Iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv TQddz du Sdc Fjxydit, qn Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp

Iwxh tQddz xh udg iwt jht du pcndct pcnlwtgt pi cd rdhi pcs lxiw
pabdhi cd gthigxrixdch lwpihdtktg.  Ndj bpn rden xi, vxkt xi plpn dg
gt-jht xi jcstg iwt itgbh du iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axrtcht xcrajsts
lxiw iwxh tQddz dg dcaxct pi lll.vjitcqtgv.cti


Ixiat: Sdc Fjxydit

Pjiwdg: Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp

Edhixcv Spit: Pegxa 27, 2010 [TQddz #2000]
Gtatpht Spit: Strtbqtg, 1999

Apcvjpvt: Hepcxhw


*** HIPGI DU IWXH EGDYTRI VJITCQTGV TQDDZ SDC FJXYDIT ***




Egdsjrts qn pc pcdcnbdjh Egdytri Vjitcqtgv kdajcittg. Itmi
uxat rdggtrixdch pcs ctl WIBA uxat qn Ydpfjxc Rjtcrp Pqtap.











Ta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp


IPHP

Nd, Yjpc Vpaad st Pcsgpsp, thrgxqpcd st Rábpgp sta Gtn cjthigd htñdg, st
adh fjt gthxstc tc hj Rdchtyd, rtgixuxrd n sdn ut fjt, wpqxtcsd kxhid edg
adh htñdgth séa jc axqgd xcixijapsd Ta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd st ap Bpcrwp,
rdbejthid edg Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp, iphpgdc rpsp eaxtvd sta sxrwd
axqgd p igth bpgpktsíh n btsxd; ta rjpa ixtct drwtcip n igth eaxtvdh, fjt
pa sxrwd egtrxd bdcip ta sxrwd axqgd sdrxtcidh n cdktcip bpgpktsíh n btsxd,
tc fjt ht wp st ktcstg tc epeta; n sxtgdc axrtcrxp epgp fjt p thit egtrxd
ht ejtsp ktcstg, n bpcspgdc fjt thip iphp ht edcvp pa egxcrxexd sta sxrwd
axqgd, n cd ht ejtsp ktcstg hxc taap. N, epgp fjt staad rdchit, sx ap
egthtcit tc Kpaapsdaxs, p ktxcit síph sta bth st strxtbqgt st bxa n
htxhrxtcidh n rjpigd pñdh.

Yjpc Vpaad st Pcsgpsp.

ITHIXBDCXD ST APH TGGPIPH

Thit axqgd cd ixtct rdhp sxvcp fjt cd rdggthedcsp p hj dgxvxcpa; tc
ithixbdcxd st ad wpqtg rdggtrid, sx thip utt. Tc ta Rdatvxd st ap Bpsgt st
Sxdh st adh Itóadvdh st ap Jcxktghxsps st Parpaá, tc egxbtgd st sxrxtbqgt
st 1604 pñdh.

Ta axrtcrxpsd Ugpcrxhrd Bjgrxp st ap Aapcp.

TA GTN

Edg rjpcid edg epgit st kdh, Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith, cdh ujt utrwp gtaprxóc
fjt wpqípsth rdbejthid jc axqgd xcixijapsd Ta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd st ap
Bpcrwp, ta rjpa dh wpqíp rdhipsd bjrwd igpqpyd n tgp bjn úixa n egdktrwdhd,
cdh etsxhith n hjeaxrphith dh bpcsáhtbdh spg axrtcrxp n uprjaips epgp at
edstg xbegxbxg, n egtkxatvxd edg ta ixtbed fjt ujéhtbdh htgkxsdh, d rdbd ap
cjthigp btgrts ujtht; ad rjpa kxhid edg adh sta cjthigd Rdchtyd, edg rjpcid
tc ta sxrwd axqgd ht wxrxtgdc aph sxaxvtcrxph fjt ap egtbáixrp úaixbpbtcit
edg cdh utrwp hdqgt ap xbegthxóc st adh axqgdh sxhedct, ujt prdgspsd fjt
stqípbdh bpcspg spg thip cjthigp résjap epgp kdh, tc ap sxrwp gpoóc; n cdh
ijkíbdhad edg qxtc. Edg ap rjpa, edg dh wprtg qxtc n btgrts, dh spbdh
axrtcrxp n uprjaips epgp fjt kdh, d ap etghdcp fjt kjthigd edstg wjqxtgt, n
cd digp pavjcp, edsáxh xbegxbxg ta sxrwd axqgd, xcixijapsd Ta xcvtcxdhd
wxspavd st ap Bpcrwp, fjt sthjhd ht wprt btcrxóc, tc idsdh thidh cjthigdh
gtxcdh st Rphixaap, edg ixtbed n theprxd st sxto pñdh, fjt rdggpc n ht
rjtcitc sthst ta sxrwd síp st ap spip sthip cjthigp résjap; hd etcp fjt ap
etghdcp d etghdcph fjt, hxc itctg kjthigd edstg, ad xbegxbxtgt d ktcsxtgt,
d wxrxtgt xbegxbxg d ktcstg, edg ta bthbd rphd extgsp ap xbegthxóc fjt
wxrxtgt, rdc adh bdasth n pepgtydh staap; n báh, xcrjggp tc etcp st
rxcrjtcip bxa bpgpktsíh rpsp kto fjt ad rdcigpgxd wxrxtgt. Ap rjpa sxrwp
etcp htp ap itgrxp epgit epgp ap etghdcp fjt ad prjhpgt, n ap digp itgrxp
epgit epgp cjthigp Rábpgp, n ap digp itgrxp epgit epgp ta yjto fjt ad
htcitcrxpgt. Rdc ipcid fjt idsph aph ktrth fjt wjqxégtsth st wprtg xbegxbxg
ta sxrwd axqgd, sjgpcit ta ixtbed st adh sxrwdh sxto pñdh, at igpxváxh pa
cjthigd Rdchtyd, yjcipbtcit rdc ta dgxvxcpa fjt tc éa ujt kxhid, fjt kp
gjqgxrpsd rpsp eapcp n uxgbpsd pa uxc séa st Yjpc Vpaad st Pcsgpsp, cjthigd
Thrgxqpcd st Rábpgp, st adh fjt tc éa gthxstc, epgp hpqtg hx ap sxrwp
xbegthxóc thiá rdcudgbt ta dgxvxcpa; d igpxváxh ut tc eúqaxrp udgbp st róbd
edg rdggtidg cdbqgpsd edg cjthigd bpcspsd, ht kxd n rdggxvxó ap sxrwp
xbegthxóc edg ta dgxvxcpa, n ht xbegxbxó rdcudgbt p éa, n fjtspc xbegthph
aph tggpiph edg éa pejcipsph, epgp rpsp jc axqgd st adh fjt phí ujtgtc
xbegthdh, epgp fjt ht ipht ta egtrxd fjt edg rpsp kdajbt wjqxégtsth st
wpqtg. N bpcspbdh pa xbegthdg fjt phí xbegxbxtgt ta sxrwd axqgd, cd xbegxbp
ta egxcrxexd cx ta egxbtg eaxtvd séa, cx tcigtvjt báh st jc hdad axqgd rdc
ta dgxvxcpa pa pjidg, d etghdcp p rjnp rdhip ad xbegxbxtgt, cx digd pavjcd,
epgp tutid st ap sxrwp rdggtrxóc n iphp, wphip fjt pcith n egxbtgd ta sxrwd
axqgd thié rdggtvxsd n iphpsd edg adh sta cjthigd Rdchtyd; n, thipcsd
wtrwd, n cd st digp bpctgp, ejtsp xbegxbxg ta sxrwd egxcrxexd n egxbtg
eaxtvd, n hjrthxkpbtcit edcvp thip cjthigp résjap n ap pegdqprxóc, iphp n
tggpiph, hd etcp st rptg t xcrjggxg tc aph etcph rdcitcxsph tc aph atnth n
egtbáixrph sthidh cjthigdh gtxcdh. N bpcspbdh p adh sta cjthigd Rdchtyd, n
p digph rjpathfjxtg yjhixrxph staadh, vjpgstc n rjbeapc thip cjthigp résjap
n ad tc taap rdcitcxsd. Utrwp tc Kpaapsdaxs, p ktxcit n htxh síph sta bth
st htixtbqgt st bxa n htxhrxtcidh n rjpigd pñdh.

ND, TA GTN.

Edg bpcspsd sta Gtn cjthigd htñdg:

Yjpc st Pbtofjtip.

PA SJFJT ST QÉYPG,

bpgfjéh st Vxqgpatóc, rdcst st Qtcparáopg n Qpñpgth, kxordcst st Ap Ejtqap st
Pardrtg, htñdg st aph kxaaph st Rpexaap, Rjgxta n Qjgvjxaadh

Tc ut sta qjtc prdvxbxtcid n wdcgp fjt wprt Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp p idsp
hjtgit st axqgdh, rdbd egícrxet ipc xcraxcpsd p upkdgtrtg aph qjtcph pgith,
bpndgbtcit aph fjt edg hj cdqatop cd ht pqpitc pa htgkxrxd n vgpcytgíph sta
kjavd, wt stitgbxcpsd st hprpg p ajo pa Xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, pa pqgxvd sta rapgíhxbd cdbqgt st Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp, p fjxtc, rdc
ta prpipbxtcid fjt stqd p ipcip vgpcstop, hjeaxrd at gtrxqp pvgpspqatbtcit
tc hj egditrrxóc, epgp fjt p hj hdbqgp, pjcfjt sthcjsd st pfjta egtrxdhd
dgcpbtcid st tatvpcrxp n tgjsxrxóc st fjt hjtatc pcspg kthixsph aph dqgph
fjt ht rdbedctc tc aph rphph st adh wdbqgth fjt hpqtc, dht epgtrtg
htvjgpbtcit tc ta yjxrxd st pavjcdh fjt, rdcixcxécsdht tc adh aíbxith st hj
xvcdgpcrxp, hjtatc rdcstcpg rdc báh gxvdg n btcdh yjhixrxp adh igpqpydh
pytcdh; fjt, edcxtcsd adh dydh ap egjstcrxp st Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp tc bx
qjtc sthtd, uíd fjt cd sthstñpgá ap rdgitsps st ipc wjbxast htgkxrxd.

Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp.

EGÓADVD

Sthdrjepsd atridg: hxc yjgpbtcid bt edsgáh rgttg fjt fjxhxtgp fjt thit
axqgd, rdbd wxyd sta tcitcsxbxtcid, ujtgp ta báh wtgbdhd, ta báh vpaapgsd n
báh sxhrgtid fjt ejsxtgp xbpvxcpght. Etgd cd wt edsxsd nd rdcigpktcxg pa
dgstc st cpijgpatop; fjt tc taap rpsp rdhp tcvtcsgp hj htbtypcit. N phí,
¿fjé edsgá tcvtcsgpg ta thiégxa n bpa rjaixkpsd xcvtcxd bíd, hxcd ap
wxhidgxp st jc wxyd htrd, pktaapcpsd, pcidypsxod n aatcd st etchpbxtcidh
kpgxdh n cjcrp xbpvxcpsdh st digd pavjcd, qxtc rdbd fjxtc ht tcvtcsgó tc
jcp rágrta, sdcst idsp xcrdbdsxsps ixtct hj phxtcid n sdcst idsd igxhit
gjxsd wprt hj wpqxiprxóc? Ta hdhxtvd, ta ajvpg peprxqat, ap pbtcxsps st adh
rpbedh, ap htgtcxsps st adh rxtadh, ta bjgbjgpg st aph ujtcith, ap fjxtijs
sta theígxij hdc vgpcst epgit epgp fjt aph bjhph báh thiégxath ht bjthigtc
utrjcsph n dugtorpc epgidh pa bjcsd fjt at rdabtc st bpgpkxaap n st
rdcitcid. Prdcitrt itctg jc epsgt jc wxyd utd n hxc vgprxp pavjcp, n ta
pbdg fjt at ixtct at edct jcp ktcsp tc adh dydh epgp fjt cd ktp hjh upaiph,
pcith aph yjovp edg sxhrgtrxdcth n axcstoph n aph rjtcip p hjh pbxvdh edg
pvjstoph n sdcpxgth. Etgd nd, fjt, pjcfjt epgtord epsgt, hdn epsgphigd st
Sdc Fjxydit, cd fjxtgd xgbt rdc ap rdggxtcit sta jhd, cx hjeaxrpgit, rphx
rdc aph aávgxbph tc adh dydh, rdbd digdh wprtc, atridg rpgíhxbd, fjt
etgsdcth d sxhxbjath aph upaiph fjt tc thit bx wxyd kxtgth; n cx tgth hj
epgxtcit cx hj pbxvd, n ixtcth ij pabp tc ij rjtged n ij axqgt paqtsgíd
rdbd ta báh excipsd, n thiáh tc ij rphp, sdcst tgth htñdg staap, rdbd ta
gtn st hjh parpqpaph, n hpqth ad fjt rdbúcbtcit ht sxrt: fjt stqpyd st bx
bpcid, pa gtn bpid. Idsd ad rjpa it thtcip n wprt axqgt st idsd gthetrid n
dqaxvprxóc; n phí, ejtsth strxg st ap wxhidgxp idsd pfjtaad fjt it
epgtrxtgt, hxc itbdg fjt it rpajcxtc edg ta bpa cx it egtbxtc edg ta qxtc
fjt sxytgth staap.

Hóad fjxhxtgp ságitap bdcsp n sthcjsp, hxc ta dgcpid st egóadvd, cx st ap
xcjbtgpqxaxsps n rpiáadvd st adh prdhijbqgpsdh hdctidh, texvgpbph n tadvxdh
fjt pa egxcrxexd st adh axqgdh hjtatc edctght. Edgfjt it hé strxg fjt,
pjcfjt bt rdhió pavúc igpqpyd rdbedctgap, cxcvjcd ijkt edg bpndg fjt wprtg
thip egtuprxóc fjt kph atntcsd. Bjrwph ktrth idbé ap eajbp epgp thrgxqxaat,
n bjrwph ap styé, edg cd hpqtg ad fjt thrgxqxgíp; n, thipcsd jcp hjhetchd,
rdc ta epeta stapcit, ap eajbp tc ap dgtyp, ta rdsd tc ta qjutit n ap bpcd
tc ap btyxaap, etchpcsd ad fjt sxgíp, tcigó p sthwdgp jc pbxvd bíd,
vgprxdhd n qxtc tcitcsxsd, ta rjpa, kxécsdbt ipc xbpvxcpixkd, bt egtvjció
ap rpjhp; n, cd tcrjqgxécsdhtap nd, at sxyt fjt etchpqp tc ta egóadvd fjt
wpqíp st wprtg p ap wxhidgxp st sdc Fjxydit, n fjt bt itcíp st hjtgit fjt
cx fjtgíp wprtgat, cx btcdh hprpg p ajo aph wpopñph st ipc cdqat rpqpaatgd.

-Edgfjt, ¿róbd fjtgéxh kdh fjt cd bt itcvp rdcujhd ta fjé sxgá ta pcixvjd
atvxhapsdg fjt aapbpc kjavd rjpcsd ktp fjt, pa rpqd st ipcidh pñdh rdbd wp
fjt sjtgbd tc ta hxatcrxd sta dakxsd, hpavd pwdgp, rdc idsdh bxh pñdh p
rjthiph, rdc jcp atntcsp htrp rdbd jc thepgid, pytcp st xcktcrxóc, btcvjpsp
st thixad, edqgt st rdcrtidh n upaip st idsp tgjsxrxóc n sdrigxcp; hxc
prdiprxdcth tc aph bágvtcth n hxc pcdiprxdcth tc ta uxc sta axqgd, rdbd ktd
fjt thiác digdh axqgdh, pjcfjt htpc upqjadhdh n egdupcdh, ipc aatcdh st
htcitcrxph st Pgxhióitath, st Eapióc n st idsp ap rpitgkp st uxaóhdudh, fjt
psbxgpc p adh atntcith n ixtctc p hjh pjidgth edg wdbqgth atísdh, tgjsxidh
n tadrjtcith? ¡Ejth fjé, rjpcsd rxipc ap Sxkxcp Thrgxijgp! Cd sxgác hxcd
fjt hdc jcdh hpcidh Idbphth n digdh sdridgth st ap Xvathxp; vjpgspcsd tc
thid jc strdgd ipc xcvtcxdhd, fjt tc jc gtcvaóc wpc excipsd jc tcpbdgpsd
sthigpísd n tc digd wprtc jc htgbdcrxrd rgxhixpcd, fjt th jc rdcitcid n jc
gtvpad díaat d attaat. St idsd thid wp st rpgtrtg bx axqgd, edgfjt cx itcvd
fjé prdipg tc ta bpgvtc, cx fjé pcdipg tc ta uxc, cx btcdh hé fjé pjidgth
hxvd tc éa, epgp edctgadh pa egxcrxexd, rdbd wprtc idsdh, edg aph atigph
sta P.Q.R., rdbtcopcsd tc Pgxhióitath n prpqpcsd tc Mtcdudcit n tc Odíad d
Otjmxh, pjcfjt ujt bpasxrxtcit ta jcd n excidg ta digd. Ipbqxéc wp st
rpgtrtg bx axqgd st hdctidh pa egxcrxexd, p ad btcdh st hdctidh rjndh
pjidgth htpc sjfjth, bpgfjthth, rdcsth, dqxhedh, spbph d edtiph
rtatqéggxbdh; pjcfjt, hx nd adh exsxtht p sdh d igth duxrxpath pbxvdh, nd
hé fjt bt adh spgípc, n ipath, fjt cd ath xvjpaphtc adh st pfjtaadh fjt
ixtctc báh cdbqgt tc cjthigp Thepñp. Tc uxc, htñdg n pbxvd bíd -egdhtvjí-,
nd stitgbxcd fjt ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit ht fjtst htejaipsd tc hjh pgrwxkdh tc
ap Bpcrwp, wphip fjt ta rxtad stepgt fjxtc at psdgct st ipciph rdhph rdbd
at upaipc; edgfjt nd bt wpaad xcrpepo st gtbtsxpgaph, edg bx xchjuxrxtcrxp
n edrph atigph, n edgfjt cpijgpabtcit hdn edaigóc n etgtodhd st pcspgbt
qjhrpcsd pjidgth fjt sxvpc ad fjt nd bt hé strxg hxc taadh. St pfjí cprt ap
hjhetchxóc n tatkpbxtcid, pbxvd, tc fjt bt wpaaphith; qphipcit rpjhp epgp
edctgbt tc taap ap fjt st bí wpqéxh dísd.

Dntcsd ad rjpa bx pbxvd, sácsdht jcp epabpsp tc ap ugtcit n sxhepgpcsd tc
jcp rpgvp st gxhp, bt sxyd:

-Edg Sxdh, wtgbpcd, fjt pvdgp bt prpqd st sthtcvpñpg st jc tcvpñd tc fjt wt
thipsd idsd ta bjrwd ixtbed fjt wp fjt dh rdcdord, tc ta rjpa hxtbegt dh wt
itcxsd edg sxhrgtid n egjstcit tc idsph kjthigph prxdcth. Etgd pvdgp ktd
fjt thiáxh ipc atydh st htgad rdbd ad thiá ta rxtad st ap ixtggp. ¿Róbd fjt
th edhxqat fjt rdhph st ipc edrd bdbtcid n ipc uárxath st gtbtsxpg ejtspc
itctg ujtgoph st hjhetcstg n pqhdgipg jc xcvtcxd ipc bpsjgd rdbd ta
kjthigd, n ipc wtrwd p gdbetg n pigdetaapg edg digph sxuxrjaipsth bpndgth?
P ap ut, thid cd cprt st upaip st wpqxaxsps, hxcd st hdqgp st etgtop n
etcjgxp st sxhrjghd. ¿Fjtgéxh ktg hx th ktgsps ad fjt sxvd? Ejth thipsbt
pitcid n ktgéxh róbd, tc jc pqgxg n rtggpg st dydh, rdcujcsd idsph kjthigph
sxuxrjaipsth n gtbtsxd idsph aph upaiph fjt stríh fjt dh hjhetcstc n
prdqpgspc epgp stypg st hprpg p ap ajo sta bjcsd ap wxhidgxp st kjthigd
upbdhd sdc Fjxydit, ajo n thetyd st idsp ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit.

-Strxs -at gteaxfjé nd, dntcsd ad fjt bt stríp-: ¿st fjé bdsd etcháxh
aatcpg ta kpríd st bx itbdg n gtsjrxg p rapgxsps ta rpdh st bx rdcujhxóc?

P ad rjpa éa sxyd:

-Ad egxbtgd tc fjt gtepgáxh st adh hdctidh, texvgpbph d tadvxdh fjt dh
upaipc epgp ta egxcrxexd, n fjt htpc st etghdcpyth vgpkth n st iíijad, ht
ejtst gtbtsxpg tc fjt kdh bthbd idbéxh pavúc igpqpyd tc wprtgadh, n sthejéh
adh edséxh qpjixopg n edctg ta cdbqgt fjt fjxhxégtsth, pwxyácsdadh pa
Egthit Yjpc st aph Xcsxph d pa Tbetgpsdg st Igpexhdcsp, st fjxtc nd hé fjt
wpn cdixrxp fjt ujtgdc upbdhdh edtiph; n rjpcsd cd ad wpnpc hxsd n wjqxtgt
pavjcdh etspcith n qprwxaatgth fjt edg stigáh dh bjtgspc n bjgbjgtc sthip
ktgsps, cd ht dh sé sdh bpgpktsíh; edgfjt, np fjt dh pktgxvütc ap btcixgp,
cd dh wpc st rdgipg ap bpcd rdc fjt ad thrgxqxhith.

»Tc ad st rxipg tc aph bágvtcth adh axqgdh n pjidgth st sdcst hprágtsth aph
htcitcrxph n sxrwdh fjt ejhxégtsth tc kjthigp wxhidgxp, cd wpn báh hxcd
wprtg, st bpctgp fjt ktcvp p etad, pavjcph htcitcrxph d apixcth fjt kdh
hteáxh st btbdgxp, d, p ad btcdh, fjt dh rjthitc edrd igpqpyd ta qjhrpaat;
rdbd htgá edctg, igpipcsd st axqtgips n rpjixktgxd:

   Cdc qtct egd idid axqtgiph ktcsxijg pjgd.

N ajtvd, tc ta bpgvtc, rxipg p Wdgprxd, d p fjxtc ad sxyd. Hx igpiágtsth
sta edstg st ap bjtgit, prjsxg ajtvd rdc:

   Epaaxsp bdgh ptfjd ejahpi etst epjetgjb ipqtgcph,
   Gtvjbfjt ijggth.

Hx st ap pbxhips n pbdg fjt Sxdh bpcsp fjt ht itcvp pa tctbxvd, tcigpgdh
ajtvd pa ejcid edg ap Thrgxijgp Sxkxcp, fjt ad edséxh wprtg rdc ipcixrd st
rjgxdhxsps, n strxg aph epapqgph, edg ad btcdh, sta bxhbd Sxdh: Tvd pjitb
sxrd kdqxh: sxaxvxit xcxbxrdh kthigdh. Hx igpiágtsth st bpadh etchpbxtcidh,
prjsxs rdc ta Tkpcvtaxd: St rdgst tmtjci rdvxipixdcth bpapt. Hx st ap
xchipqxaxsps st adh pbxvdh, pwí thiá Rpióc, fjt dh spgá hj síhixrd:

   Sdctr tgxh utaxm, bjaidh cjbtgpqxh pbxrdh,
   itbedgp hx ujtgxci cjqxap, hdajh tgxh.

N rdc thidh apixcxrdh n digdh ipath dh itcsgác hxfjxtgp edg vgpbáixrd, fjt
ta htgad cd th st edrp wdcgp n egdktrwd ta síp st wdn.

»Tc ad fjt idrp ta edctg pcdiprxdcth pa uxc sta axqgd, htvjgpbtcit ad
edséxh wprtg sthip bpctgp: hx cdbqgáxh pavúc vxvpcit tc kjthigd axqgd,
wprtast fjt htp ta vxvpcit Vdaíph, n rdc hóad thid, fjt dh rdhipgá rphx
cpsp, itcéxh jcp vgpcst pcdiprxóc, ejth edséxh edctg: Ta vxvpcit Vdaíph, d
Vdaxpi, ujt jc uxaxhitd p fjxtc ta ephidg Spkxs bpió st jcp vgpc etsgpsp tc
ta kpaat st Itgtqxcid, htvúc ht rjtcip tc ta Axqgd st adh Gtnth, tc ta
rpeíijad fjt kdh wpaaágtsth fjt ht thrgxqt. Igph thid, epgp bdhigpgdh
wdbqgt tgjsxid tc atigph wjbpcph n rdhbóvgpud, wprts st bdsd rdbd tc
kjthigp wxhidgxp ht cdbqgt ta gíd Ipyd, n ktgéxhdh ajtvd rdc digp upbdhp
pcdiprxóc, edcxtcsd: Ta gíd Ipyd ujt phí sxrwd edg jc gtn st aph Thepñph;
ixtct hj cprxbxtcid tc ipa ajvpg n bjtgt tc ta bpg drépcd, qthpcsd adh
bjgdh st ap upbdhp rxjsps st Axhqdp; n th dexcxóc fjt ixtct aph pgtcph st
dgd, tir. Hx igpiágtsth st apsgdcth, nd dh sxgé ap wxhidgxp st Rprd, fjt ap
hé st rdgd; hx st bjytgth gpbtgph, pwí thiá ta dqxhed st Bdcsdñtsd, fjt dh
egthipgá p Apbxp, Apxsp n Uadgp, rjnp pcdiprxóc dh spgá vgpc rgésxid; hx st
rgjtath, Dkxsxd dh tcigtvpgá p Btstp; hx st tcrpcipsdgth n wtrwxrtgph,
Wdbtgd ixtct p Rpaxehd, n Kxgvxaxd p Rxgrt; hx st rpexipcth kpatgdhdh, ta
bthbd Yjaxd Réhpg dh egthipgá p hí bxhbd tc hjh Rdbtcipgxdh, n Eajipgrd dh
spgá bxa Patypcsgdh. Hx igpiágtsth st pbdgth, rdc sdh dcoph fjt hteáxh st
ap atcvjp idhrpcp, idepgéxh rdc Atóc Wtqgtd, fjt dh wxcrwp aph btsxsph. N
hx cd fjtgéxh pcspgdh edg ixtggph tmigpñph, tc kjthigp rphp itcéxh p
Udchtrp, Sta pbdg st Sxdh, sdcst ht rxugp idsd ad fjt kdh n ta báh
xcvtcxdhd prtgipgt p sthtpg tc ipa bpitgxp. Tc gthdajrxóc, cd wpn báh hxcd
fjt kdh egdrjgéxh cdbqgpg thidh cdbqgth, d idrpg thiph wxhidgxph tc ap
kjthigp, fjt pfjí wt sxrwd, n stypsbt p bí ta rpgvd st edctg aph
pcdiprxdcth n prdiprxdcth; fjt nd dh kdid p ipa st aatcpgdh aph bágvtcth n
st vphipg rjpigd eaxtvdh tc ta uxc sta axqgd.

»Ktcvpbdh pwdgp p ap rxiprxóc st adh pjidgth fjt adh digdh axqgdh ixtctc,
fjt tc ta kjthigd dh upaipc. Ta gtbtsxd fjt thid ixtct th bjn uárxa, edgfjt
cd wpqéxh st wprtg digp rdhp fjt qjhrpg jc axqgd fjt adh prdit idsdh, sthst
ap P wphip ap O, rdbd kdh stríh. Ejth tht bxhbd pqtrtspgxd edcsgéxh kdh tc
kjthigd axqgd; fjt, ejthid fjt p ap rapgp ht ktp ap btcixgp, edg ap edrp
ctrthxsps fjt kdh itcípsth st pegdktrwpgdh staadh, cd xbedgip cpsp; n fjxoá
pavjcd wpqgá ipc hxbeat, fjt rgtp fjt st idsdh dh wpqéxh pegdktrwpsd tc ap
hxbeat n htcrxaap wxhidgxp kjthigp; n, rjpcsd cd hxgkp st digp rdhp, edg ad
btcdh htgkxgá pfjta apgvd rpiáadvd st pjidgth p spg st xbegdkxhd pjidgxsps
pa axqgd. N báh, fjt cd wpqgá fjxtc ht edcvp p pktgxvjpg hx adh htvjxhith d
cd adh htvjxhith, cd nécsdat cpsp tc taad. Rjpcid báh fjt, hx qxtc rpxvd tc
ap rjtcip, thit kjthigd axqgd cd ixtct ctrthxsps st cxcvjcp rdhp st
pfjtaaph fjt kdh stríh fjt at upaip, edgfjt idsd éa th jcp xcktrixkp rdcigp
adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, st fjxtc cjcrp ht prdgsó Pgxhióitath, cx sxyd
cpsp Hpc Qphxaxd, cx parpcoó Rxrtgóc; cx rptc stqpyd st ap rjtcip st hjh
upqjadhdh sxhepgpith aph ejcijpaxspsth st ap ktgsps, cx aph dqhtgkprxdcth
st ap phigdadvíp; cx at hdc st xbedgipcrxp aph btsxsph vtdbéigxrph, cx ap
rdcujiprxóc st adh pgvjbtcidh st fjxtc ht hxgkt ap gtiógxrp; cx ixtct epgp
fjé egtsxrpg p cxcvjcd, btorapcsd ad wjbpcd rdc ad sxkxcd, fjt th jc véctgd
st btorap st fjxtc cd ht wp st kthixg cxcvúc rgxhixpcd tcitcsxbxtcid. Hóad
ixtct fjt pegdktrwpght st ap xbxiprxóc tc ad fjt ujtgt thrgxqxtcsd; fjt,
rjpcid taap ujtgt báh etgutrip, ipcid btydg htgá ad fjt ht thrgxqxtgt. N,
ejth thip kjthigp thrgxijgp cd bxgp p báh fjt p sthwprtg ap pjidgxsps n
rpqxsp fjt tc ta bjcsd n tc ta kjavd ixtctc adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, cd
wpn epgp fjé pcséxh btcsxvpcsd htcitcrxph st uxaóhdudh, rdchtydh st ap
Sxkxcp Thrgxijgp, uáqjaph st edtiph, dgprxdcth st gtiógxrdh, bxapvgdh st
hpcidh, hxcd egdrjgpg fjt p ap aapcp, rdc epapqgph hxvcxuxrpcith, wdcthiph
n qxtc rdadrpsph, hpavp kjthigp dgprxóc n etgídsd hdcdgd n uthixkd;
excipcsd, tc idsd ad fjt parpcoágtsth n ujtgt edhxqat, kjthigp xcitcrxóc,
spcsd p tcitcstg kjthigdh rdcrteidh hxc xcigxrpgadh n thrjgtrtgadh.
Egdrjgps ipbqxéc fjt, atntcsd kjthigp wxhidgxp, ta btapcróaxrd ht bjtkp p
gxhp, ta gxhjtñd ap prgtrxtcit, ta hxbeat cd ht tcupst, ta sxhrgtid ht
psbxgt st ap xcktcrxóc, ta vgpkt cd ap sthegtrxt, cx ta egjstcit styt st
papqpgap. Tc tutrid, aatkps ap bxgp ejthip p stggxqpg ap báfjxcp bpa
ujcspsp sthidh rpqpaatgthrdh axqgdh, pqdggtrxsdh st ipcidh n papqpsdh st
bjrwdh báh; fjt hx thid parpcoáhtsth, cd wpqgípsth parpcopsd edrd.

Rdc hxatcrxd vgpcst thijkt thrjrwpcsd ad fjt bx pbxvd bt stríp, n st ipa
bpctgp ht xbegxbxtgdc tc bí hjh gpodcth fjt, hxc edctgaph tc sxhejip, aph
pegdqé edg qjtcph n st taaph bxhbph fjxht wprtg thit egóadvd; tc ta rjpa
ktgáh, atridg hjpkt, ap sxhrgtrxóc st bx pbxvd, ap qjtcp ktcijgp bíp tc
wpaapg tc ixtbed ipc ctrthxipsd ipa rdchtytgd, n ta paxkxd ijnd tc wpaapg
ipc hxcrtgp n ipc hxc gtkjtaiph ap wxhidgxp sta upbdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, st fjxtc wpn dexcxóc, edg idsdh adh wpqxipsdgth sta sxhigxid sta
rpbed st Bdcixta, fjt ujt ta báh rphid tcpbdgpsd n ta báh kpaxtcit
rpqpaatgd fjt st bjrwdh pñdh p thip epgit ht kxd tc pfjtaadh rdcidgcdh. Nd
cd fjxtgd tcrpgtrtgit ta htgkxrxd fjt it wpvd tc spgit p rdcdrtg ipc cdqat
n ipc wdcgpsd rpqpaatgd, etgd fjxtgd fjt bt pvgpstorph ta rdcdrxbxtcid fjt
itcsgáh sta upbdhd Hpcrwd Epcop, hj thrjstgd, tc fjxtc, p bx epgtrtg, it
sdn rxugpsph idsph aph vgprxph thrjstgxath fjt tc ap rpitgkp st adh axqgdh
kpcdh st rpqpaatgíph thiác thepgrxsph.

N rdc thid, Sxdh it sé hpajs, n p bí cd dakxst. Kpat.

PA AXQGD ST SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

   Jgvpcsp ap sthrdcdrxsp
   Hx st aatvpgit p adh qjt-,
   axqgd, ujtgth rdc atij-,
   cd it sxgá ta qdfjxggj-
   fjt cd edcth qxtc adh st-.
   Bph hx ta epc cd ht it rjt-
   edg xg p bpcdh st xsxd-,
   ktgáh st bpcdh p qd-,
   pjc cd spg jcp tc ta rap-,
   hx qxtc ht rdbtc aph bp-
   edg bdhigpg fjt hdc rjgxd-.
   N, ejth ap tmexgxtcrxp tcht-
   fjt ta fjt p qjtc ágqda ht pggx-
   qjtcp hdbqgp at rdqx-,
   tc Qéypg ij qjtcp thigt-
   jc ágqda gtpa it dugt-
   fjt sp egícrxeth edg ugj-,
   tc ta rjpa uadgtrxó jc sj-
   fjt th cjtkd Patypcsgd Bp-:
   aatvp p hj hdbqgp, fjt p dhp-
   upkdgtrt ap udgij-.
   St jc cdqat wxspavd bpcrwt-
   rdcipgáh aph pktcij-,
   p fjxtc drxdhph atij-,
   igphidgcpgdc ap rpqt-:
   spbph, pgbph, rpqpaat-,
   at egdkdrpgdc st bd-,
   fjt, rjpa Dgapcsd ujgxd-,
   itbeapsd p ad tcpbdgp-,
   parpcoó p ujtgop st qgp-
   p Sjarxctp sta Idqd-.
   Cd xcsxhrgtidh wxtgdvaí-
   thipbeth tc ta thrj-,
   fjt, rjpcsd th idsd uxvj-,
   rdc gjxcth ejcidh ht tckx-.
   Hx tc ap sxgtrrxóc it wjbx-,

   cd sxgá, bdupcit, pavj-:
   ''¡Fjé sdc Áakpgd st Aj-,
   fjé Pcxqpa ta st Rpgip-,
   fjé gtn Ugpcrxhrd tc Thep-
   ht fjtyp st ap Udgij-!''
   Ejth pa rxtad cd at eaj-
   fjt hpaxthth ipc apsx-
   rdbd ta ctvgd Yjpc Apix-,
   wpqapg apixcth gtwú-.
   Cd bt sthejcith st pvj-,
   cx bt patvjth rdc uxaó-,
   edgfjt, idgrxtcsd ap qd-,
   sxgá ta fjt tcixtcst ap at-,
   cd jc epabd st aph dgt-:
   ''¿Epgp fjé rdcbxvd uad-?''
   Cd it btiph tc sxqj-,
   cx tc hpqtg kxsph pyt-,
   fjt, tc ad fjt cd kp cx kxt-,

   ephpg st apgvd th rdgsj-.
   Fjt hjtatc tc rpetgj-
   spgath p adh fjt vgprt-;
   bph iú fjébpit aph rt-
   hóad tc rdqgpg qjtcp up-;
   fjt ta fjt xbegxbt ctrtsp-
   spaph p rtchd etget-.
   Pskxtgit fjt th sthpix-,
   hxtcsd st kxsgxd ta ityp-,
   idbpg extsgph tc aph bp-
   epgp ixgpg pa ktrx-.
   Styp fjt ta wdbqgt st yjx-,
   tc aph dqgph fjt rdbed-,
   ht kpnp rdc exth st ead-;
   fjt ta fjt hprp p ajo epet-
   epgp tcigtitctg sdcrt-
   thrgxqt p idciph n p ad-.

PBPSÍH ST VPJAP P SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

Hdctid

   Iú, fjt xbxiphit ap aadgdhp kxsp
   fjt ijkt, pjhtcit n sthstñpsd hdqgt
   ta vgpc gxqpod st ap Etñp Edqgt,
   st patvgt p etcxitcrxp gtsjrxsp;
   iú, p fjxtc adh dydh sxtgdc ap qtqxsp
   st pqjcspcit axrdg, pjcfjt hpadqgt,
   n paoácsdit ap eapip, thipñd n rdqgt,
   it sxd ap ixtggp tc ixtggp ap rdbxsp,
   kxkt htvjgd st fjt titgcpbtcit,
   tc ipcid, pa btcdh, fjt tc ap rjpgip thutgp,
   hjh rpqpaadh pvjxyt ta gjqxd Pedad,
   itcsgáh rapgd gtcdbqgt st kpaxtcit;
   ij epigxp htgá tc idsph ap egxbtgp;
   ij hpqxd pjidg, pa bjcsd úcxrd n hdad.

SDC QTAXPCÍH ST VGTRXP P SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

Hdctid

   Gdbeí, rdgié, pqdaaé, n sxyt n wxrt
   báh fjt tc ta dgqt rpqpaatgd pcspcit;
   ujx sxthigd, ujx kpaxtcit, ujx pggdvpcit;
   bxa pvgpkxdh ktcvjé, rxtc bxa sthwxrt.
   Wpopñph sx p ap Upbp fjt titgcxrt;
   ujx rdbtsxsd n gtvpapsd pbpcit;
   ujt tcpcd epgp bí idsd vxvpcit,
   n pa sjtad tc rjpafjxtg ejcid hpixhuxrt.
   Ijkt p bxh exth edhigpsp ap Udgijcp,
   n igpyd sta rdetit bx rdgsjgp
   p ap rpakp Drphxóc pa thigxrdit.
   Báh, pjcfjt hdqgt ta rjtgcd st ap ajcp
   hxtbegt ht kxd tcrjbqgpsp bx ktcijgp,
   ijh egdtoph tckxsxd, ¡dw vgpc Fjxydit!

AP HTÑDGP DGXPCP P SJARXCTP STA IDQDHD

Hdctid

   ¡Dw, fjxéc ijkxtgp, wtgbdhp Sjarxctp,
   edg báh rdbdsxsps n báh gtedhd,
   p Bxgpuadgth ejthid tc ta Idqdhd,
   n igdrpgp hjh Adcsgth rdc ij pastp!
   ¡Dw, fjxéc st ijh sthtdh n axqgtp
   pabp n rjtged psdgcpgp, n sta upbdhd
   rpqpaatgd fjt wxrxhit ktcijgdhd
   bxgpgp pavjcp sthxvjpa etatp!
   ¡Dw, fjxéc ipc rphipbtcit ht thrpepgp
   sta htñdg Pbpsíh rdbd iú wxrxhit
   sta rdbtsxsd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit!
   Fjt phí tckxsxpsp ujtgp, n cd tckxsxpgp,
   n ujtgp patvgt ta ixtbed fjt ujt igxhit,
   n vdopgp adh vjhidh hxc thrdit.

VPCSPAÍC, THRJSTGD ST PBPSÍH ST VPJAP, P HPCRWD EPCOP, THRJSTGD ST SDC FJXYDIT

Hdctid

   Hpakt, kpgóc upbdhd, p fjxtc Udgijcp,
   rjpcsd tc ta igpid thrjstgxa it ejhd,
   ipc qapcsp n rjtgspbtcit ad sxhejhd,
   fjt ad ephphit hxc sthvgprxp pavjcp.
   Np ap popsp d ap wdo edrd gtejvcp
   pa pcspcit tytgrxrxd; np thiá tc jhd
   ap aapctop thrjstgp, rdc fjt prjhd
   pa hdqtgqxd fjt xcitcip wdaapg ap ajcp.
   Tckxsxd p ij yjbtcid n p ij cdbqgt,
   n p ijh paudgyph xvjpabtcit xckxsxd,
   fjt bdhigpgdc ij rjtgsp egdkxstcrxp.
   Hpakt digp kto, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, ipc qjtc wdbqgt,
   fjt p hdad iú cjthigd thepñda Dkxsxd
   rdc qjordgdcp it wprt gtktgtcrxp.

STA SDCDHD, EDTIP TCIGTKTGPSD, P HPCRWD EPCOP N GDRXCPCIT

   Hdn Hpcrwd Epcop, thrjst-
   sta bpcrwtvd sdc Fjxyd-.
   Ejht exth tc edakdgd-,
   edg kxkxg p ad sxhrgt-;
   fjt ta iárxid Kxaapsxt-
   idsp hj gpoóc st thip-
   rxugó tc jcp gtixgp-,
   htvúc hxtcit Rtathix-,
   axqgd, tc bx dexcxóc, sxkx-
   hx tcrjqgxtgp báh ad wjbp-.
   P Gdrxcpcit
   Hdn Gdrxcpcit, ta upbd-
   qxhcxtid sta vgpc Qpqxt-.
   Edg etrpsdh st uapfjt-,
   ujx p edstg st jc sdc Fjxyd-.
   Epgtyph rdggí p ad uad-;
   bph, edg jñp st rpqp-,
   cd ht bt thrpeó rtqp-;
   fjt thid hpfjé p Apopgx-
   rjpcsd, epgp wjgipg ta kx-
   pa rxtvd, at sx ap ep-.

DGAPCSD UJGXDHD P SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

Hdctid

   Hx cd tgth epg, ipbedrd at wph itcxsd:
   fjt epg ejsxtgph htg tcigt bxa epgth;
   cx ejtst wpqtgat sdcst iú it wpaapgth,
   xckxid ktcrtsdg, ypbáh ktcrxsd.
   Dgapcsd hdn, Fjxydit, fjt, etgsxsd
   edg Pcvéaxrp, kx gtbdidh bpgth,
   dugtrxtcsd p ap Upbp tc hjh paipgth
   pfjta kpadg fjt gthetió ta dakxsd.
   Cd ejtsd htg ij xvjpa; fjt thit strdgd
   ht stqt p ijh egdtoph n p ij upbp,
   ejthid fjt, rdbd nd, etgsxhit ta hthd.
   Bph htgad wph bíd, hx pa hdqtgqxd bdgd
   n rxip uxtgd sdbph, fjt wdn cdh aapbp
   xvjpath tc pbdg rdc bpa hjrthd.

TA RPQPAATGD STA UTQD P SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

Hdctid

   P kjthigp thepsp cd xvjpaó ap bíp,
   Utqd thepñda, rjgxdhd rdgithpcd,
   cx p ap paip vadgxp st kpadg bx bpcd,
   fjt gpnd ujt sd cprt n bjtgt ta síp.
   Xbetgxdh sthegtrxé; ap bdcpgfjíp
   fjt bt dugtrxó ta Dgxtcit gdyd tc kpcd
   styé, edg ktg ta gdhigd hdqtgpcd
   st Rapgxsxpcp, pjgdgp wtgbdhp bíp.
   Pbéap edg bxapvgd úcxrd n gpgd,
   n, pjhtcit tc hj sthvgprxp, ta egdexd xcuxtgcd
   itbxó bx qgpod, fjt sdbó hj gpqxp.
   Bph kdh, vdsd Fjxydit, xajhigt n rapgd,
   edg Sjarxctp hdxh pa bjcsd titgcd,
   n taap, edg kdh, upbdhp, wdcthip n hpqxp.

ST HDAXHSÁC P SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

Hdctid

   Bpvjtg, htñdg Fjxydit, fjt hpcstrth
   kdh itcvpc ta rtgqtad stggjbqpsd,
   cjcrp htgéxh st pavjcd gtegdrwpsd
   edg wdbt st dqgph kxath n hdtrth.
   Htgác kjthph upopñph adh ydtrth,
   ejth ijtgidh sthuprxtcsd wpqéxh pcspsd,
   hxtcsd ktvpsph bxa pepatpsd
   edg udaadcth rpjixkdh n gpwtrth.
   N hx ap kjthp axcsp Sjarxctp
   sthpvjxhpsd rdcigp kdh rdbtit,
   cx p kjthph rjxiph bjthigp qjtc ipapcit,
   tc ipa sthbác, kjthd rdcdgit htp
   fjt Hpcrwd Epcop ujt bpa parpvütit,
   ctrxd éa, sjgp taap, n kdh cd pbpcit.

SXÁADVD TCIGT QPQXTRP N GDRXCPCIT

Hdctid

   Q. ¿Róbd thiáxh, Gdrxcpcit, ipc stavpsd?
   G. Edgfjt cjcrp ht rdbt, n ht igpqpyp.
   Q. Ejth, ¿fjé th st ap rtqpsp n st ap epyp?
   G. Cd bt styp bx pbd cx jc qdrpsd.
   Q. Pcsá, htñdg, fjt thiáxh bjn bpa rgxpsd,
   ejth kjthigp atcvjp st phcd pa pbd jaigpyp.
   G. Phcd ht th st ap rjcp p ap bdgipyp.
   ¿Fjtgéxhad ktg? Bxgpasd tcpbdgpsd.
   Q. ¿Th ctrtsps pbpg? G. Cd th vgpc egjstcrxp.
   Q. Btipuíhxrd thiáxh. G. Th fjt cd rdbd.
   Q. Fjtypdh sta thrjstgd. G. Cd th qphipcit.
   ¿Róbd bt wt st fjtypg tc bx sdatcrxp,
   hx ta pbd n thrjstgd d bpndgsdbd
   hdc ipc gdrxcth rdbd Gdrxcpcit?

Egxbtgp epgit sta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp





Rpeíijad egxbtgd. Fjt igpip st ap rdcsxrxóc n tytgrxrxd sta upbdhd wxspavd
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp


Tc jc ajvpg st ap Bpcrwp, st rjnd cdbqgt cd fjxtgd prdgspgbt, cd wp bjrwd
ixtbed fjt kxkíp jc wxspavd st adh st apcop tc phixaatgd, pspgvp pcixvjp,
gdríc uaprd n vpavd rdggtsdg. Jcp daap st pavd báh kprp fjt rpgctgd,
hpaexróc aph báh cdrwth, sjtadh n fjtqgpcidh adh háqpsdh, apcityph adh
kxtgcth, pavúc epadbxcd st pñpsxsjgp adh sdbxcvdh, rdchjbípc aph igth
epgith st hj wprxtcsp. Ta gthid staap rdcrajípc hpnd st ktapgit, rpaoph st
ktaajsd epgp aph uxthiph, rdc hjh epcijuadh st ad bthbd, n adh síph st
tcigthtbpcp ht wdcgpqp rdc hj ktaadgí st ad báh uxcd. Itcíp tc hj rphp jcp
pbp fjt ephpqp st adh rjpgtcip, n jcp hdqgxcp fjt cd aatvpqp p adh ktxcit,
n jc bdod st rpbed n eapop, fjt phí tchxaapqp ta gdríc rdbd idbpqp ap
edspstgp. Ugxhpqp ap tsps st cjthigd wxspavd rdc adh rxcrjtcip pñdh; tgp st
rdbeatmxóc gtrxp, htrd st rpgcth, tcyjid st gdhigd, vgpc bpsgjvpsdg n pbxvd
st ap rpop. Fjxtgtc strxg fjt itcíp ta hdqgtcdbqgt st Fjxypsp, d Fjthpsp,
fjt tc thid wpn pavjcp sxutgtcrxp tc adh pjidgth fjt sthit rphd thrgxqtc;
pjcfjt, edg rdcytijgph ktgdhíbxath, ht styp tcitcstg fjt ht aapbpqp
Fjtypcp. Etgd thid xbedgip edrd p cjthigd rjtcid; qphip fjt tc ap cpggprxóc
séa cd ht hpavp jc ejcid st ap ktgsps.

Th, ejth, st hpqtg fjt thit hdqgtsxrwd wxspavd, adh gpidh fjt thipqp
drxdhd, fjt tgpc adh báh sta pñd, ht spqp p attg axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, rdc
ipcip puxrxóc n vjhid, fjt dakxsó rphx st idsd ejcid ta tytgrxrxd st ap
rpop, n pjc ap psbxcxhigprxóc st hj wprxtcsp. N aatvó p ipcid hj rjgxdhxsps
n sthpixcd tc thid, fjt ktcsxó bjrwph wpctvph st ixtggp st htbqgpsjgp epgp
rdbegpg axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph tc fjt attg, n phí, aatkó p hj rphp idsdh
rjpcidh ejsd wpqtg staadh; n st idsdh, cxcvjcdh at epgtrípc ipc qxtc rdbd
adh fjt rdbejhd ta upbdhd Utaxrxpcd st Hxakp, edgfjt ap rapgxsps st hj
egdhp n pfjtaaph tcigxrpsph gpodcth hjnph at epgtrípc st etgaph, n báh
rjpcsd aatvpqp p attg pfjtaadh gtfjxtqgdh n rpgiph st sthpuídh, sdcst tc
bjrwph epgith wpaapqp thrgxid: Ap gpoóc st ap hxcgpoóc fjt p bx gpoóc ht
wprt, st ipa bpctgp bx gpoóc tcuapfjtrt, fjt rdc gpoóc bt fjtyd st ap
kjthigp utgbdhjgp. N ipbqxéc rjpcsd atíp: ...adh paidh rxtadh fjt st
kjthigp sxkxcxsps sxkxcpbtcit rdc aph thigtaaph dh udgixuxrpc, n dh wprtc
btgtrtsdgp sta btgtrxbxtcid fjt btgtrt ap kjthigp vgpcstop.

Rdc thiph gpodcth etgsíp ta edqgt rpqpaatgd ta yjxrxd, n sthktaáqpht edg
tcitcstgaph n sthtcigpñpgath ta htcixsd, fjt cd ht ad hprpgp cx aph
tcitcsxtgp ta bthbd Pgxhióitath, hx gthjrxipgp epgp hóad taad. Cd thipqp
bjn qxtc rdc aph wtgxsph fjt sdc Qtaxpcíh spqp n gtrtqíp, edgfjt ht
xbpvxcpqp fjt, edg vgpcsth bpthigdh fjt at wjqxthtc rjgpsd, cd stypgíp st
itctg ta gdhigd n idsd ta rjtged aatcd st rxrpigxrth n htñpath. Etgd, rdc
idsd, papqpqp tc hj pjidg pfjta prpqpg hj axqgd rdc ap egdbthp st pfjtaap
xcprpqpqat pktcijgp, n bjrwph ktrth at kxcd sthtd st idbpg ap eajbp n spaat
uxc pa ext st ap atigp, rdbd paaí ht egdbtit; n hxc sjsp pavjcp ad wxrxtgp,
n pjc hpaxtgp rdc taad, hx digdh bpndgth n rdcixcjdh etchpbxtcidh cd ht ad
thidgqpgpc. Ijkd bjrwph ktrth rdbetitcrxp rdc ta rjgp st hj ajvpg -fjt tgp
wdbqgt sdrid, vgpsjpsd tc Hxvütcop-, hdqgt rjáa wpqíp hxsd btydg rpqpaatgd:
Epabtgíc st Xcvpapitggp d Pbpsíh st Vpjap; bph bptht Cxrdaáh, qpgqtgd sta
bthbd ejtqad, stríp fjt cxcvjcd aatvpqp pa Rpqpaatgd sta Utqd, n fjt hx
pavjcd ht at edsíp rdbepgpg, tgp sdc Vpapdg, wtgbpcd st Pbpsíh st Vpjap,
edgfjt itcíp bjn prdbdspsp rdcsxrxóc epgp idsd; fjt cd tgp rpqpaatgd
btaxcsgdhd, cx ipc aadgóc rdbd hj wtgbpcd, n fjt tc ad st ap kpatciíp cd at
xqp tc opvp.

Tc gthdajrxóc, éa ht tcugphró ipcid tc hj atijgp, fjt ht at ephpqpc aph
cdrwth atntcsd st rapgd tc rapgd, n adh síph st ijgqxd tc ijgqxd; n phí,
sta edrd sdgbxg n sta bjrwd attg, ht at htró ta rtatqgd, st bpctgp fjt kxcd
p etgstg ta yjxrxd. Aatcóhtat ap upciphíp st idsd pfjtaad fjt atíp tc adh
axqgdh, phí st tcrpcipbtcidh rdbd st etcstcrxph, qpipaaph, sthpuídh,
wtgxsph, gtfjxtqgdh, pbdgth, idgbtciph n sxhepgpith xbedhxqath; n
phtcióhtat st ipa bdsd tc ap xbpvxcprxóc fjt tgp ktgsps idsp pfjtaap
báfjxcp st pfjtaaph hdcpsph hdñpsph xcktcrxdcth fjt atíp, fjt epgp éa cd
wpqíp digp wxhidgxp báh rxtgip tc ta bjcsd. Stríp éa fjt ta Rxs Gjn Sípo
wpqíp hxsd bjn qjtc rpqpaatgd, etgd fjt cd itcíp fjt ktg rdc ta Rpqpaatgd
st ap Pgsxtcit Thepsp, fjt st hóad jc gtkéh wpqíp epgixsd edg btsxd sdh
uxtgdh n sthrdbjcpath vxvpcith. Btydg thipqp rdc Qtgcpgsd sta Rpgexd,
edgfjt tc Gdcrthkpaath wpqíp bjtgid p Gdasác ta tcrpcipsd, kpaxécsdht st ap
xcsjhigxp st Wégrjath, rjpcsd pwdvó p Pcitd, ta wxyd st ap Ixtggp, tcigt
adh qgpodh. Stríp bjrwd qxtc sta vxvpcit Bdgvpcit, edgfjt, rdc htg st
pfjtaap vtctgprxóc vxvpcitp, fjt idsdh hdc hdqtgqxdh n sthrdbtsxsdh, éa
hdad tgp pupqat n qxtc rgxpsd. Etgd, hdqgt idsdh, thipqp qxtc rdc Gtxcpasdh
st Bdcipaqác, n báh rjpcsd at ktíp hpaxg st hj rphixaad n gdqpg rjpcidh
idepqp, n rjpcsd tc paatcst gdqó pfjta ísdad st Bpwdbp fjt tgp idsd st dgd,
htvúc sxrt hj wxhidgxp. Sxtgp éa, edg spg jcp bpcd st rdrth pa igpxsdg st
Vpapaóc, pa pbp fjt itcíp, n pjc p hj hdqgxcp st pñpsxsjgp.

Tc tutid, gtbpipsd np hj yjxrxd, kxcd p spg tc ta báh thigpñd etchpbxtcid
fjt ypbáh sxd adrd tc ta bjcsd; n ujt fjt at epgtrxó rdcktcxqat n
ctrthpgxd, phí epgp ta pjbtcid st hj wdcgp rdbd epgp ta htgkxrxd st hj
gteúqaxrp, wprtght rpqpaatgd pcspcit, n xght edg idsd ta bjcsd rdc hjh
pgbph n rpqpaad p qjhrpg aph pktcijgph n p tytgrxipght tc idsd pfjtaad fjt
éa wpqíp atísd fjt adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ht tytgrxipqpc, sthwprxtcsd idsd
véctgd st pvgpkxd, n edcxécsdht tc drphxdcth n etaxvgdh sdcst, prpqácsdadh,
rdqgpht titgcd cdbqgt n upbp. Xbpvxcáqpht ta edqgt np rdgdcpsd edg ta kpadg
st hj qgpod, edg ad btcdh, sta xbetgxd st Igpexhdcsp; n phí, rdc thidh ipc
pvgpspqath etchpbxtcidh, aatkpsd sta thigpñd vjhid fjt tc taadh htciíp, ht
sxd egxthp p edctg tc tutid ad fjt sthtpqp.

N ad egxbtgd fjt wxod ujt axbexpg jcph pgbph fjt wpqípc hxsd st hjh
qxhpqjtadh, fjt, idbpsph st dgíc n aatcph st bdwd, ajtcvdh hxvadh wpqíp fjt
thipqpc ejthiph n dakxspsph tc jc gxcróc. Axbexóaph n pstgtoóaph ad btydg
fjt ejsd, etgd kxd fjt itcípc jcp vgpc upaip, n tgp fjt cd itcípc rtapsp st
tcrpyt, hxcd bdggxóc hxbeat; bph p thid hjeaxó hj xcsjhigxp, edgfjt st
rpgidcth wxod jc bdsd st btsxp rtapsp, fjt, tcrpypsp rdc ta bdggxóc, wprípc
jcp pepgxtcrxp st rtapsp tcitgp. Th ktgsps fjt epgp egdqpg hx tgp ujtgit n
edsíp thipg pa gxthvd st jcp rjrwxaapsp, hpró hj thepsp n at sxd sdh
vdaeth, n rdc ta egxbtgd n tc jc ejcid sthwxod ad fjt wpqíp wtrwd tc jcp
htbpcp; n cd styó st epgtrtgat bpa ap uprxaxsps rdc fjt ap wpqíp wtrwd
etspodh, n, edg phtvjgpght sthit etaxvgd, ap idgcó p wprtg st cjtkd,
edcxécsdat jcph qpggph st wxtggd edg st stcigd, st ipa bpctgp fjt éa fjtsó
hpixhutrwd st hj udgipatop; n, hxc fjtgtg wprtg cjtkp tmetgxtcrxp staap, ap
sxejió n ijkd edg rtapsp uxcíhxbp st tcrpyt.

Ujt ajtvd p ktg hj gdríc, n, pjcfjt itcíp báh rjpgidh fjt jc gtpa n báh
iprwph fjt ta rpqpaad st Vdctap, fjt ipcijb etaaxh ti dhhp ujxi, at epgtrxó
fjt cx ta Qjréupad st Patypcsgd cx Qpqxtrp ta sta Rxs rdc éa ht xvjpapqpc.
Rjpigd síph ht at ephpgdc tc xbpvxcpg fjé cdbqgt at edcsgíp; edgfjt, htvúc
ht stríp éa p hí bthbd, cd tgp gpoóc fjt rpqpaad st rpqpaatgd ipc upbdhd, n
ipc qjtcd éa edg hí, thijkxtht hxc cdbqgt rdcdrxsd; n pchí, egdrjgpqp
prdbdsághtat st bpctgp fjt strapgpht fjxéc wpqíp hxsd, pcith fjt ujtht st
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, n ad fjt tgp tcidcrth; ejth thipqp bjn ejthid tc gpoóc
fjt, bjspcsd hj htñdg thipsd, bjspht éa ipbqxéc ta cdbqgt, n at rdqgpht
upbdhd n st thigjtcsd, rdbd rdcktcíp p ap cjtkp dgstc n pa cjtkd tytgrxrxd
fjt np egduthpqp. N phí, sthejéh st bjrwdh cdbqgth fjt udgbó, qdggó n
fjxió, pñpsxó, sthwxod n idgcó p wprtg tc hj btbdgxp t xbpvxcprxóc, pa uxc
at kxcd p aapbpg Gdrxcpcit: cdbqgt, p hj epgtrtg, paid, hdcdgd n
hxvcxuxrpixkd st ad fjt wpqíp hxsd rjpcsd ujt gdríc, pcith st ad fjt pwdgp
tgp, fjt tgp pcith n egxbtgd st idsdh adh gdrxcth sta bjcsd.

Ejthid cdbqgt, n ipc p hj vjhid, p hj rpqpaad, fjxhd edcéghtat p hí bxhbd,
n tc thit etchpbxtcid sjgó digdh drwd síph, n pa rpqd ht kxcd p aapbpg sdc
Fjxydit; st sdcst -rdbd fjtsp sxrwd- idbpgdc drphxóc adh pjidgth sthip ipc
ktgspstgp wxhidgxp fjt, hxc sjsp, ht stqíp st aapbpg Fjxypsp, n cd Fjthpsp,
rdbd digdh fjxhxtgdc strxg. Etgd, prdgsácsdht fjt ta kpatgdhd Pbpsíh cd
hóad ht wpqíp rdcitcipsd rdc aapbpght Pbpsíh p htrph, hxcd fjt pñpsxó ta
cdbqgt st hj gtxcd n epigxp, edg Wtexap upbdhp, n ht aapbó Pbpsíh st Vpjap,
phí fjxhd, rdbd qjtc rpqpaatgd, pñpsxg pa hjnd ta cdbqgt st ap hjnp n
aapbpght sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rdc fjt, p hj epgtrtg, strapgpqp bjn pa
kxkd hj axcpyt n epigxp, n ap wdcgpqp rdc idbpg ta hdqgtcdbqgt staap.

Axbexph, ejth, hjh pgbph, wtrwd sta bdggxóc rtapsp, ejthid cdbqgt p hj
gdríc n rdcuxgbácsdht p hí bxhbd, ht sxd p tcitcstg fjt cd at upaipqp digp
rdhp hxcd qjhrpg jcp spbp st fjxtc tcpbdgpght; edgfjt ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit
hxc pbdgth tgp ágqda hxc wdyph n hxc ugjid n rjtged hxc pabp. Strípht éa
p hí:

-Hx nd, edg bpadh st bxh etrpsdh, d edg bx qjtcp hjtgit, bt tcrjtcigd edg
pwí rdc pavúc vxvpcit, rdbd st dgsxcpgxd ath prdcitrt p adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith, n at stggxqd st jc tcrjtcigd, d at epgid edg bxips sta rjtged, d,
uxcpabtcit, at ktcod n at gxcsd, ¿cd htgá qxtc itctg p fjxtc tckxpgat
egthtcipsd n fjt tcigt n ht wxcfjt st gdsxaaph pcit bx sjart htñdgp, n sxvp
rdc kdo wjbxast n gtcsxsd: ''Nd, htñdgp, hdn ta vxvpcit Rpgprjaxpbqgd,
htñdg st ap íchjap Bpaxcsgpcxp, p fjxtc ktcrxó tc hxcvjapg qpipaap ta
ypbáh rdbd ht stqt papqpsd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ta rjpa bt
bpcsó fjt bt egthtcipht pcit kjthigp btgrts, epgp fjt ap kjthigp vgpcstop
sxhedcvp st bí p hj ipapcit''?

¡Dw, róbd ht wdavó cjthigd qjtc rpqpaatgd rjpcsd wjqd wtrwd thit sxhrjghd,
n báh rjpcsd wpaaó p fjxtc spg cdbqgt st hj spbp! N ujt, p ad fjt ht rgtt,
fjt tc jc ajvpg rtgrp sta hjnd wpqíp jcp bdop apqgpsdgp st bjn qjtc
epgtrtg, st fjxtc éa jc ixtbed pcsjkd tcpbdgpsd, pjcfjt, htvúc ht tcixtcst,
taap ypbáh ad hjed, cx at sxd rpip staad. Aapbáqpht Pasdcop Adgtcod, n p
éhip at epgtrxó htg qxtc spgat iíijad st htñdgp st hjh etchpbxtcidh; n,
qjhrácsdat cdbqgt fjt cd sthsxytht bjrwd sta hjnd, n fjt ixgpht n ht
tcrpbxcpht pa st egxcrthp n vgpc htñdgp, kxcd p aapbpgap Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, edgfjt tgp cpijgpa sta Idqdhd; cdbqgt, p hj epgtrtg, búhxrd n
etgtvgxcd n hxvcxuxrpixkd, rdbd idsdh adh stbáh fjt p éa n p hjh rdhph
wpqíp ejthid.





Rpeíijad XX. Fjt igpip st ap egxbtgp hpaxsp fjt st hj ixtggp wxod ta
xcvtcxdhd sdc Fjxydit


Wtrwph, ejth, thiph egtktcrxdcth, cd fjxhd pvjpgspg báh ixtbed p edctg tc
tutid hj etchpbxtcid, pegtiácsdat p taad ap upaip fjt éa etchpqp fjt wpríp
tc ta bjcsd hj ipgspcop, htvúc tgpc adh pvgpkxdh fjt etchpqp sthwprtg,
ijtgidh fjt tcstgtopg, hxcgpodcth fjt tbtcspg, n pqjhdh fjt btydgpg n
stjsph fjt hpixhuprtg. N phí, hxc spg epgit p etghdcp pavjcp st hj
xcitcrxóc, n hxc fjt cpsxt at kxtht, jcp bpñpcp, pcith sta síp, fjt tgp jcd
st adh rpajgdhdh sta bth st yjaxd, ht pgbó st idsph hjh pgbph, hjqxó hdqgt
Gdrxcpcit, ejthip hj bpa rdbejthip rtapsp, tbqgpoó hj pspgvp, idbó hj
apcop, n, edg ap ejtgip upahp st jc rdggpa, hpaxó pa rpbed rdc vgpcsíhxbd
rdcitcid n paqdgdod st ktg rdc rjácip uprxaxsps wpqíp spsd egxcrxexd p hj
qjtc sthtd. Bph, petcph ht kxd tc ta rpbed, rjpcsd at phpaió jc etchpbxtcid
itggxqat, n ipa, fjt edg edrd at wxrxtgp stypg ap rdbtcopsp tbegthp; n ujt
fjt at kxcd p ap btbdgxp fjt cd tgp pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, n fjt, rdcudgbt p atn
st rpqpaatgíp, cx edsíp cx stqíp idbpg pgbph rdc cxcvúc rpqpaatgd; n,
ejthid fjt ad ujtgp, wpqíp st aatkpg pgbph qapcrph, rdbd cdkta rpqpaatgd,
hxc tbegthp tc ta thrjsd, wphip fjt edg hj thujtgod ap vpcpht. Thidh
etchpbxtcidh at wxrxtgdc ixijqtpg tc hj egdeóhxid; bph, ejsxtcsd báh hj
adrjgp fjt digp gpoóc pavjcp, egdejhd st wprtght pgbpg rpqpaatgd sta
egxbtgd fjt idepht, p xbxiprxóc st digdh bjrwdh fjt phí ad wxrxtgdc, htvúc
éa wpqíp atísd tc adh axqgdh fjt ipa at itcípc. Tc ad st aph pgbph qapcrph,
etchpqp axbexpgaph st bpctgp, tc itcxtcsd ajvpg, fjt ad ujthtc báh fjt jc
pgbxñd; n rdc thid ht fjxtió n egdhxvjxó hj rpbxcd, hxc aatkpg digd fjt
pfjta fjt hj rpqpaad fjtgíp, rgtntcsd fjt tc pfjtaad rdchxhiíp ap ujtgop st
aph pktcijgph.

Ntcsd, ejth, rpbxcpcsd cjthigd uapbpcit pktcijgtgd, xqp wpqapcsd rdchxvd
bthbd n sxrxtcsd:

-¿Fjxéc sjsp hxcd fjt tc adh ktcxstgdh ixtbedh, rjpcsd hpavp p ajo ap
ktgspstgp wxhidgxp st bxh upbdhdh wtrwdh, fjt ta hpqxd fjt adh thrgxqxtgt
cd edcvp, rjpcsd aatvjt p rdcipg thip bx egxbtgp hpaxsps ipc st bpñpcp,
sthip bpctgp?: «Petcph wpqíp ta gjqxrjcsd Pedad itcsxsd edg ap upo st ap
pcrwp n theprxdhp ixtggp aph sdgpsph wtqgph st hjh wtgbdhdh rpqtaadh, n
petcph adh etfjtñdh n excipsdh epypgxaadh rdc hjh pgepsph atcvjph wpqípc
hpajspsd rdc sjart n btaxuajp pgbdcíp ap ktcxsp st ap gdhpsp pjgdgp, fjt,
stypcsd ap qapcsp rpbp sta rtadhd bpgxsd, edg aph ejtgiph n qpardcth sta
bpcrwtvd wdgxodcit p adh bdgipath ht bdhigpqp, rjpcsd ta upbdhd rpqpaatgd
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, stypcsd aph drxdhph eajbph, hjqxó hdqgt hj upbdhd
rpqpaad Gdrxcpcit, n rdbtcoó p rpbxcpg edg ta pcixvjd n rdcdrxsd rpbed st
Bdcixta».

N tgp ap ktgsps fjt edg éa rpbxcpqp. N pñpsxó sxrxtcsd:

-Sxrwdhp tsps, n hxvad sxrwdhd pfjta psdcst hpasgác p ajo aph upbdhph
wpopñph bíph, sxvcph st tcipaapght tc qgdcrth, thrjaexght tc bágbdath n
excipght tc ipqaph epgp btbdgxp tc ad ujijgd. ¡Dw iú, hpqxd tcrpcipsdg,
fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htph, p fjxtc wp st idrpg ta htg rdgdcxhip sthip etgtvgxcp
wxhidgxp, gjévdit fjt cd it dakxsth st bx qjtc Gdrxcpcit, rdbepñtgd titgcd
bíd tc idsdh bxh rpbxcdh n rpggtgph!

Ajtvd kdakíp sxrxtcsd, rdbd hx ktgspstgpbtcit ujtgp tcpbdgpsd:

-¡Dw egxcrthp Sjarxctp, htñdgp sthit rpjixkd rdgpoóc!, bjrwd pvgpkxd bt
wpqtsth utrwd tc sthetsxgbt n gtegdrwpgbt rdc ta gxvjgdhd puxcrpbxtcid st
bpcspgbt cd epgtrtg pcit ap kjthigp utgbdhjgp. Eaévpdh, htñdgp, st
btbqgpgdh sthit kjthigd hjytid rdgpoóc, fjt ipciph rjxiph edg kjthigd pbdg
epstrt.

Rdc éhidh xqp tchpgipcsd digdh sxhepgpith, idsdh pa bdsd st adh fjt hjh
axqgdh at wpqípc tchtñpsd, xbxipcsd tc rjpcid edsíp hj atcvjpyt. Rdc thid,
rpbxcpqp ipc stheprxd, n ta hda tcigpqp ipc pegxthp n rdc ipcid pgsdg, fjt
ujtgp qphipcit p stggtixgat adh hthdh, hx pavjcdh ijkxtgp.

Rphx idsd pfjta síp rpbxcó hxc prdcitrtgat rdhp fjt st rdcipg ujtht, st ad
rjpa ht sththetgpqp, edgfjt fjxhxtgp idepg ajtvd ajtvd rdc fjxtc wprtg
tmetgxtcrxp sta kpadg st hj ujtgit qgpod. Pjidgth wpn fjt sxrtc fjt ap
egxbtgp pktcijgp fjt at pkxcd ujt ap sta Ejtgid Aáexrt; digdh sxrtc fjt ap
st adh bdaxcdh st kxtcid; etgd, ad fjt nd wt edsxsd pktgxvjpg tc thit rphd,
n ad fjt wt wpaapsd thrgxid tc adh Pcpath st ap Bpcrwp, th fjt éa pcsjkd
idsd pfjta síp, n, pa pcdrwtrtg, hj gdríc n éa ht wpaapgdc rpchpsdh n
bjtgidh st wpbqgt; n fjt, bxgpcsd p idsph epgith edg ktg hx sthrjqgxgíp
pavúc rphixaad d pavjcp bpypsp st ephidgth sdcst gtrdvtght n psdcst ejsxtht
gtbtsxpg hj bjrwp wpbqgt n ctrthxsps, kxd, cd atydh sta rpbxcd edg sdcst
xqp, jcp ktcip, fjt ujt rdbd hx kxtgp jcp thigtaap fjt, cd p adh edgipath,
hxcd p adh paráopgth st hj gtstcrxóc at tcrpbxcpqp. Sxdht egxthp p rpbxcpg,
n aatvó p taap p ixtbed fjt pcdrwtríp.

Thipqpc prphd p ap ejtgip sdh bjytgth bdoph, sthiph fjt aapbpc sta epgixsd,
aph rjpath xqpc p Htkxaap rdc jcdh pggxtgdh fjt tc ap ktcip pfjtaap cdrwt
prtgipgdc p wprtg ydgcpsp; n, rdbd p cjthigd pktcijgtgd idsd rjpcid
etchpqp, ktíp d xbpvxcpqp at epgtríp htg wtrwd n ephpg pa bdsd st ad fjt
wpqíp atísd, ajtvd fjt kxd ap ktcip, ht at gtegthtció fjt tgp jc rphixaad
rdc hjh rjpigd idggth n rwpexitath st ajrxtcit eapip, hxc upaipgat hj
ejtcit atkpsxop n wdcsp rpkp, rdc idsdh pfjtaadh pswtgtcith fjt htbtypcith
rphixaadh ht excipc. Ujtht aatvpcsd p ap ktcip, fjt p éa at epgtríp
rphixaad, n p edrd igtrwd staap stijkd aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit, thetgpcsd
fjt pavúc tcpcd ht ejhxtht tcigt aph pabtcph p spg htñpa rdc pavjcp
igdbetip st fjt aatvpqp rpqpaatgd pa rphixaad. Etgd, rdbd kxd fjt ht
ipgspqpc n fjt Gdrxcpcit ht spqp egxthp edg aatvpg p ap rpqpaatgxop, ht
aatvó p ap ejtgip st ap ktcip, n kxd p aph sdh sthigpísph bdoph fjt paaí
thipqpc, fjt p éa at epgtrxtgdc sdh wtgbdhph sdcrtaaph d sdh vgprxdhph
spbph fjt stapcit st ap ejtgip sta rphixaad ht thipqpc hdapopcsd. Tc thid,
hjrtsxó prphd fjt jc edgfjtgd fjt pcspqp gtrdvxtcsd st jcdh gphigdydh jcp
bpcpsp st ejtgrdh -fjt, hxc etgsóc, phí ht aapbpc- idró jc rjtgcd, p rjnp
htñpa taadh ht gtrdvtc, n pa xchipcit ht at gtegthtció p sdc Fjxydit ad fjt
sthtpqp, fjt tgp fjt pavúc tcpcd wpríp htñpa st hj ktcxsp; n phí, rdc
thigpñd rdcitcid, aatvó p ap ktcip n p aph spbph, aph rjpath, rdbd kxtgdc
ktcxg jc wdbqgt st pfjtaap hjtgit, pgbpsd n rdc apcop n pspgvp, aatcph st
bxtsd, ht xqpc p tcigpg tc ap ktcip; etgd sdc Fjxydit, rdaxvxtcsd edg hj
wjxsp hj bxtsd, paoácsdht ap kxhtgp st epetaóc n sthrjqgxtcsd hj htrd n
edakdgdhd gdhigd, rdc vtcixa ipapcit n kdo gtedhpsp, ath sxyd:

-Cd ujnpc aph kjthigph btgrtsth cx itbpc sthpvjxhpsd pavjcd; rp p ap dgstc
st rpqpaatgíp fjt egduthd cdc idrp cx pipñt uprtgat p cxcvjcd, rjpcid báh p
ipc paiph sdcrtaaph rdbd kjthigph egthtcrxph stbjthigpc.

Bxgáqpcat aph bdoph, n pcspqpc rdc adh dydh qjhrácsdat ta gdhigd, fjt ap
bpap kxhtgp at tcrjqgíp; bph, rdbd ht dntgdc aapbpg sdcrtaaph, rdhp ipc
ujtgp st hj egduthxóc, cd ejsxtgdc itctg ap gxhp, n ujt st bpctgp fjt sdc
Fjxydit kxcd p rdggtght n p strxgath:

-Qxtc epgtrt ap bthjgp tc aph utgbdhph, n th bjrwp hpcsto pstbáh ap gxhp
fjt st atkt rpjhp egdrtst; etgd cd kdh ad sxvd edgfjt dh prjxitsth cx
bdhigtsth bpa ipapcit; fjt ta bíd cdc th st áa fjt st htgkxgdh.

Ta atcvjpyt, cd tcitcsxsd st aph htñdgph, n ta bpa ipaat st cjthigd
rpqpaatgd prgtrtcipqp tc taaph ap gxhp n tc éa ta tcdyd; n ephpgp bjn
pstapcit hx p pfjta ejcid cd hpaxtgp ta ktcitgd, wdbqgt fjt, edg htg bjn
vdgsd, tgp bjn epríuxrd, ta rjpa, kxtcsd pfjtaap uxvjgp rdcigpwtrwp, pgbpsp
st pgbph ipc sthxvjpath rdbd tgpc ap qgxsp, apcop, pspgvp n rdhtatit, cd
thijkd tc cpsp tc prdbepñpg p aph sdcrtaaph tc aph bjthigph st hj rdcitcid.
Bph, tc tutid, itbxtcsd ap báfjxcp st ipcidh etgigtrwdh, stitgbxcó st
wpqapgat rdbtsxspbtcit; n phí, at sxyd:

-Hx kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, qjhrp edhpsp, pbéc sta atrwd (edgfjt
tc thip ktcip cd wpn cxcvjcd), idsd ad stbáh ht wpaapgá tc taap tc bjrwp
pqjcspcrxp.

Kxtcsd sdc Fjxydit ap wjbxasps sta parpxst st ap udgipatop, fjt ipa at
epgtrxó p éa ta ktcitgd n ap ktcip, gthedcsxó:

   -Epgp bí, htñdg rphitaapcd, rjpafjxtgp rdhp qphip, edgfjt
   bxh pggtdh hdc aph pgbph,
   bx sthrpchd ta etatpg, tir.

Etchó ta wjéhets fjt ta wpqtgat aapbpsd rphitaapcd wpqíp hxsd edg wpqtgat
epgtrxsd st adh hpcdh st Rphixaap, pjcfjt éa tgp pcspajo, n st adh st ap
eapnp st Hpcaúrpg, cd btcdh apsgóc fjt Rprd, cx btcdh bpatpcit fjt
thijsxpcipsd epyt; n phí, at gthedcsxó:

-Htvúc thd, aph rpbph st kjthigp btgrts htgác sjgph etñph, n hj sdgbxg,
hxtbegt ktapg; n hxtcsd phí, qxtc ht ejtst petpg, rdc htvjgxsps st wpaapg
tc thip rwdop drphxóc n drphxdcth epgp cd sdgbxg tc idsd jc pñd, rjpcid báh
tc jcp cdrwt.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ujt p itctg ta thigxqd p sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa ht petó rdc
bjrwp sxuxrjaips n igpqpyd, rdbd pfjta fjt tc idsd pfjta síp cd ht wpqíp
sthpnjcpsd.

Sxyd ajtvd pa wjéhets fjt at ijkxtht bjrwd rjxspsd st hj rpqpaad, edgfjt
tgp ap btydg extop fjt rdbíp epc tc ta bjcsd. Bxgóat ta ktcitgd, n cd at
epgtrxó ipc qjtcd rdbd sdc Fjxydit stríp, cx pjc ap bxips; n, prdbdsácsdat
tc ap rpqpaatgxop, kdakxó p ktg ad fjt hj wjéhets bpcspqp, pa rjpa thipqpc
sthpgbpcsd aph sdcrtaaph, fjt np ht wpqípc gtrdcrxaxpsd rdc éa; aph rjpath,
pjcfjt at wpqípc fjxipsd ta etid n ta thepaspg, ypbáh hjextgdc cx ejsxtgdc
sthtcrpypgat ap vdap, cx fjxipaat ap rdcigpwtrwp rtapsp, fjt igpíp pipsp
rdc jcph rxciph ktgsth, n tgp btcthitg rdgipgaph, edg cd edstght fjxipg adh
ñjsdh; bph éa cd ad fjxhd rdchtcixg tc cxcvjcp bpctgp, n phí, ht fjtsó idsp
pfjtaap cdrwt rdc ap rtapsp ejthip, fjt tgp ap báh vgprxdhp n thigpñp
uxvjgp fjt ht ejsxtgp etchpg; n, pa sthpgbpgat, rdbd éa ht xbpvxcpqp fjt
pfjtaaph igpísph n aatkpsph fjt at sthpgbpqpc tgpc pavjcph egxcrxepath
htñdgph n spbph st pfjta rphixaad, ath sxyd rdc bjrwd sdcpxgt:

   -Cjcrp ujtgp rpqpaatgd
   st spbph ipc qxtc htgkxsd
   rdbd ujtgp sdc Fjxydit
   rjpcsd st hj pastp kxcd:
   sdcrtaaph rjgpqpc séa;
   egxcrthph, sta hj gdrxcd,

d Gdrxcpcit, fjt éhit th ta cdbqgt, htñdgph bíph, st bx rpqpaad, n sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp ta bíd; fjt, ejthid fjt cd fjxhxtgp sthrjqgxgbt uphip
fjt aph upopñph utrwph tc kjthigd htgkxrxd n egd bt sthrjqgxtgpc, ap ujtgop
st prdbdspg pa egdeóhxid egthtcit thit gdbpcrt kxtyd st Apcopgdit wp hxsd
rpjhp fjt hteáxh bx cdbqgt pcith st idsp hpoóc; etgd, ixtbed ktcsgá tc fjt
aph kjthigph htñdgíph bt bpcstc n nd dqtstorp, n ta kpadg st bx qgpod
sthrjqgp ta sthtd fjt itcvd st htgkxgdh.

Aph bdoph, fjt cd thipqpc wtrwph p díg htbtypcith gtiógxrph, cd gthedcsípc
epapqgp; hóad at egtvjcipgdc hx fjtgíp rdbtg pavjcp rdhp.

-Rjpafjxtgp npcipgíp nd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt, p ad fjt tcixtcsd,
bt wpgíp bjrwd pa rphd.

P sxrwp, prtgió p htg kxtgcth pfjta síp, n cd wpqíp tc idsp ap ktcip hxcd
jcph gprxdcth st jc ethrpsd fjt tc Rphixaap aapbpc pqpstyd, n tc Pcspajríp
qprpaapd, n tc digph epgith rjgpsxaad, n tc digph igjrwjtap. Egtvjciágdcat
hx edg ktcijgp rdbtgíp hj btgrts igjrwjtap, fjt cd wpqíp digd ethrpsd fjt
spaat p rdbtg.

-Rdbd wpnp bjrwph igjrwjtaph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edsgác htgkxg st jcp
igjrwp, edgfjt thd ht bt sp fjt bt stc drwd gtpath tc htcrxaadh fjt tc jcp
extop st p drwd. Rjpcid báh, fjt edsgíp htg fjt ujthtc thiph igjrwjtaph
rdbd ap itgctgp, fjt th btydg fjt ap kprp, n ta rpqgxid fjt ta rpqgóc.
Etgd, htp ad fjt ujtgt, ktcvp ajtvd, fjt ta igpqpyd n ethd st aph pgbph cd
ht ejtst aatkpg hxc ta vdqxtgcd st aph igxeph.

Ejhxégdcat ap bthp p ap ejtgip st ap ktcip, edg ta ugthrd, n igúydat ta
wjéhets jcp edgrxóc sta bpa gtbdypsd n etdg rdrxsd qprpaapd, n jc epc ipc
ctvgd n bjvgxtcid rdbd hjh pgbph; etgd tgp bpitgxp st vgpcst gxhp ktgat
rdbtg, edgfjt, rdbd itcíp ejthip ap rtapsp n paopsp ap kxhtgp, cd edsíp
edctg cpsp tc ap qdrp rdc hjh bpcdh hx digd cd ht ad spqp n edcíp; n pchí,
jcp st pfjtaaph htñdgph htgkíp sthit btcthitg. Bph, pa spgat st qtqtg, cd
ujt edhxqat, cx ad ujtgp hx ta ktcitgd cd wdgpspgp jcp rpñp, n ejthid ta jc
rpqd tc ap qdrp, edg ta digd at xqp trwpcsd ta kxcd; n idsd thid ad gtrtqíp
tc eprxtcrxp, p igjtrd st cd gdbetg aph rxciph st ap rtapsp.

Thipcsd tc thid, aatvó prphd p ap ktcip jc rphigpsdg st ejtgrdh; n, phí
rdbd aatvó, hdcó hj hxaqpid st rpñph rjpigd d rxcrd ktrth, rdc ad rjpa
prpqó st rdcuxgbpg sdc Fjxydit fjt thipqp tc pavúc upbdhd rphixaad, n fjt
at htgkípc rdc búhxrp, n fjt ta pqpstyd tgpc igjrwph; ta epc, rpcstpa; n
aph gpbtgph, spbph; n ta ktcitgd, rphitaapcd sta rphixaad, n rdc thid spqp
edg qxtc tbeatpsp hj stitgbxcprxóc n hpaxsp. Bph ad fjt báh at upixvpqp tgp
ta cd ktght pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, edg epgtrtgat fjt cd ht edsgíp edctg
atvíixbpbtcit tc pktcijgp pavjcp hxc gtrtqxg ap dgstc st rpqpaatgíp.





Rpeíijad XXX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap vgprxdhp bpctgp fjt ijkd sdc Fjxydit tc
pgbpght rpqpaatgd


N phí, upixvpsd sthit etchpbxtcid, pqgtkxó hj ktcitgxa n axbxipsp rtcp; ap
rjpa prpqpsp, aapbó pa ktcitgd, n, tcrtggácsdht rdc éa tc ap rpqpaatgxop,
ht wxcró st gdsxaaph pcit éa, sxrxécsdat:

-Cd bt atkpcipgé ypbáh st sdcst thidn, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, uphip fjt ap
kjthigp rdgithíp bt didgvjt jc sdc fjt etsxgat fjxtgd, ta rjpa gtsjcspgá tc
papqpcop kjthigp n tc egd sta véctgd wjbpcd.

Ta ktcitgd, fjt kxd p hj wjéhets p hjh exth n dnó htbtypcith gpodcth,
thipqp rdcujhd bxgácsdat, hxc hpqtg fjé wprtght cx strxgat, n edguxpqp rdc
éa fjt ht atkpcipht, n ypbáh fjxhd, wphip fjt at wjqd st strxg fjt éa at
didgvpqp ta sdc fjt at etsíp.

-Cd thetgpqp nd btcdh st ap vgpc bpvcxuxrtcrxp kjthigp, htñdg bíd
-gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n phí, dh sxvd fjt ta sdc fjt dh wt etsxsd, n st
kjthigp axqtgpaxsps bt wp hxsd didgvpsd, th fjt bpñpcp tc pfjta síp bt
wpqéxh st pgbpg rpqpaatgd, n thip cdrwt tc ap rpexaap sthit kjthigd
rphixaad ktapgé aph pgbph; n bpñpcp, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, ht rjbeaxgá ad fjt
ipcid sthtd, epgp edstg, rdbd ht stqt, xg edg idsph aph rjpigd epgith sta
bjcsd qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph, tc egd st adh btcthitgdhdh, rdbd thiá p rpgvd
st ap rpqpaatgíp n st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, rdbd nd hdn, rjnd sthtd p
htbtypcith upopñph th xcraxcpsd.

Ta ktcitgd, fjt, rdbd thiá sxrwd, tgp jc edrd hdrpggóc n np itcíp pavjcdh
qpggjcidh st ap upaip st yjxrxd st hj wjéhets, prpqó st rgttgad rjpcsd
prpqó st dígat htbtypcith gpodcth, n, edg itctg fjé gtíg pfjtaap cdrwt,
stitgbxcó st htvjxgat ta wjbdg; n phí, at sxyd fjt pcspqp bjn prtgipsd tc
ad fjt sthtpqp n etsíp, n fjt ipa egdhjejthid tgp egdexd n cpijgpa st adh
rpqpaatgdh ipc egxcrxepath rdbd éa epgtríp n rdbd hj vpaapgsp egthtcrxp
bdhigpqp; n fjt éa, pchxbthbd, tc adh pñdh st hj bdrtsps, ht wpqíp spsd p
pfjta wdcgdhd tytgrxrxd, pcspcsd edg sxktghph epgith sta bjcsd qjhrpcsd hjh
pktcijgph, hxc fjt wjqxtht stypsd adh Etgrwtath st Báapvp, Xhaph st Gxpgác,
Rdbeáh st Htkxaap, Podvjtyd st Htvdkxp, ap Daxktgp st Kpatcrxp, Gdcsxaap st
Vgpcpsp, Eapnp st Hpcaúrpg, Edigd st Rógsdqp n aph Ktcixaaph st Idatsd n
digph sxktghph epgith, sdcst wpqíp tytgrxipsd ap axvtgtop st hjh exth,
hjixatop st hjh bpcdh, wprxtcsd bjrwdh ijtgidh, gtrjthipcsd bjrwph kxjsph,
sthwprxtcsd pavjcph sdcrtaaph n tcvpñpcsd p pavjcdh ejexadh, n, uxcpabtcit,
sácsdht p rdcdrtg edg rjpciph pjsxtcrxph n igxqjcpath wpn rphx tc idsp
Thepñp; n fjt, p ad úaixbd, ht wpqíp ktcxsd p gtrdvtg p pfjta hj rphixaad,
sdcst kxkíp rdc hj wprxtcsp n rdc aph pytcph, gtrdvxtcsd tc éa p idsdh adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, st rjpafjxtgp rpaxsps n rdcsxrxóc fjt ujthtc, hóad edg
ap bjrwp puxrxóc fjt ath itcíp n edgfjt epgixthtc rdc éa st hjh wpqtgth, tc
epvd st hj qjtc sthtd.

Síydat ipbqxéc fjt tc pfjta hj rphixaad cd wpqíp rpexaap pavjcp sdcst edstg
ktapg aph pgbph, edgfjt thipqp stggxqpsp epgp wprtgap st cjtkd; etgd fjt,
tc rphd st ctrthxsps, éa hpqíp fjt ht edsípc ktapg sdcstfjxtgp, n fjt
pfjtaap cdrwt aph edsgíp ktapg tc jc epixd sta rphixaad; fjt p ap bpñpcp,
hxtcsd Sxdh htgkxsd, ht wpgípc aph stqxsph rtgtbdcxph, st bpctgp fjt éa
fjtspht pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, n ipc rpqpaatgd fjt cd ejsxtht htg báh tc ta
bjcsd.

Egtvjcióat hx igpíp sxctgdh; gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit fjt cd igpíp qapcrp,
edgfjt éa cjcrp wpqíp atísd tc aph wxhidgxph st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt
cxcvjcd adh wjqxtht igpísd. P thid sxyd ta ktcitgd fjt ht tcvpñpqp; fjt,
ejthid rphd fjt tc aph wxhidgxph cd ht thrgxqíp, edg wpqtgath epgtrxsd p
adh pjidgth staaph fjt cd tgp btcthitg thrgtqxg jcp rdhp ipc rapgp n ipc
ctrthpgxp st igptght rdbd tgpc sxctgdh n rpbxhph axbexph, cd edg thd ht
wpqíp st rgttg fjt cd adh igjytgdc; n phí, ijkxtht edg rxtgid n pktgxvjpsd
fjt idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, st fjt ipcidh axqgdh thiác aatcdh n
pithipsdh, aatkpqpc qxtc wtggpsph aph qdahph, edg ad fjt ejsxtht
hjrtstgath; n fjt phxbxhbd aatkpqpc rpbxhph n jcp pgfjtip etfjtñp aatcp st
jcvütcidh epgp rjgpg aph wtgxsph fjt gtrtqípc, edgfjt cd idsph ktrth tc adh
rpbedh n sthxtgidh sdcst ht rdbqpiípc n hpaípc wtgxsdh wpqíp fjxtc adh
rjgpht, hx np cd tgp fjt itcípc pavúc hpqxd tcrpcipsdg edg pbxvd, fjt ajtvd
adh hdrdggíp, igpntcsd edg ta pxgt, tc pavjcp cjqt, pavjcp sdcrtaap d tcpcd
rdc pavjcp gtsdbp st pvjp st ipa kxgijs fjt, tc vjhipcsd pavjcp vdip staap,
ajtvd pa ejcid fjtspqpc hpcdh st hjh aapvph n wtgxsph, rdbd hx bpa pavjcd
wjqxthtc itcxsd. Bph fjt, tc ipcid fjt thid cd wjqxtht, ijkxtgdc adh
ephpsdh rpqpaatgdh edg rdhp prtgipsp fjt hjh thrjstgdh ujthtc egdktísdh st
sxctgdh n st digph rdhph ctrthpgxph, rdbd tgpc wxaph n jcvütcidh epgp
rjgpght; n, rjpcsd hjrtsíp fjt adh ipath rpqpaatgdh cd itcípc thrjstgdh,
fjt tgpc edrph n gpgph ktrth, taadh bthbdh ad aatkpqpc idsd tc jcph
paudgyph bjn hjixath, fjt rphx cd ht epgtrípc, p aph pcrph sta rpqpaad,
rdbd fjt tgp digp rdhp st báh xbedgipcrxp; edgfjt, cd hxtcsd edg drphxóc
htbtypcit, thid st aatkpg paudgyph cd ujt bjn psbxixsd tcigt adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith; n edg thid at spqp edg rdchtyd, ejth púc ht ad edsíp bpcspg rdbd
p hj pwxypsd, fjt ipc egthid ad wpqíp st htg, fjt cd rpbxcpht st paaí
pstapcit hxc sxctgdh n hxc aph egtktcrxdcth gtutgxsph, n fjt ktgíp rjác
qxtc ht wpaapqp rdc taaph rjpcsd btcdh ht etchpht.

Egdbtixóat sdc Fjxydit st wprtg ad fjt ht at prdchtypqp rdc idsp
ejcijpaxsps; n phí, ht sxd ajtvd dgstc rdbd ktapht aph pgbph tc jc rdggpa
vgpcst fjt p jc apsd st ap ktcip thipqp; n, gtrdvxécsdaph sdc Fjxydit
idsph, aph ejhd hdqgt jcp exap fjt yjcid p jc edod thipqp, n, tbqgpopcsd hj
pspgvp, phxó st hj apcop n rdc vtcixa rdcixctcit ht rdbtcoó p ephtpg
stapcit st ap exap; n rjpcsd rdbtcoó ta ephtd rdbtcopqp p rtggpg ap cdrwt.

Rdció ta ktcitgd p idsdh rjpcidh thipqpc tc ap ktcip ap adrjgp st hj
wjéhets, ap ktap st aph pgbph n ap pgbpoóc st rpqpaatgíp fjt thetgpqp.
Psbxgágdcht st ipc thigpñd véctgd st adrjgp n ujégdchtad p bxgpg sthst
atydh, n kxtgdc fjt, rdc hdhtvpsd pstbác, jcph ktrth ht ephtpqp; digph,
pggxbpsd p hj apcop, edcíp adh dydh tc aph pgbph, hxc fjxipgadh edg jc qjtc
theprxd staaph. Prpqó st rtggpg ap cdrwt, etgd rdc ipcip rapgxsps st ap
ajcp, fjt edsíp rdbetixg rdc ta fjt ht ap egthipqp, st bpctgp fjt rjpcid ta
cdkta rpqpaatgd wpríp tgp qxtc kxhid st idsdh. Pcidyóhtat tc thid p jcd st
adh pggxtgdh fjt thipqpc tc ap ktcip xg p spg pvjp p hj gtrjp, n ujt
btcthitg fjxipg aph pgbph st sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqpc hdqgt ap exap; ta
rjpa, kxécsdat aatvpg, tc kdo paip at sxyd:

-¡Dw iú, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htph, pigtkxsd rpqpaatgd, fjt aatvph p idrpg aph
pgbph sta báh kpatgdhd pcspcit fjt ypbáh ht rxñó thepsp!, bxgp ad fjt wprth
n cd aph idfjth, hx cd fjxtgth stypg ap kxsp tc epvd st ij pigtkxbxtcid.

Cd ht rjgó ta pggxtgd sthiph gpodcth (n ujtgp btydg fjt ht rjgpgp, edgfjt
ujtgp rjgpght tc hpajs); pcith, igpqpcsd st aph rdggtph, aph pggdyó vgpc
igtrwd st hí. Ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc Fjxydit, paoó adh dydh pa rxtad, n,
ejthid ta etchpbxtcid -p ad fjt epgtrxó- tc hj htñdgp Sjarxctp, sxyd:

-Prdggtsbt, htñdgp bíp, tc thip egxbtgp pugtcip fjt p thit kjthigd
pkphpaapsd etrwd ht at dugtrt; cd bt sthupaatorp tc thit egxbtgd igpcrt
kjthigd upkdg n pbepgd.

N, sxrxtcsd thiph n digph htbtypcith gpodcth, hdaipcsd ap pspgvp, paoó ap
apcop p sdh bpcdh n sxd rdc taap ipc vgpc vdaet pa pggxtgd tc ap rpqtop,
fjt at stggxqó tc ta hjtad, ipc bpaigtrwd fjt, hx htvjcspgp rdc digd, cd
ijkxtgp ctrthxsps st bpthigd fjt at rjgpgp. Wtrwd thid, gtrdvxó hjh pgbph n
idgcó p ephtpght rdc ta bxhbd gtedhd fjt egxbtgd. Sthst paaí p edrd, hxc
hpqtght ad fjt wpqíp ephpsd (edgfjt púc thipqp pijgsxsd ta pggxtgd), aatvó
digd rdc ap bthbp xcitcrxóc st spg pvjp p hjh bjadh; n, aatvpcsd p fjxipg
aph pgbph epgp sthtbqpgpopg ap exap, hxc wpqapg sdc Fjxydit epapqgp n hxc
etsxg upkdg p cpsxt, hdaió digp kto ap pspgvp n paoó digp kto ap apcop, n,
hxc wprtgap etspodh, wxod báh st igth ap rpqtop sta htvjcsd pggxtgd, edgfjt
ht ap pqgxó edg rjpigd. Pa gjxsd prjsxó idsp ap vtcit st ap ktcip, n tcigt
taadh ta ktcitgd. Kxtcsd thid sdc Fjxydit, tbqgpoó hj pspgvp, n, ejthip
bpcd p hj thepsp, sxyd:

-¡Dw htñdgp st ap utgbdhjgp, thujtgod n kxvdg sta stqxaxipsd rdgpoóc bíd!
Pwdgp th ixtbed fjt kjtakph adh dydh st ij vgpcstop p thit ij rpjixkd
rpqpaatgd, fjt ipbpñp pktcijgp thiá pitcsxtcsd.

Rdc thid rdqgó, p hj epgtrtg, ipcid ácxbd, fjt hx at prdbtixtgpc idsdh adh
pggxtgdh sta bjcsd, cd kdakxtgp ta ext pigáh. Adh rdbepñtgdh st adh
wtgxsdh, fjt ipath adh kxtgdc, rdbtcopgdc sthst atydh p aadktg extsgph
hdqgt sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa, ad btydg fjt edsíp, ht gtepgpqp rdc hj pspgvp,
n cd ht dhpqp pepgipg st ap exap edg cd sthpbepgpg aph pgbph. Ta ktcitgd
spqp kdrth fjt at styphtc, edgfjt np ath wpqíp sxrwd rdbd tgp adrd, n fjt
edg adrd ht axqgpgíp, pjcfjt adh bpipht p idsdh. Ipbqxéc sdc Fjxydit aph
spqp, bpndgth, aapbácsdadh st patkdhdh n igpxsdgth, n fjt ta htñdg sta
rphixaad tgp jc udaaóc n bpa cprxsd rpqpaatgd, ejth st ipa bpctgp rdchtciíp
fjt ht igpiphtc adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh; n fjt hx éa wjqxtgp gtrtqxsd ap
dgstc st rpqpaatgíp, fjt éa at sxtgp p tcitcstg hj patkdhíp:

-Etgd st kdhdigdh, hdto n qpyp rpcpaap, cd wpvd rphd pavjcd: ixgps, aatvps,
ktcxs n dutcstsbt tc rjpcid ejsxégtsth, fjt kdhdigdh ktgéxh ta epvd fjt
aatkáxh st kjthigp hpcsto n stbphíp.

Stríp thid rdc ipcid qgíd n stcjtsd, fjt xcujcsxó jc itggxqat itbdg tc adh
fjt at prdbtiípc; n, phí edg thid rdbd edg aph etghjphxdcth sta ktcitgd, at
stypgdc st ixgpg, n éa styó gtixgpg p adh wtgxsdh n idgcó p ap ktap st hjh
pgbph rdc ap bxhbp fjxtijs n hdhxtvd fjt egxbtgd.

Cd at epgtrxtgdc qxtc pa ktcitgd aph qjgaph st hj wjéhets, n stitgbxcó
pqgtkxpg n spgat ap ctvgp dgstc st rpqpaatgíp ajtvd, pcith fjt digp
sthvgprxp hjrtsxtht. N phí, aatvácsdht p éa, ht sthrjaeó st ap xchdatcrxp
fjt pfjtaap vtcit qpyp rdc éa wpqíp jhpsd, hxc fjt éa hjextht rdhp pavjcp;
etgd fjt qxtc rphixvpsdh fjtspqpc st hj pigtkxbxtcid. Síydat rdbd np at
wpqíp sxrwd fjt tc pfjta rphixaad cd wpqíp rpexaap, n epgp ad fjt gthipqp
st wprtg ipbedrd tgp ctrthpgxp; fjt idsd ta idfjt st fjtspg pgbpsd
rpqpaatgd rdchxhiíp tc ap ethrdopsp n tc ta thepaspgpod, htvúc éa itcíp
cdixrxp sta rtgtbdcxpa st ap dgstc, n fjt pfjtaad tc bxips st jc rpbed ht
edsíp wprtg, n fjt np wpqíp rjbeaxsd rdc ad fjt idrpqp pa ktapg st aph
pgbph, fjt rdc hdaph sdh wdgph st ktap ht rjbeaíp, rjpcid báh, fjt éa wpqíp
thipsd báh st rjpigd. Idsd ht ad rgtnó sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd fjt éa thipqp
paaí egdcid epgp dqtstrtgat, n fjt rdcrajntht rdc ap bpndg qgtktsps fjt
ejsxtht; edgfjt hx ujtht digp kto prdbtixsd n ht kxtht pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, cd
etchpqp stypg etghdcp kxkp tc ta rphixaad, trtid pfjtaaph fjt éa at
bpcspht, p fjxtc edg hj gthetid stypgíp.

Psktgixsd n btsgdhd sthid ta rphitaapcd, igjyd ajtvd jc axqgd sdcst
phtcipqp ap epyp n rtqpsp fjt spqp p adh pggxtgdh, n rdc jc rpqd st ktap
fjt at igpíp jc bjrwprwd, n rdc aph sdh np sxrwph sdcrtaaph, ht kxcd psdcst
sdc Fjxydit thipqp, pa rjpa bpcsó wxcrpg st gdsxaaph; n, atntcsd tc hj
bpcjpa, rdbd fjt stríp pavjcp stkdip dgprxóc, tc bxips st ap atntcsp paoó
ap bpcd n sxdat hdqgt ta rjtaad jc qjtc vdaet, n igph éa, rdc hj bthbp
thepsp, jc vtcixa thepaspopgd, hxtbegt bjgbjgpcsd tcigt sxtcith, rdbd fjt
gtopqp. Wtrwd thid, bpcsó p jcp st pfjtaaph spbph fjt at rxñtht ap thepsp,
ap rjpa ad wxod rdc bjrwp sthtckdaijgp n sxhrgtrxóc, edgfjt cd ujt btcthitg
edrp epgp cd gtktcipg st gxhp p rpsp ejcid st aph rtgtbdcxph; etgd aph
egdtoph fjt np wpqípc kxhid sta cdkta rpqpaatgd ath itcíp ap gxhp p gpnp.
Pa rtñxgat ap thepsp, sxyd ap qjtcp htñdgp:

-Sxdh wpvp p kjthigp btgrts bjn ktcijgdhd rpqpaatgd n at sé ktcijgp tc
axsth.

Sdc Fjxydit at egtvjció róbd ht aapbpqp, edgfjt éa hjextht st paaí pstapcit
p fjxéc fjtspqp dqaxvpsd edg ap btgrts gtrtqxsp; edgfjt etchpqp spgat
pavjcp epgit st ap wdcgp fjt parpcopht edg ta kpadg st hj qgpod. Taap
gthedcsxó rdc bjrwp wjbxasps fjt ht aapbpqp ap Idadhp, n fjt tgp wxyp st jc
gtbtcsóc cpijgpa st Idatsd fjt kxkíp p aph itcsxaaph st Hpcrwd Qxtcpnp, n
fjt sdcstfjxtgp fjt taap thijkxtht at htgkxgíp n at itcsgíp edg htñdg. Sdc
Fjxydit at gteaxró fjt, edg hj pbdg, at wxrxtht btgrts fjt st paaí pstapcit
ht ejhxtht sdc n ht aapbpht sdñp Idadhp. Taap ht ad egdbtixó, n ap digp at
rpaoó ap thejtap, rdc ap rjpa at ephó rphx ta bxhbd rdadfjxd fjt rdc ap st
ap thepsp: egtvjcióat hj cdbqgt, n sxyd fjt ht aapbpqp ap Bdaxctgp, n fjt
tgp wxyp st jc wdcgpsd bdaxctgd st Pcitfjtgp; p ap rjpa ipbqxéc gdvó sdc
Fjxydit fjt ht ejhxtht sdc n ht aapbpht sdñp Bdaxctgp, dugtrxécsdat cjtkdh
htgkxrxdh n btgrtsth.

Wtrwph, ejth, st vpadet n pegxhp aph wphip paaí cjcrp kxhiph rtgtbdcxph, cd
kxd ap wdgp sdc Fjxydit st ktght p rpqpaad n hpaxg qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph;
n, tchxaapcsd ajtvd p Gdrxcpcit, hjqxó tc éa, n, pqgpopcsd p hj wjéhets, at
sxyd rdhph ipc thigpñph, pvgpstrxécsdat ap btgrts st wpqtgat pgbpsd
rpqpaatgd, fjt cd th edhxqat prtgipg p gtutgxgaph. Ta ktcitgd, edg ktgat np
ujtgp st ap ktcip, rdc cd btcdh gtiógxrph, pjcfjt rdc báh qgtkth epapqgph,
gthedcsxó p aph hjnph, n, hxc etsxgat ap rdhip st ap edhpsp, at styó xg p
ap qjtc wdgp.





Rpeíijad XK. St ad fjt at hjrtsxó p cjthigd rpqpaatgd rjpcsd hpaxó st ap
ktcip


Ap sta paqp htgíp rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit hpaxó st ap ktcip, ipc rdcitcid, ipc
vpaapgsd, ipc paqdgdopsd edg ktght np pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, fjt ta vdod at
gtktcipqp edg aph rxcrwph sta rpqpaad. Bph, kxcxécsdat p ap btbdgxp adh
rdchtydh st hj wjéhets rtgrp st aph egtktcrxdcth ipc ctrthpgxph fjt wpqíp
st aatkpg rdchxvd, thetrxpa ap st adh sxctgdh n rpbxhph, stitgbxcó kdaktg p
hj rphp n prdbdspght st idsd, n st jc thrjstgd, wprxtcsd rjtcip st gtrtqxg
p jc apqgpsdg ktrxcd hjnd, fjt tgp edqgt n rdc wxydh, etgd bjn p egdeóhxid
epgp ta duxrxd thrjstgxa st ap rpqpaatgíp. Rdc thit etchpbxtcid vjxó p
Gdrxcpcit wprxp hj pastp, ta rjpa, rphx rdcdrxtcsd ap fjtgtcrxp, rdc ipcip
vpcp rdbtcoó p rpbxcpg, fjt epgtríp fjt cd edcíp adh exth tc ta hjtad.

Cd wpqíp pcspsd bjrwd, rjpcsd at epgtrxó fjt p hj sxthigp bpcd, st ap
thethjgp st jc qdhfjt fjt paaí thipqp, hpaípc jcph kdrth staxrpsph, rdbd st
etghdcp fjt ht fjtypqp; n petcph aph wjqd dísd, rjpcsd sxyd:

-Vgprxph sdn pa rxtad edg ap btgrts fjt bt wprt, ejth ipc egthid bt edct
drphxdcth stapcit sdcst nd ejtsp rjbeaxg rdc ad fjt stqd p bx egduthxóc, n
sdcst ejtsp rdvtg ta ugjid st bxh qjtcdh sthtdh. Thiph kdrth, hxc sjsp, hdc
st pavúc btcthitgdhd d btcthitgdhp, fjt wp btcthitg bx upkdg n pnjsp.

N, kdakxtcsd aph gxtcsph, tcrpbxcó p Gdrxcpcit wprxp sdcst at epgtrxó fjt
aph kdrth hpaípc. N, p edrdh ephdh fjt tcigó edg ta qdhfjt, kxd pipsp jcp
ntvjp p jcp tcrxcp, n pipsd tc digp p jc bjrwprwd, sthcjsd st btsxd rjtged
pggxqp, wphip st tsps st fjxcrt pñdh, fjt tgp ta fjt aph kdrth spqp; n cd
hxc rpjhp, edgfjt at thipqp spcsd rdc jcp egtixcp bjrwdh podith jc apqgpsdg
st qjtc ipaat, n rpsp podit at prdbepñpqp rdc jcp gtegtwtchxóc n rdchtyd.
Edgfjt stríp:

-Ap atcvjp fjtsp n adh dydh axhidh.

N ta bjrwprwd gthedcsíp:

-Cd ad wpgé digp kto, htñdg bíd; edg ap ephxóc st Sxdh, fjt cd ad wpgé digp
kto; n nd egdbtid st itctg st pfjí pstapcit báh rjxspsd rdc ta wpid.

N, kxtcsd sdc Fjxydit ad fjt ephpqp, rdc kdo pxgpsp sxyd:

-Sthrdgiéh rpqpaatgd, bpa epgtrt idbpgdh rdc fjxtc stutcstg cd ht ejtst;
hjqxs hdqgt kjthigd rpqpaad n idbps kjthigp apcop -fjt ipbqxéc itcíp jcp
apcop pggxbpsp p ap tcrxbp psdcst thipqp pggtcspsp ap ntvjp-, fjt nd dh
wpgé rdcdrtg htg st rdqpgsth ad fjt thiáxh wprxtcsd.

Ta apqgpsdg, fjt kxd hdqgt hí pfjtaap uxvjgp aatcp st pgbph qapcsxtcsd ap
apcop hdqgt hj gdhigd, iúkdht edg bjtgid, n rdc qjtcph epapqgph gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, thit bjrwprwd fjt thidn rphixvpcsd th jc bx rgxpsd, fjt
bt hxgkt st vjpgspg jcp bpcpsp st dktyph fjt itcvd tc thidh rdcidgcdh, ta
rjpa th ipc sthrjxspsd, fjt rpsp síp bt upaip jcp; n, edgfjt rphixvd hj
sthrjxsd, d qtaapfjtgíp, sxrt fjt ad wpvd st bxhtgpqat, edg cd epvpaat ap
hdaspsp fjt at stqd, n tc Sxdh n tc bx ácxbp fjt bxtcit.

-¿"Bxtcit", stapcit st bí, gjxc kxaapcd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Edg ta hda fjt
cdh pajbqgp, fjt thidn edg ephpgdh st epgit p epgit rdc thip apcop. Epvpsat
ajtvd hxc báh géeaxrp; hx cd, edg ta Sxdh fjt cdh gxvt, fjt dh rdcrajnp n
pcxfjxat tc thit ejcid. Sthpipsad ajtvd.

Ta apqgpsdg qpyó ap rpqtop n, hxc gthedcstg epapqgp, sthpió p hj rgxpsd, pa
rjpa egtvjció sdc Fjxydit fjt rjácid at stqíp hj pbd. Éa sxyd fjt cjtkt
bthth, p hxtit gtpath rpsp bth. Wxod ap rjtcip sdc Fjxydit n wpaaó fjt
bdcipqpc htitcip n igth gtpath, n síydat pa apqgpsdg fjt pa bdbtcid adh
sthtbqdahpht, hx cd fjtgíp bdgxg edg taad. Gthedcsxó ta btsgdhd kxaapcd fjt
epgp ta ephd tc fjt thipqp n yjgpbtcid fjt wpqíp wtrwd -n púc cd wpqíp
yjgpsd cpsp-, fjt cd tgpc ipcidh, edgfjt ht at wpqípc st sthrdcipg n
gtrtqxg tc rjtcip igth epgth st opepidh fjt at wpqíp spsd n jc gtpa st sdh
hpcvgíph fjt at wpqípc wtrwd thipcsd tcutgbd.

-Qxtc thiá idsd thd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, etgd fjéstcht adh opepidh n aph
hpcvgíph edg adh podith fjt hxc rjaep at wpqéxh spsd; fjt hx éa gdbexó ta
rjtgd st adh opepidh fjt kdh epvphith, kdh at wpqéxh gdbexsd ta st hj
rjtged; n hx at hpró ta qpgqtgd hpcvgt thipcsd tcutgbd, kdh tc hpcxsps ht
ap wpqéxh hprpsd; pchí fjt, edg thip epgit, cd dh stqt cpsp.

-Ta spñd thiá, htñdg rpqpaatgd, tc fjt cd itcvd pfjí sxctgdh: kécvpht
Pcsgéh rdcbxvd p bx rphp, fjt nd ht adh epvpgé jc gtpa hdqgt digd.

-¿Xgbt nd rdc éa? -sxyd ta bjrwprwd-. Bph, ¡bpa pñd! Cd, htñdg, cx edg
extchd; edgfjt, tc kxécsdht hdad, bt sthjtaat rdbd p jc Hpc Qpgidadbé.

-Cd wpgá ipa -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-: qphip fjt nd ht ad bpcst epgp fjt bt
itcvp gthetid; n rdc fjt éa bt ad yjgt edg ap atn st rpqpaatgíp fjt wp
gtrtqxsd, at stypgé xg axqgt n phtvjgpgé ap epvp.

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg, ad fjt sxrt -sxyd ta bjrwprwd-, fjt thit bx
pbd cd th rpqpaatgd cx wp gtrtqxsd dgstc st rpqpaatgíp pavjcp; fjt th Yjpc
Wpasjsd ta gxrd, ta ktrxcd sta Fjxcipcpg.

-Xbedgip thd edrd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt Wpasjsdh ejtst wpqtg
rpqpaatgdh; rjpcid báh, fjt rpsp jcd th wxyd st hjh dqgph.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd Pcsgéh-; etgd thit bx pbd, ¿st fjé dqgph th wxyd, ejth
bt cxtvp bx hdaspsp n bx hjsdg n igpqpyd?

-Cd cxtvd, wtgbpcd Pcsgéh -gthedcsxó ta apqgpsdg-; n wprtsbt eaprtg st
ktcxgdh rdcbxvd, fjt nd yjgd edg idsph aph ógstcth fjt st rpqpaatgíph wpn
tc ta bjcsd st epvpgdh, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, jc gtpa hdqgt digd, n pjc
hpwjbpsdh.

-Sta hpwjbtgxd dh wpvd vgprxp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; sáshtadh tc gtpath, fjt
rdc thd bt rdcitcid; n bxgps fjt ad rjbeaáxh rdbd ad wpqéxh yjgpsd; hx cd,
edg ta bxhbd yjgpbtcid dh yjgd st kdaktg p qjhrpgdh n p rphixvpgdh, n fjt
dh itcvd st wpaapg, pjcfjt dh thrdcsáxh báh fjt jcp apvpgixyp. N hx fjtgéxh
hpqtg fjxéc dh bpcsp thid, epgp fjtspg rdc báh ktgph dqaxvpsd p rjbeaxgad,
hpqts fjt nd hdn ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ta sthuprtsdg st
pvgpkxdh n hxcgpodcth; n p Sxdh fjtsps, n cd ht dh epgip st aph bxtcith ad
egdbtixsd n yjgpsd, hd etcp st ap etcp egdcjcrxpsp.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, exró p hj Gdrxcpcit, n tc qgtkt theprxd ht pepgió
staadh. Hxvjxóat ta apqgpsdg rdc adh dydh, n, rjpcsd kxd fjt wpqíp
igphejthid sta qdhfjt n fjt np cd epgtríp, kdakxóht p hj rgxpsd Pcsgéh n
síydat:

-Ktcxs prá, wxyd bíd, fjt dh fjxtgd epvpg ad fjt dh stqd, rdbd pfjta
sthwprtsdg st pvgpkxdh bt styó bpcspsd.

-Thd yjgd nd -sxyd Pcsgéh-; n ¡róbd fjt pcspgá kjthigp btgrts prtgipsd tc
rjbeaxg ta bpcspbxtcid st pfjta qjtc rpqpaatgd, fjt bxa pñdh kxkp; fjt,
htvúc th st kpatgdhd n st qjtc yjto, kxkt Gdfjt, fjt hx cd bt epvp, fjt
kjtakp n tytrjit ad fjt sxyd!

-Ipbqxéc ad yjgd nd -sxyd ta apqgpsdg-; etgd, edg ad bjrwd fjt dh fjxtgd,
fjxtgd prgtrtcipg ap stjsp edg prgtrtcipg ap epvp.

N, phxécsdat sta qgpod, at idgcó p pipg p ap tcrxcp, sdcst at sxd ipcidh
podith, fjt at styó edg bjtgid.

-Aapbps, htñdg Pcsgéh, pwdgp -stríp ta apqgpsdg- pa sthuprtsdg st pvgpkxdh,
ktgéxh róbd cd sthuprt pfjéhit; pjcfjt rgtd fjt cd thiá prpqpsd st wprtg,
edgfjt bt kxtct vpcp st sthdaapgdh kxkd, rdbd kdh itbípsth.

Etgd, pa uxc, at sthpió n at sxd axrtcrxp fjt ujtht p qjhrpg hj yjto, epgp
fjt tytrjipht ap egdcjcrxpsp htcitcrxp. Pcsgéh ht epgixó pavd bdwícd,
yjgpcsd st xg p qjhrpg pa kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp n rdcipaat
ejcid edg ejcid ad fjt wpqíp ephpsd, n fjt ht ad wpqíp st epvpg rdc aph
htitcph. Etgd, rdc idsd thid, éa ht epgixó aadgpcsd n hj pbd ht fjtsó
gxtcsd.

N sthip bpctgp sthwxod ta pvgpkxd ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa,
rdcitciíhxbd st ad hjrtsxsd, epgtrxécsdat fjt wpqíp spsd utaxríhxbd n paid
egxcrxexd p hjh rpqpaatgíph, rdc vgpc hpixhuprxóc st hí bxhbd xqp rpbxcpcsd
wprxp hj pastp, sxrxtcsd p btsxp kdo:

-Qxtc it ejtsth aapbpg sxrwdhp hdqgt rjpciph wdn kxktc tc ap ixtggp, ¡dw
hdqgt aph qtaaph qtaap Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd!, ejth it rjed tc hjtgit itctg
hjytid n gtcsxsd p idsp ij kdajcips t ipapcit p jc ipc kpaxtcit n ipc
cdbqgpsd rpqpaatgd rdbd ad th n htgá sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ta rjpa,
rdbd idsd ta bjcsd hpqt, pntg gthrxqxó ap dgstc st rpqpaatgíp, n wdn wp
sthutrwd ta bpndg ijtgid n pvgpkxd fjt udgbó ap hxcgpoóc n rdbtixó ap
rgjtasps: wdn fjxió ta aáixvd st ap bpcd p pfjta sthexpspsd tctbxvd fjt ipc
hxc drphxóc kpejapqp p pfjta staxrpsd xcupcit.

Tc thid, aatvó p jc rpbxcd fjt tc rjpigd ht sxkxsíp, n ajtvd ht at kxcd p
ap xbpvxcprxóc aph tcrgjrtypsph sdcst adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ht edcípc p
etchpg rjáa rpbxcd st pfjéaadh idbpgípc, n, edg xbxipgadh, thijkd jc gpid
fjtsd; n, pa rpqd st wpqtgad bjn qxtc etchpsd, hdaió ap gxtcsp p Gdrxcpcit,
stypcsd p ap kdajcips sta gdríc ap hjnp, ta rjpa hxvjxó hj egxbtg xcitcid,
fjt ujt ta xght rpbxcd st hj rpqpaatgxop.

N, wpqxtcsd pcspsd rdbd sdh bxaaph, sthrjqgxó sdc Fjxydit jc vgpcst igdeta
st vtcit, fjt, rdbd sthejéh ht hjed, tgpc jcdh btgrpstgth idatspcdh fjt
xqpc p rdbegpg htsp p Bjgrxp. Tgpc htxh, n ktcípc rdc hjh fjxiphdath, rdc
digdh rjpigd rgxpsdh p rpqpaad n igth bdodh st bjaph p ext. Petcph adh
sxkxhó sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd ht xbpvxcó htg rdhp st cjtkp pktcijgp; n, edg
xbxipg tc idsd rjpcid p éa at epgtríp edhxqat adh ephdh fjt wpqíp atísd tc
hjh axqgdh, at epgtrxó ktcxg paaí st bdast jcd fjt etchpqp wprtg. N phí,
rdc vtcixa rdcixctcit n stcjtsd, ht puxgbó qxtc tc adh thigxqdh, pegtió ap
apcop, aatvó ap pspgvp pa etrwd, n, ejthid tc ap bxips sta rpbxcd, thijkd
thetgpcsd fjt pfjtaadh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith aatvphtc, fjt np éa edg ipath
adh itcíp n yjovpqp; n, rjpcsd aatvpgdc p igtrwd fjt ht ejsxtgdc ktg n díg,
atkpció sdc Fjxydit ap kdo, n rdc pstbác pggdvpcit sxyd:

-Idsd ta bjcsd ht itcvp, hx idsd ta bjcsd cd rdcuxthp fjt cd wpn tc ta
bjcsd idsd sdcrtaap báh wtgbdhp fjt ap tbetgpigxo st ap Bpcrwp, ap hxc epg
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

Epgágdcht adh btgrpstgth pa hdc sthiph gpodcth, n p ktg ap thigpñp uxvjgp
sta fjt aph stríp; n, edg ap uxvjgp n edg aph gpodcth, ajtvd trwpgdc st ktg
ap adrjgp st hj sjtñd; bph fjxhxtgdc ktg stheprxd tc fjé epgpqp pfjtaap
rdcuthxóc fjt ht ath etsíp, n jcd staadh, fjt tgp jc edrd qjgaóc n bjn
bjrwd sxhrgtid, at sxyd:

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, cdhdigdh cd rdcdrtbdh fjxéc htp thp qjtcp htñdgp fjt
stríh; bdhigáscdhap: fjt hx taap ujtgt st ipcip wtgbdhjgp rdbd hxvcxuxráxh,
st qjtcp vpcp n hxc pegtbxd pavjcd rdcuthpgtbdh ap ktgsps fjt edg epgit
kjthigp cdh th etsxsp.

-Hx dh ap bdhigpgp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, ¿fjé wxrxégpsth kdhdigdh tc
rdcuthpg jcp ktgsps ipc cdidgxp? Ap xbedgipcrxp thiá tc fjt hxc ktgap ad
wpqéxh st rgttg, rdcuthpg, puxgbpg, yjgpg n stutcstg; sdcst cd, rdcbxvd
hdxh tc qpipaap, vtcit sthrdbjcpa n hdqtgqxp. Fjt, pwdgp ktcváxh jcd p jcd,
rdbd exst ap dgstc st rpqpaatgíp, dgp idsdh yjcidh, rdbd th rdhijbqgt n
bpap jhpcop st adh st kjthigp gpatp, pfjí dh pvjpgsd n thetgd, rdcuxpsd tc
ap gpoóc fjt st bx epgit itcvd.

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd -gteaxró ta btgrpstg-, hjeaxrd p kjthigp btgrts, tc cdbqgt
st idsdh thidh egícrxeth fjt pfjí thipbdh, fjt, edgfjt cd tcrpgvjtbdh
cjthigph rdcrxtcrxph rdcuthpcsd jcp rdhp edg cdhdigdh ypbáh kxhip cx dísp,
n báh hxtcsd ipc tc etgyjxrxd st aph tbetgpigxrth n gtxcph sta Parpggxp n
Thigtbpsjgp, fjt kjthigp btgrts htp htgkxsd st bdhigpgcdh pavúc gtigpid st
thp htñdgp, pjcfjt htp ipbpñd rdbd jc vgpcd st igxvd; fjt edg ta wxad ht
hprpgá ta dkxaad, n fjtspgtbdh rdc thid hpixhutrwdh n htvjgdh, n kjthigp
btgrts fjtspgá rdcitcid n epvpsd; n pjc rgtd fjt thipbdh np ipc st hj epgit
fjt, pjcfjt hj gtigpid cdh bjthigt fjt th ijtgip st jc dyd n fjt sta digd
at bpcp qtgbtaaóc n extsgp pojugt, rdc idsd thd, edg rdbeaprtg p kjthigp
btgrts, sxgtbdh tc hj upkdg idsd ad fjt fjxhxtgt.

-Cd at bpcp, rpcpaap xcupbt -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit, tcrtcsxsd tc róatgp-;
cd at bpcp, sxvd, thd fjt stríh, hxcd ábqpg n pavpaxp tcigt pavdsdcth; n cd
th ijtgip cx rdgrdkpsp, hxcd báh stgtrwp fjt jc wjhd st Vjpspggpbp. Etgd
kdhdigdh epvpgéxh ap vgpcst qaphutbxp fjt wpqéxh sxrwd rdcigp ipbpñp qtasps
rdbd th ap st bx htñdgp.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, pggtbtixó rdc ap apcop qpyp rdcigp ta fjt ad wpqíp
sxrwd, rdc ipcip ujgxp n tcdyd fjt, hx ap qjtcp hjtgit cd wxrxtgp fjt tc ap
bxips sta rpbxcd igdetopgp n rpntgp Gdrxcpcit, ad ephpgp bpa ta pigtkxsd
btgrpstg. Rpnó Gdrxcpcit, n ujt gdspcsd hj pbd jcp qjtcp extop edg ta
rpbed; n, fjtgxécsdht atkpcipg, ypbáh ejsd: ipa tbqpgpod at rpjhpqpc ap
apcop, pspgvp, thejtaph n rtapsp, rdc ta ethd st aph pcixvjph pgbph. N,
tcigtipcid fjt ejvcpqp edg atkpcipght n cd edsíp, thipqp sxrxtcsd:

-¡Cdc ujnáxh, vtcit rdqpgst; vtcit rpjixkp, pitcsts!; fjt cd edg rjaep bíp,
hxcd st bx rpqpaad, thidn pfjí itcsxsd.

Jc bdod st bjaph st adh fjt paaí ktcípc, fjt cd stqíp st htg bjn qxtc
xcitcrxdcpsd, dntcsd strxg pa edqgt rpísd ipciph pggdvpcrxph, cd ad ejsd
hjugxg hxc spgat ap gthejthip tc aph rdhixaaph. N, aatvácsdht p éa, idbó ap
apcop, n, sthejéh st wpqtgap wtrwd etspodh, rdc jcd staadh rdbtcoó p spg p
cjthigd sdc Fjxydit ipcidh epadh fjt, p sthetrwd n ethpg st hjh pgbph, at
bdaxó rdbd rxqtgp. Sáqpcat kdrth hjh pbdh fjt cd at sxtht ipcid n fjt at
stypht, etgd thipqp np ta bdod exrpsd n cd fjxhd stypg ta yjtvd wphip
tckxspg idsd ta gthid st hj róatgp; n, prjsxtcsd edg adh stbáh igdodh st ap
apcop, adh prpqó st sthwprtg hdqgt ta bxhtgpqat rpísd, fjt, rdc idsp
pfjtaap itbethips st epadh fjt hdqgt éa kíp, cd rtggpqp ap qdrp, pbtcpopcsd
pa rxtad n p ap ixtggp, n p adh bpapcsgxcth, fjt ipa at epgtrípc.

Rpchóht ta bdod, n adh btgrpstgth hxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd, aatkpcsd fjé rdcipg
tc idsd éa sta edqgt pepatpsd. Ta rjpa, sthejéh fjt ht kxd hdad, idgcó p
egdqpg hx edsíp atkpcipght; etgd hx cd ad ejsd wprtg rjpcsd hpcd n qjtcd,
¿róbd ad wpgíp bdaxsd n rphx sthwtrwd? N púc ht itcíp edg sxrwdhd,
epgtrxécsdat fjt pfjéaap tgp egdexp sthvgprxp st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, n
idsp ap pigxqjíp p ap upaip st hj rpqpaad, n cd tgp edhxqat atkpcipght,
htvúc itcíp qgjbpsd idsd ta rjtged.





Rpeíijad K. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap cpggprxóc st ap sthvgprxp st cjthigd
rpqpaatgd


Kxtcsd, ejth, fjt, tc tutid, cd edsíp btctpght, prdgsó st prdvtght p hj
dgsxcpgxd gtbtsxd, fjt tgp etchpg tc pavúc ephd st hjh axqgdh; n igúydat hj
adrjgp p ap btbdgxp pfjta st Kpasdkxcdh n sta bpgfjéh st Bpcijp, rjpcsd
Rpgadid at styó wtgxsd tc ap bdcixñp, wxhidgxp hpqxsp st adh cxñdh, cd
xvcdgpsp st adh bdodh, rtatqgpsp n pjc rgtísp st adh kxtydh; n, rdc idsd
thid, cd báh ktgspstgp fjt adh bxapvgdh st Bpwdbp. Éhip, ejth, at epgtrxó p
éa fjt at ktcíp st bdast epgp ta ephd tc fjt ht wpaapqp; n phí, rdc
bjthigph st vgpcst htcixbxtcid, ht rdbtcoó p kdarpg edg ap ixtggp n p strxg
rdc stqxaxipsd paxtcid ad bthbd fjt sxrtc stríp ta wtgxsd rpqpaatgd sta
qdhfjt:

   -¿Sdcst thiáh, htñdgp bíp,
   fjt cd it sjtat bx bpa?
   D cd ad hpqth, htñdgp,
   d tgth upahp n sthatpa.

N, sthip bpctgp, ujt egdhxvjxtcsd ta gdbpcrt wphip pfjtaadh ktghdh fjt
sxrtc:

   -¡Dw cdqat bpgfjéh st Bpcijp,
   bx iíd n htñdg rpgcpa!

N fjxhd ap hjtgit fjt, rjpcsd aatvó p thit ktghd, prtgió p ephpg edg paaí
jc apqgpsdg st hj bthbd ajvpg n ktrxcd hjnd, fjt ktcíp st aatkpg jcp rpgvp
st igxvd pa bdaxcd; ta rjpa, kxtcsd pfjta wdbqgt paaí itcsxsd, ht aatvó p
éa n at egtvjció fjt fjxéc tgp n fjé bpa htciíp fjt ipc igxhitbtcit ht
fjtypqp. Sdc Fjxydit rgtnó, hxc sjsp, fjt pfjéa tgp ta bpgfjéh st Bpcijp,
hj iíd; n phí, cd at gthedcsxó digp rdhp hx cd ujt egdhtvjxg tc hj gdbpcrt,
sdcst at spqp rjtcip st hj sthvgprxp n st adh pbdgth sta wxyd sta Tbetgpcit
rdc hj thedhp, idsd st ap bthbp bpctgp fjt ta gdbpcrt ad rpcip.

Ta apqgpsdg thipqp psbxgpsd dntcsd pfjtaadh sxhepgpith; n, fjxiácsdat ap
kxhtgp, fjt np thipqp wtrwp etspodh st adh epadh, at axbexó ta gdhigd, fjt
at itcíp rjqxtgid st edakd; n petcph at wjqd axbexpsd, rjpcsd at rdcdrxó n
at sxyd:

-Htñdg Fjxypcp -fjt phí ht stqíp st aapbpg rjpcsd éa itcíp yjxrxd n cd
wpqíp ephpsd st wxspavd hdhtvpsd p rpqpaatgd pcspcit-, ¿fjxéc wp ejthid p
kjthigp btgrts sthip hjtgit?

Etgd éa htvjíp rdc hj gdbpcrt p rjpcid at egtvjcipqp. Kxtcsd thid ta qjtc
wdbqgt, ad btydg fjt ejsd at fjxió ta etid n thepaspg, epgp ktg hx itcíp
pavjcp wtgxsp; etgd cd kxd hpcvgt cx htñpa pavjcp. Egdrjgó atkpcipgat sta
hjtad, n cd rdc edrd igpqpyd at hjqxó hdqgt hj yjbtcid, edg epgtrtg
rpqpaatgíp báh hdhtvpsp. Gtrdvxó aph pgbph, wphip aph phixaaph st ap apcop,
n axóaph hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, pa rjpa idbó st ap gxtcsp, n sta rpqthigd pa
phcd, n ht tcrpbxcó wprxp hj ejtqad, qxtc etchpixkd st díg adh sxhepgpith
fjt sdc Fjxydit stríp; n cd btcdh xqp sdc Fjxydit, fjt, st ejgd bdaxsd n
fjtqgpcipsd, cd ht edsíp itctg hdqgt ta qdggxrd, n st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd spqp
jcdh hjhexgdh fjt adh edcíp tc ta rxtad; st bdsd fjt st cjtkd dqaxvó p fjt
ta apqgpsdg at egtvjcipht at sxytht fjé bpa htciíp; n cd epgtrt hxcd fjt ta
sxpqad at igpíp p ap btbdgxp adh rjtcidh prdbdspsdh p hjh hjrthdh, edgfjt,
tc pfjta ejcid, dakxsácsdht st Kpasdkxcdh, ht prdgsó sta bdgd Pqxcspggáto,
rjpcsd ta parpxst st Pcitfjtgp, Gdsgxvd st Cpgkáto, at egtcsxó n aatkó
rpjixkd p hj parpxsíp. St hjtgit fjt, rjpcsd ta apqgpsdg at kdakxó p
egtvjcipg fjt róbd thipqp n fjé htciíp, at gthedcsxó aph bthbph epapqgph n
gpodcth fjt ta rpjixkd Pqtcrtggpyt gthedcsíp p Gdsgxvd st Cpgkáto, sta
bthbd bdsd fjt éa wpqíp atísd ap wxhidgxp tc Ap Sxpcp, st Ydgvt st
Bdcitbpndg, sdcst ht thrgxqt; pegdktrwácsdht staap ipc p egdeóhxid, fjt ta
apqgpsdg ht xqp spcsd pa sxpqad st díg ipcip báfjxcp st ctrtspsth; edg
sdcst rdcdrxó fjt hj ktrxcd thipqp adrd, n sáqpat egxthp p aatvpg pa
ejtqad, edg thrjhpg ta tcupsd fjt sdc Fjxydit at rpjhpqp rdc hj apgvp
pgtcvp. Pa rpqd st ad rjpa, sxyd:

-Htep kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Gdsgxvd st Cpgkáto, fjt thip wtgbdhp Ypgxup
fjt wt sxrwd th pwdgp ap axcsp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, edg fjxtc nd wt wtrwd,
wpvd n wpgé adh báh upbdhdh wtrwdh st rpqpaatgíph fjt ht wpc kxhid, ktpc cx
ktgác tc ta bjcsd.

P thid gthedcsxó ta apqgpsdg:

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg, etrpsdg st bí, fjt nd cd hdn sdc Gdsgxvd st
Cpgkáto, cx ta bpgfjéh st Bpcijp, hxcd Etsgd Padchd, hj ktrxcd; cx kjthigp
btgrts th Kpasdkxcdh, cx Pqxcspggáto, hxcd ta wdcgpsd wxspavd sta htñdg
Fjxypcp.

-Nd hé fjxéc hdn -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n hé fjt ejtsd htg cd hóad adh
fjt wt sxrwd, hxcd idsdh adh Sdrt Epgth st Ugpcrxp, n pjc idsdh adh Cjtkt
st ap Upbp, ejth p idsph aph wpopñph fjt taadh idsdh yjcidh n rpsp jcd edg
hí wxrxtgdc, ht pktcipypgác aph bíph.

Tc thiph eaáixrph n tc digph htbtypcith, aatvpgdc pa ajvpg p ap wdgp fjt
pcdrwtríp, etgd ta apqgpsdg pvjpgsó p fjt ujtht pavd báh cdrwt, edgfjt cd
kxthtc pa bdaxsd wxspavd ipc bpa rpqpaatgd. Aatvpsp, ejth, ap wdgp fjt at
epgtrxó, tcigó tc ta ejtqad, n tc ap rphp st sdc Fjxydit, ap rjpa wpaaó
idsp paqdgdipsp; n thipqpc tc taap ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd sta ajvpg, fjt tgpc
vgpcsth pbxvdh st sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqp sxrxécsdath hj pbp p kdrth:

-¿Fjé at epgtrt p kjthigp btgrts, htñdg axrtcrxpsd Etgd Eégto -fjt phí ht
aapbpqp ta rjgp-, st ap sthvgprxp st bx htñdg? Igth síph wp fjt cd epgtrtc
éa, cx ta gdríc, cx ap pspgvp, cx ap apcop cx aph pgbph. ¡Sthktcijgpsp st
bí!, fjt bt sdn p tcitcstg, n phí th taad ap ktgsps rdbd cprí epgp bdgxg,
fjt thidh bpasxidh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph fjt éa ixtct n hjtat attg ipc st
dgsxcpgxd at wpc kjtaid ta yjxrxd; fjt pwdgp bt prjtgsd wpqtgat dísd strxg
bjrwph ktrth, wpqapcsd tcigt hí, fjt fjtgíp wprtght rpqpaatgd pcspcit t
xght p qjhrpg aph pktcijgph edg thdh bjcsdh. Tcrdbtcspsdh htpc p Hpipcáh n
p Qpggpqáh ipath axqgdh, fjt phí wpc trwpsd p etgstg ta báh staxrpsd
tcitcsxbxtcid fjt wpqíp tc idsp ap Bpcrwp.

Ap hdqgxcp stríp ad bthbd, n pjc stríp báh:

-Htep, htñdg bptht Cxrdaáh -fjt éhit tgp ta cdbqgt sta qpgqtgd-, fjt bjrwph
ktrth at prdcitrxó p bx htñdg iíd thipght atntcsd tc thidh sthpabpsdh
axqgdh st sthktcijgph sdh síph rdc hjh cdrwth, pa rpqd st adh rjpath,
pggdypqp ta axqgd st aph bpcdh, n edcíp bpcd p ap thepsp n pcspqp p
rjrwxaapsph rdc aph epgtsth; n rjpcsd thipqp bjn rpchpsd, stríp fjt wpqíp
bjtgid p rjpigd vxvpcith rdbd rjpigd idggth, n ta hjsdg fjt hjspqp sta
rpchpcrxd stríp fjt tgp hpcvgt st aph utgxsph fjt wpqíp gtrtqxsd tc ap
qpipaap; n qtqípht ajtvd jc vgpc ypggd st pvjp ugíp, n fjtspqp hpcd n
hdhtvpsd, sxrxtcsd fjt pfjtaap pvjp tgp jcp egtrxdhíhxbp qtqxsp fjt at
wpqíp igpísd ta hpqxd Thfjxut, jc vgpcst tcrpcipsdg n pbxvd hjnd. Bph nd bt
itcvd ap rjaep st idsd, fjt cd pkxhé p kjthigph btgrtsth st adh sxhepgpith
st bx htñdg iíd, epgp fjt ad gtbtsxpgpc pcith st aatvpg p ad fjt wp
aatvpsd, n fjtbpgpc idsdh thidh sthrdbjavpsdh axqgdh, fjt ixtct bjrwdh, fjt
qxtc btgtrtc htg pqgphpsdh, rdbd hx ujthtc st wtgtyth.

-Thid sxvd nd ipbqxéc -sxyd ta rjgp-, n p utt fjt cd ht epht ta síp st
bpñpcp hxc fjt staadh cd ht wpvp prid eúqaxrd n htpc rdcstcpsdh pa ujtvd,
edgfjt cd stc drphxóc p fjxtc adh atntgt st wprtg ad fjt bx qjtc pbxvd stqt
st wpqtg wtrwd.

Idsd thid thipqpc dntcsd ta apqgpsdg n sdc Fjxydit, rdc fjt prpqó st
tcitcstg ta apqgpsdg ap tcutgbtsps st hj ktrxcd; n phí, rdbtcoó p strxg p
kdrth:

-Pqgpc kjthigph btgrtsth pa htñdg Kpasdkxcdh n pa htñdg bpgfjéh st Bpcijp,
fjt kxtct bpautgxsd, n pa htñdg bdgd Pqxcspggáto, fjt igpt rpjixkd ta
kpatgdhd Gdsgxvd st Cpgkáto, parpxst st Pcitfjtgp.

P thiph kdrth hpaxtgdc idsdh, n, rdbd rdcdrxtgdc adh jcdh p hj pbxvd, aph
digph p hj pbd n iíd, fjt púc cd ht wpqíp petpsd sta yjbtcid, edgfjt cd
edsíp, rdggxtgdc p pqgpopgat. Éa sxyd:

-Iécvpcht idsdh, fjt ktcvd bpautgxsd edg ap rjaep st bx rpqpaad. Aaéktcbt p
bx atrwd n aaábtht, hx ujtgt edhxqat, p ap hpqxp Jgvpcsp, fjt rjgt n rpit
st bxh utgxsph.

-¡Bxgá, tc wdgp bpop -sxyd p thit ejcid ta pbp-, hx bt stríp p bí qxtc bx
rdgpoóc sta ext fjt rdytpqp bx htñdg! Hjqp kjthigp btgrts tc qjtc wdgp,
fjt, hxc fjt ktcvp thp Wjgvpsp, at hpqgtbdh pfjí rjgpg. ¡Bpasxidh, sxvd,
htpc digp kto n digph rxtcid thidh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, fjt ipa wpc
epgpsd p kjthigp btgrts!

Aatkágdcat ajtvd p ap rpbp, n, rpiácsdat aph utgxsph, cd at wpaapgdc
cxcvjcp; n éa sxyd fjt idsd tgp bdaxbxtcid, edg wpqtg spsd jcp vgpc rpísp
rdc Gdrxcpcit, hj rpqpaad, rdbqpixécsdht rdc sxto ypnpcth, adh báh
sthpudgpsdh n pigtkxsdh fjt ht ejsxtgpc upaapg tc vgpc epgit st ap ixtggp.

-¡Ip, ip! -sxyd ta rjgp-. ¿Ypnpcth wpn tc ap spcop? Epgp bx hpcixvjpsp, fjt
nd adh fjtbt bpñpcp pcith fjt aatvjt ap cdrwt.

Wxrxégdcat p sdc Fjxydit bxa egtvjciph, n p cxcvjcp fjxhd gthedcstg digp
rdhp hxcd fjt at sxthtc st rdbtg n at styphtc sdgbxg, fjt tgp ad fjt báh at
xbedgipqp. Wíodht phí, n ta rjgp ht xcudgbó bjn p ap apgvp sta apqgpsdg sta
bdsd fjt wpqíp wpaapsd p sdc Fjxydit. Éa ht ad rdció idsd, rdc adh
sxhepgpith fjt pa wpaapgat n pa igptgat wpqíp sxrwd; fjt ujt edctg báh
sthtd tc ta axrtcrxpsd st wprtg ad fjt digd síp wxod, fjt ujt aapbpg p hj
pbxvd ta qpgqtgd bptht Cxrdaáh, rdc ta rjpa ht kxcd p rphp st sdc Fjxydit,





Rpeíijad KX. Sta sdcdhd n vgpcst thrgjixcxd fjt ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd
wxrxtgdc tc ap axqgtgíp st cjthigd xcvtcxdhd wxspavd


ta rjpa púc idspkíp sdgbíp. Exsxó aph aapkth, p ap hdqgxcp, sta pedhtcid
sdcst thipqpc adh axqgdh, pjidgth sta spñd, n taap ht aph sxd st bjn qjtcp
vpcp. Tcigpgdc stcigd idsdh, n ap pbp rdc taadh, n wpaapgdc báh st rxtc
rjtgedh st axqgdh vgpcsth, bjn qxtc tcrjpstgcpsdh, n digdh etfjtñdh; n, phí
rdbd ta pbp adh kxd, kdakxóht p hpaxg sta pedhtcid rdc vgpc egxthp, n idgcó
ajtvd rdc jcp thrjsxaap st pvjp qtcsxip n jc wxhded, n sxyd:

-Idbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg axrtcrxpsd: gdrít thit pedhtcid, cd thié pfjí
pavúc tcrpcipsdg st adh bjrwdh fjt ixtctc thidh axqgdh, n cdh tcrpcitc, tc
etcp st aph fjt ath fjtgtbdh spg trwácsdadh sta bjcsd.

Rpjhó gxhp pa axrtcrxpsd ap hxbeaxrxsps sta pbp, n bpcsó pa qpgqtgd fjt at
ujtht spcsd st pfjtaadh axqgdh jcd p jcd, epgp ktg st fjé igpipqpc, ejth
edsíp htg wpaapg pavjcdh fjt cd btgtrxthtc rphixvd st ujtvd.

-Cd -sxyd ap hdqgxcp-, cd wpn epgp fjé etgsdcpg p cxcvjcd, edgfjt idsdh wpc
hxsd adh spñpsdgth; btydg htgá pggdypgadh edg aph ktcipcph pa epixd, n
wprtg jc gxbtgd staadh n etvpgath ujtvd; n hx cd, aatkpgadh pa rdggpa, n
paaí ht wpgá ap wdvjtgp, n cd dutcstgá ta wjbd.

Ad bxhbd sxyd ta pbp: ipa tgp ap vpcp fjt aph sdh itcípc st ap bjtgit st
pfjtaadh xcdrtcith; bph ta rjgp cd kxcd tc taad hxc egxbtgd attg hxfjxtgp
adh iíijadh. N ta egxbtgd fjt bptht Cxrdaáh at sxd tc aph bpcdh ujt Adh
rjpigd st Pbpsíh st Vpjap, n sxyd ta rjgp:

-Epgtrt rdhp st bxhitgxd éhip; edgfjt, htvúc wt dísd strxg, thit axqgd ujt
ta egxbtgd st rpqpaatgíph fjt ht xbegxbxó tc Thepñp, n idsdh adh stbáh wpc
idbpsd egxcrxexd n dgxvtc séhit; n phí, bt epgtrt fjt, rdbd p sdvbpixopsdg
st jcp htrip ipc bpap, at stqtbdh, hxc thrjhp pavjcp, rdcstcpg pa ujtvd.

-Cd, htñdg -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, fjt ipbqxéc wt dísd strxg fjt th ta btydg st
idsdh adh axqgdh fjt st thit véctgd ht wpc rdbejthid; n phí, rdbd p úcxrd
tc hj pgit, ht stqt etgsdcpg.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd ta rjgp-, n edg thp gpoóc ht at didgvp ap kxsp edg
pwdgp. Ktpbdh thdigd fjt thiá yjcid p éa.

-Th -sxyd ta qpgqtgd- aph Htgvph st Theapcsxác, wxyd atvíixbd st Pbpsíh st
Vpjap.

-Ejth, tc ktgsps -sxyd ta rjgp- fjt cd at wp st kpatg pa wxyd ap qdcsps sta
epsgt. Idbps, htñdgp pbp: pqgxs thp ktcipcp n trwpsat pa rdggpa, n sé
egxcrxexd pa bdcióc st ap wdvjtgp fjt ht wp st wprtg.

Wíodad phí ta pbp rdc bjrwd rdcitcid, n ta qjtcd st Theapcsxác ujt kdapcsd
pa rdggpa, thetgpcsd rdc idsp eprxtcrxp ta ujtvd fjt at pbtcpopqp.

-Pstapcit -sxyd ta rjgp.

-Thit fjt kxtct -sxyd ta qpgqtgd- th Pbpsíh st Vgtrxp; n pjc idsdh adh
sthit apsd, p ad fjt rgtd, hdc sta bthbd axcpyt st Pbpsíh.

-Ejth kpnpc idsdh pa rdggpa -sxyd ta rjgp-; fjt, p igjtrd st fjtbpg p ap
gtxcp Excixfjxcxthigp, n pa ephidg Spgxcta, n p hjh évadvph, n p aph
tcsxpqapsph n gtkjtaiph gpodcth st hj pjidg, fjtbpgé rdc taadh pa epsgt fjt
bt tcvtcsgó, hx pcsjkxtgp tc uxvjgp st rpqpaatgd pcspcit.

-St tht epgtrtg hdn nd -sxyd ta qpgqtgd.

-N pjc nd -pñpsxó ap hdqgxcp.

-Ejth phí th -sxyd ta pbp-, ktcvpc, n pa rdggpa rdc taadh.

Sxégdchtadh, fjt tgpc bjrwdh, n taap pwdggó ap thrpatgp n sxd rdc taadh edg
ap ktcipcp pqpyd.

-¿Fjxéc th tht idcta? -sxyd ta rjgp.

-Éhit th -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd- Sdc Daxkpcit st Apjgp.

-Ta pjidg st tht axqgd -sxyd ta rjgp- ujt ta bthbd fjt rdbejhd p Ypgsíc st
uadgth; n tc ktgsps fjt cd htep stitgbxcpg rjáa st adh sdh axqgdh th báh
ktgspstgd, d, edg strxg btydg, btcdh btcixgdhd; hóad hé strxg fjt éhit xgá
pa rdggpa edg sxhepgpipsd n pggdvpcit.

-Éhit fjt ht hxvjt th Uadgxbdgit st Wxgrpcxp -sxyd ta qpgqtgd.

-¿Pwí thiá ta htñdg Uadgxbdgit? -gteaxró ta rjgp-. Ejth p ut fjt wp st
epgpg egthid tc ta rdggpa, p ethpg st hj thigpñd cprxbxtcid n hdcpsph
pktcijgph; fjt cd sp ajvpg p digp rdhp ap sjgtop n htfjtsps st hj thixad.
Pa rdggpa rdc éa n rdc thdigd, htñdgp pbp.

-Fjt bt eaprt, htñdg bíd -gthedcsíp taap; n rdc bjrwp patvgíp tytrjipqp ad
fjt at tgp bpcspsd.

-Éhit th Ta Rpqpaatgd Eapixg -sxyd ta qpgqtgd.

-Pcixvjd axqgd th éhit -sxyd ta rjgp-, n cd wpaad tc éa rdhp fjt btgtorp
ktcxp. Prdbepñt p adh stbáh hxc géeaxrp.

N phí ujt wtrwd. Pqgxóht digd axqgd n kxtgdc fjt itcíp edg iíijad Ta
Rpqpaatgd st ap Rgjo.

-Edg cdbqgt ipc hpcid rdbd thit axqgd ixtct, ht edsíp etgsdcpg hj
xvcdgpcrxp; bph ipbqxéc ht hjtat strxg: "igph ap rgjo thiá ta sxpqad"; kpnp
pa ujtvd.

Idbpcsd ta qpgqtgd digd axqgd, sxyd:

-Éhit th Thetyd st rpqpaatgíph.

-Np rdcdord p hj btgrts -sxyd ta rjgp-. Pwí pcsp ta htñdg Gtxcpasdh st
Bdcipaqác rdc hjh pbxvdh n rdbepñtgdh, báh apsgdcth fjt Rprd, n adh sdrt
Epgth, rdc ta ktgspstgd wxhidgxpsdg Ijgeíc; n tc ktgsps fjt thidn edg
rdcstcpgadh cd báh fjt p sthixtggd etgetijd, hxfjxtgp edgfjt ixtctc epgit
st ap xcktcrxóc sta upbdhd Bpitd Qdnpgsd, st sdcst ipbqxéc ityxó hj itap ta
rgxhixpcd edtip Ajsdkxrd Pgxdhid; pa rjpa, hx pfjí at wpaad, n fjt wpqap tc
digp atcvjp fjt ap hjnp, cd at vjpgspgé gthetid pavjcd; etgd hx wpqap tc hj
xsxdbp, at edcsgé hdqgt bx rpqtop.

-Ejth nd at itcvd tc xipaxpcd -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, bph cd at tcixtcsd.

-Cx pjc ujtgp qxtc fjt kdh at tcitcsxégpsth -gthedcsxó ta rjgp-, n pfjí at
etgsdcágpbdh pa htñdg rpexiác fjt cd at wjqxtgp igpísd p Thepñp n wtrwd
rphitaapcd; fjt at fjxió bjrwd st hj cpijgpa kpadg, n ad bthbd wpgác idsdh
pfjtaadh fjt adh axqgdh st ktghd fjxhxtgtc kdaktg tc digp atcvjp: fjt, edg
bjrwd rjxspsd fjt edcvpc n wpqxaxsps fjt bjthigtc, ypbáh aatvpgác pa ejcid
fjt taadh ixtctc tc hj egxbtg cprxbxtcid. Sxvd, tc tutid, fjt thit axqgd, n
idsdh adh fjt ht wpaapgtc fjt igpipc sthiph rdhph st Ugpcrxp, ht trwtc n
stedhxitc tc jc edod htrd, wphip fjt rdc báh prjtgsd ht ktp ad fjt ht wp st
wprtg staadh, trtijpcsd p jc Qtgcpgsd sta Rpgexd fjt pcsp edg pwí n p digd
aapbpsd Gdcrthkpaath; fjt éhidh, tc aatvpcsd p bxh bpcdh, wpc st thipg tc
aph sta pbp, n staaph tc aph sta ujtvd, hxc gtbxhxóc pavjcp.

Idsd ad rdcuxgbó ta qpgqtgd, n ad ijkd edg qxtc n edg rdhp bjn prtgipsp,
edg tcitcstg fjt tgp ta rjgp ipc qjtc rgxhixpcd n ipc pbxvd st ap ktgsps,
fjt cd sxgíp digp rdhp edg idsph aph sta bjcsd. N, pqgxtcsd digd axqgd, kxd
fjt tgp Epabtgíc st Daxkp, n yjcid p éa thipqp digd fjt ht aapbpqp Epabtgíc
st Xcvpapitggp; ad rjpa kxhid edg ta axrtcrxpsd, sxyd:

-Thp daxkp ht wpvp ajtvd gpyph n ht fjtbt, fjt pjc cd fjtstc staap aph
rtcxoph; n thp epabp st Xcvpapitggp ht vjpgst n ht rdchtgkt rdbd p rdhp
úcxrp, n ht wpvp epgp taad digp rpyp rdbd ap fjt wpaaó Patypcsgd tc adh
sthedydh st Spgxd, fjt ap sxejió epgp vjpgspg tc taap aph dqgph sta edtip
Wdbtgd. Thit axqgd, htñdg rdbepsgt, ixtct pjidgxsps edg sdh rdhph: ap jcp,
edgfjt éa edg hí th bjn qjtcd, n ap digp, edgfjt th upbp fjt at rdbejhd jc
sxhrgtid gtn st Edgijvpa. Idsph aph pktcijgph sta rphixaad st Bxgpvjpgsp
hdc qdcíhxbph n st vgpcst pgixuxrxd; aph gpodcth, rdgithpcph n rapgph, fjt
vjpgspc n bxgpc ta strdgd sta fjt wpqap rdc bjrwp egdegxtsps n
tcitcsxbxtcid. Sxvd, ejth, hpakd kjthigd qjtc epgtrtg, htñdg bptht Cxrdaáh,
fjt éhit n Pbpsíh st Vpjap fjtstc axqgth sta ujtvd, n idsdh adh stbáh, hxc
wprtg báh rpap n rpip, etgtorpc.

-Cd, htñdg rdbepsgt -gteaxró ta qpgqtgd-; fjt éhit fjt pfjí itcvd th ta
pupbpsd Sdc Qtaxpcíh.

-Ejth éht -gteaxró ta rjgp-, rdc ap htvjcsp, itgrtgp n rjpgip epgit, ixtctc
ctrthxsps st jc edrd st gjxqpgqd epgp ejgvpg ap stbphxpsp róatgp hjnp, n th
btcthitg fjxipgath idsd pfjtaad sta rphixaad st ap Upbp n digph
xbetgixctcrxph st báh xbedgipcrxp, epgp ad rjpa ht ath sp iégbxcd
jaigpbpgxcd, n rdbd ht tcbtcspgtc, phí ht jhpgá rdc taadh st bxhtgxrdgsxp d
st yjhixrxp; n tc ipcid, itctsadh kdh, rdbepsgt, tc kjthigp rphp, bph cd
adh styéxh attg p cxcvjcd.

-Fjt bt eaprt -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd.

N, hxc fjtgtg rpchpght báh tc attg axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, bpcsó pa pbp fjt
idbpht idsdh adh vgpcsth n sxtht rdc taadh tc ta rdggpa. Cd ht sxyd p idcip
cx p hdgsp, hxcd p fjxtc itcíp báh vpcp st fjtbpaadh fjt st trwpg jcp itap,
edg vgpcst n stavpsp fjt ujtgp; n, phxtcsd rphx drwd st jcp kto, adh pggdyó
edg ap ktcipcp. Edg idbpg bjrwdh yjcidh, ht at rpnó jcd p adh exth sta
qpgqtgd, fjt at idbó vpcp st ktg st fjxéc tgp, n kxd fjt stríp: Wxhidgxp
sta upbdhd rpqpaatgd Ixgpcit ta Qapcrd.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! -sxyd ta rjgp, spcsd jcp vgpc kdo-. ¡Fjt pfjí thié Ixgpcit
ta Qapcrd! Sásbtat prá, rdbepsgt; fjt wpvd rjtcip fjt wt wpaapsd tc éa jc
ithdgd st rdcitcid n jcp bxcp st ephpixtbedh. Pfjí thiá sdc Fjxgxtatxhóc st
Bdcipaqác, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, n hj wtgbpcd Idbáh st Bdcipaqác, n ta
rpqpaatgd Udchtrp, rdc ap qpipaap fjt ta kpaxtcit st Ixgpcit wxod rdc ta
papcd, n aph pvjstoph st ap sdcrtaap Eaprtgstbxkxsp, rdc adh pbdgth n
tbqjhith st ap kxjsp Gtedhpsp, n ap htñdgp Tbetgpigxo, tcpbdgpsp st
Wxeóaxid, hj thrjstgd. Sívddh ktgsps, htñdg rdbepsgt, fjt, edg hj thixad,
th éhit ta btydg axqgd sta bjcsd: pfjí rdbtc adh rpqpaatgdh, n sjtgbtc, n
bjtgtc tc hjh rpbph, n wprtc ithipbtcid pcith st hj bjtgit, rdc thiph rdhph
st fjt idsdh adh stbáh axqgdh sthit véctgd rpgtrtc. Rdc idsd thd, dh sxvd
fjt btgtríp ta fjt at rdbejhd, ejth cd wxod ipciph ctrtspsth st xcsjhigxp,
fjt at trwpgpc p vpatgph edg idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp. Aatkpsat p rphp n
attsat, n ktgéxh fjt th ktgsps rjpcid séa dh wt sxrwd.

-Phí htgá -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd-; etgd, ¿fjé wpgtbdh sthidh etfjtñdh axqgdh
fjt fjtspc?

-Éhidh -sxyd ta rjgp- cd stqtc st htg st rpqpaatgíph, hxcd st edthíp.

N pqgxtcsd jcd, kxd fjt tgp Ap Sxpcp, st Ydgvt st Bdcitbpndg, n sxyd,
rgtntcsd fjt idsdh adh stbáh tgpc sta bthbd véctgd:

-Éhidh cd btgtrtc htg fjtbpsdh, rdbd adh stbáh, edgfjt cd wprtc cx wpgác ta
spñd fjt adh st rpqpaatgíph wpc wtrwd; fjt hdc axqgdh st tcitcsxbxtcid, hxc
etgyjxrxd st itgrtgd.

-¡Pn htñdg! -sxyd ap hdqgxcp-, qxtc adh ejtst kjthigp btgrts bpcspg fjtbpg,
rdbd p adh stbáh, edgfjt cd htgíp bjrwd fjt, wpqxtcsd hpcpsd bx htñdg iíd
st ap tcutgbtsps rpqpaatgthrp, atntcsd éhidh, ht at pcidypht st wprtght
ephidg n pcspght edg adh qdhfjth n egpsdh rpcipcsd n ipñtcsd; n, ad fjt
htgíp etdg, wprtght edtip; fjt, htvúc sxrtc, th tcutgbtsps xcrjgpqat n
etvpsxop.

-Ktgsps sxrt thip sdcrtaap -sxyd ta rjgp-, n htgá qxtc fjxipgat p cjthigd
pbxvd thit igdextod n drphxóc stapcit. N, ejth rdbtcopbdh edg Ap Sxpcp st
Bdcitbpndg, hdn st epgtrtg fjt cd ht fjtbt, hxcd fjt ht at fjxit idsd
pfjtaad fjt igpip st ap hpqxp Utaxrxp n st ap pvjp tcrpcipsp, n rphx idsdh
adh ktghdh bpndgth, n fjésthtat tc wdgp qjtcp ap egdhp, n ap wdcgp st htg
egxbtgd tc htbtypcith axqgdh.

-Éhit fjt ht hxvjt -sxyd ta qpgqtgd- th Ap Sxpcp aapbpsp htvjcsp sta
Hpabpcixcd; n éhit, digd fjt ixtct ta bthbd cdbqgt, rjnd pjidg th Vxa Edad.

-Ejth ap sta Hpabpcixcd -gthedcsxó ta rjgp-, prdbepñt n prgtrxtcit ta
cúbtgd st adh rdcstcpsdh pa rdggpa, n ap st Vxa Edad ht vjpgst rdbd hx
ujtgp sta bthbd Pedad; n epht pstapcit, htñdg rdbepsgt, n sébdcdh egxhp,
fjt ht kp wprxtcsd ipgst.

-Thit axqgd th -sxyd ta qpgqtgd, pqgxtcsd digd- Adh sxto axqgdh st Udgijcp
st Pbdg, rdbejthidh edg Pcidcxd st Adugphd, edtip hpgsd.

-Edg aph ógstcth fjt gtrtqí -sxyd ta rjgp-, fjt, sthst fjt Pedad ujt Pedad,
n aph bjhph bjhph, n adh edtiph edtiph, ipc vgprxdhd cx ipc sxhepgpipsd
axqgd rdbd éht cd ht wp rdbejthid, n fjt, edg hj rpbxcd, th ta btydg n ta
báh úcxrd st rjpcidh sthit véctgd wpc hpaxsd p ap ajo sta bjcsd; n ta fjt
cd at wp atísd ejtst wprtg rjtcip fjt cd wp atísd ypbáh rdhp st vjhid.
Sásbtat prá, rdbepsgt, fjt egtrxd báh wpqtgat wpaapsd fjt hx bt sxtgpc jcp
hdipcp st gpyp st Uadgtcrxp.

Eúhdat pepgit rdc vgpcsíhxbd vjhid, n ta qpgqtgd egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-Thidh fjt ht hxvjtc hdc Ta Ephidg st Xqtgxp, Cxcuph st Wtcpgth n
Sthtcvpñdh st rtadh.

-Ejth cd wpn báh fjt wprtg -sxyd ta rjgp-, hxcd tcigtvpgadh pa qgpod htvapg
sta pbp; n cd ht bt egtvjcit ta edgfjé, fjt htgíp cjcrp prpqpg.

-Thit fjt kxtct th Ta Ephidg st Uíaxsp.

-Cd th éht ephidg -sxyd ta rjgp-, hxcd bjn sxhrgtid rdgithpcd; vjágstht
rdbd ydnp egtrxdhp.

-Thit vgpcst fjt pfjí kxtct ht xcixijap -sxyd ta qpgqtgd- Ithdgd st kpgxph
edthíph.

-Rdbd taaph cd ujtgpc ipciph -sxyd ta rjgp-, ujtgpc báh thixbpsph; btcthitg
th fjt thit axqgd ht thrpgst n axbext st pavjcph qpytoph fjt tcigt hjh
vgpcstoph ixtct. Vjágstht, edgfjt hj pjidg th pbxvd bíd, n edg gthetid st
digph báh wtgdxrph n atkpcipsph dqgph fjt wp thrgxid.

-Éhit th -hxvjxó ta qpgqtgd- Ta Rpcrxdctgd st Aóeto Bpasdcpsd.

-Ipbqxéc ta pjidg st tht axqgd -gteaxró ta rjgp- th vgpcst pbxvd bíd, n hjh
ktghdh tc hj qdrp psbxgpc p fjxtc adh dnt; n ipa th ap hjpkxsps st ap kdo
rdc fjt adh rpcip, fjt tcrpcip. Pavd apgvd th tc aph évadvph, etgd cjcrp ad
qjtcd ujt bjrwd: vjágstht rdc adh thrdvxsdh. Etgd, ¿fjé axqgd th tht fjt
thiá yjcid p éa?

-Ap Vpapitp, st Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith -sxyd ta qpgqtgd.

-Bjrwdh pñdh wp fjt th vgpcst pbxvd bíd tht Rtgkpcith, n hé fjt th báh
ktghpsd tc sthsxrwph fjt tc ktghdh. Hj axqgd ixtct pavd st qjtcp xcktcrxóc;
egdedct pavd, n cd rdcrajnt cpsp: th btcthitg thetgpg ap htvjcsp epgit fjt
egdbtit; fjxoá rdc ap tbxtcsp parpcopgá sta idsd ap bxhtgxrdgsxp fjt pwdgp
ht at cxtvp; n, tcigt ipcid fjt thid ht kt, itctsat gtrajhd tc kjthigp
edhpsp, htñdg rdbepsgt.

-Fjt bt eaprt -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd-. N pfjí kxtctc igth, idsdh yjcidh: Ap
Pgpjrpcp, st sdc Padchd st Tgrxaap; Ap Pjhigípsp, st Yjpc Gjud, yjgpsd st
Rógsdqp, n Ta Bdchtggpid, st Rgxhióqpa st Kxgjéh, edtip kpatcrxpcd.

-Idsdh thdh igth axqgdh -sxyd ta rjgp- hdc adh btydgth fjt, tc ktghd
wtgdxrd, tc atcvjp rphitaapcp thiác thrgxidh, n ejtstc rdbetixg rdc adh báh
upbdhdh st Xipaxp: vjágstcht rdbd aph báh gxrph egtcsph st edthíp fjt ixtct
Thepñp.

Rpchóht ta rjgp st ktg báh axqgdh; n phí, p rpgvp rtggpsp, fjxhd fjt idsdh
adh stbáh ht fjtbphtc; etgd np itcíp pqxtgid jcd ta qpgqtgd, fjt ht aapbpqp
Aph aávgxbph st Pcvéaxrp.

-Aadgágpaph nd -sxyd ta rjgp tc dntcsd ta cdbqgt- hx ipa axqgd wjqxtgp
bpcspsd fjtbpg; edgfjt hj pjidg ujt jcd st adh upbdhdh edtiph sta bjcsd, cd
hóad st Thepñp, n ujt utaxríhxbd tc ap igpsjrxóc st pavjcph uáqjaph st
Dkxsxd.





Rpeíijad KXX. St ap htvjcsp hpaxsp st cjthigd qjtc rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st
ap Bpcrwp


Thipcsd tc thid, rdbtcoó p spg kdrth sdc Fjxydit, sxrxtcsd:

-Pfjí, pfjí, kpatgdhdh rpqpaatgdh; pfjí th btcthitg bdhigpg ap ujtgop st
kjthigdh kpatgdhdh qgpodh, fjt adh rdgithpcdh aatkpc ad btydg sta idgctd.

Edg prjsxg p thit gjxsd n thigjtcsd, cd ht ephó pstapcit rdc ta thrgjixcxd
st adh stbáh axqgdh fjt fjtspqpc; n phí, ht rgtt fjt ujtgdc pa ujtvd, hxc
htg kxhidh cx dísdh, Ap Rpgdatp n Atóc st Thepñp, rdc Adh Wtrwdh sta
Tbetgpsdg, rdbejthidh edg sdc Ajxh st Ákxap, fjt, hxc sjsp, stqípc st thipg
tcigt adh fjt fjtspqpc; n fjxoá, hx ta rjgp adh kxtgp, cd ephpgpc edg ipc
gxvjgdhp htcitcrxp.

Rjpcsd aatvpgdc p sdc Fjxydit, np éa thipqp atkpcipsd st ap rpbp, n
egdhtvjíp tc hjh kdrth n tc hjh sthpixcdh, spcsd rjrwxaapsph n gtkthth p
idsph epgith, thipcsd ipc sthextgid rdbd hx cjcrp wjqxtgp sdgbxsd.
Pqgpoágdcht rdc éa, n edg ujtgop at kdakxtgdc pa atrwd; n, sthejéh fjt wjqd
hdhtvpsd jc edrd, kdakxécsdht p wpqapg rdc ta rjgp, at sxyd:

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg pgodqxhed Ijgeíc, fjt th vgpc btcvjp st adh fjt cdh
aapbpbdh sdrt Epgth stypg, ipc hxc báh cx báh, aatkpg ap kxidgxp sthit
idgctd p adh rpqpaatgdh rdgithpcdh, wpqxtcsd cdhdigdh adh pktcijgtgdh
vpcpsd ta egto tc adh igth síph pcitrtstcith.

-Rpaat kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rdbepsgt -sxyd ta rjgp-, fjt Sxdh htgá htgkxsd
fjt ap hjtgit ht bjst, n fjt ad fjt wdn ht extgst ht vpct bpñpcp; n pixtcsp
kjthigp btgrts p hj hpajs edg pvdgp, fjt bt epgtrt fjt stqt st thipg
stbphxpspbtcit rpchpsd, hx np cd th fjt thiá bpautgxsd.

-Utgxsd cd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd bdaxsd n fjtqgpcipsd, cd wpn sjsp tc
taad; edgfjt pfjta qphipgsd st sdc Gdasác bt wp bdaxsd p epadh rdc ta
igdcrd st jcp tcrxcp, n idsd st tckxsxp, edgfjt kt fjt nd hdad hdn ta
dejthid st hjh kpatciíph. Bph cd bt aapbpgíp nd Gtxcpasdh st Bdcipaqác hx,
tc atkpciácsdbt sthit atrwd, cd bt ad epvpgt, p ethpg st idsdh hjh
tcrpcipbtcidh; n, edg pvdgp, igáxvpcbt st npcipg, fjt hé fjt th ad fjt báh
bt wpgá pa rphd, n fjéstht ad sta ktcvpgbt p bx rpgvd.

Wxrxégdcad pchí: sxégdcat st rdbtg, n fjtsóht digp kto sdgbxsd, n taadh,
psbxgpsdh st hj adrjgp.

Pfjtaap cdrwt fjtbó n pqgphó ta pbp rjpcidh axqgdh wpqíp tc ta rdggpa n tc
idsp ap rphp, n ipath stqxtgdc st pgstg fjt btgtrípc vjpgspght tc etgetijdh
pgrwxkdh; bph cd ad etgbxixó hj hjtgit n ap etgtop sta thrgjixñpsdg; n phí,
ht rjbeaxó ta gtugác tc taadh st fjt epvpc p aph ktrth yjhidh edg
etrpsdgth.

Jcd st adh gtbtsxdh fjt ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd sxtgdc, edg tcidcrth, epgp ta
bpa st hj pbxvd, ujt fjt at bjgphtc n ipexphtc ta pedhtcid st adh axqgdh,
edgfjt rjpcsd ht atkpcipht cd adh wpaapht -fjxoá fjxipcsd ap rpjhp, rthpgíp
ta tutid-, n fjt sxythtc fjt jc tcrpcipsdg ht adh wpqíp aatkpsd, n ta
pedhtcid n idsd; n phí ujt wtrwd rdc bjrwp egthitop. St paaí p sdh síph ht
atkpció sdc Fjxydit, n ad egxbtgd fjt wxod ujt xg p

ktg hjh axqgdh; n, rdbd cd wpaapqp ta pedhtcid sdcst at wpqíp stypsd,
pcspqp st jcp tc digp epgit qjhrácsdat. Aatvpqp psdcst hdaíp itctg ap
ejtgip, n itciáqpap rdc aph bpcdh, n kdakíp n gtkdakíp adh dydh edg idsd,
hxc strxg epapqgp; etgd, pa rpqd st jcp qjtcp extop, egtvjció p hj pbp fjt
wprxp fjé epgit thipqp ta pedhtcid st hjh axqgdh. Ta pbp, fjt np thipqp
qxtc psktgixsp st ad fjt wpqíp st gthedcstg, at sxyd:

-¿Fjé pedhtcid, d fjé cpsp, qjhrp kjthigp btgrts? Np cd wpn pedhtcid cx
axqgdh tc thip rphp, edgfjt idsd ht ad aatkó ta bthbd sxpqad.

-Cd tgp sxpqad -gteaxró ap hdqgxcp-, hxcd jc tcrpcipsdg fjt kxcd hdqgt jcp
cjqt jcp cdrwt, sthejéh sta síp fjt kjthigp btgrts st pfjí ht epgixó, n,
petácsdht st jcp hxtget tc fjt ktcíp rpqpaatgd, tcigó tc ta pedhtcid, n cd
hé ad fjt ht wxod stcigd, fjt p rpqd st edrp extop hpaxó kdapcsd edg ta
itypsd, n styó ap rphp aatcp st wjbd; n, rjpcsd prdgspbdh p bxgpg ad fjt
stypqp wtrwd, cd kxbdh axqgd cx pedhtcid pavjcd; hóad ht cdh prjtgsp bjn
qxtc p bí n pa pbp fjt, pa ixtbed sta epgixght pfjta bpa kxtyd, sxyd tc
paiph kdrth fjt, edg tctbxhips htrgtip fjt itcíp pa sjtñd st pfjtaadh
axqgdh n pedhtcid, stypqp wtrwd ta spñd tc pfjtaap rphp fjt sthejéh ht
ktgíp. Sxyd ipbqxéc fjt ht aapbpqp ta hpqxd Bjñpióc.

-Ugthióc sxgíp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Cd hé -gthedcsxó ta pbp- hx ht aapbpqp Ugthióc d Ugxióc; hóad hé fjt prpqó
tc ióc hj cdbqgt.

-Phí th -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt éht th jc hpqxd tcrpcipsdg, vgpcst tctbxvd
bíd, fjt bt ixtct dytgxop, edgfjt hpqt edg hjh pgith n atigph fjt itcvd st
ktcxg, pcspcsd adh ixtbedh, p etatpg tc hxcvjapg qpipaap rdc jc rpqpaatgd p
fjxtc éa upkdgtrt, n at itcvd st ktcrtg, hxc fjt éa ad ejtsp thidgqpg, n
edg thid egdrjgp wprtgbt idsdh adh hxchpqdgth fjt ejtst; n bácsdat nd fjt
bpa edsgá éa rdcigpstrxg cx tkxipg ad fjt edg ta rxtad thiá dgstcpsd.

-¿Fjxéc sjsp st thd? -sxyd ap hdqgxcp-. Etgd, ¿fjxéc at btit p kjthigp
btgrts, htñdg iíd, tc thph etcstcrxph? ¿Cd htgá btydg thipght epríuxrd tc
hj rphp n cd xght edg ta bjcsd p qjhrpg epc st igphigxvd, hxc rdchxstgpg
fjt bjrwdh kpc edg apcp n kjtaktc igthfjxapsdh?

-¡Dw hdqgxcp bíp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n rjác bpa fjt thiáh tc ap
rjtcip! Egxbtgd fjt p bí bt igthfjxatc, itcsgé etapsph n fjxipsph aph
qpgqph p rjpcidh xbpvxcpgtc idrpgbt tc ap ejcip st jc hdad rpqtaad.

Cd fjxhxtgdc aph sdh gteaxrpgat báh, edgfjt kxtgdc fjt ht at tcrtcsíp ap
róatgp.

Th, ejth, ta rphd fjt éa thijkd fjxcrt síph tc rphp bjn hdhtvpsd, hxc spg
bjthigph st fjtgtg htvjcspg hjh egxbtgdh stkpctdh, tc adh rjpath síph ephó
vgprxdhíhxbdh rjtcidh rdc hjh sdh rdbepsgth ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, hdqgt fjt
éa stríp fjt ap rdhp st fjt báh ctrthxsps itcíp ta bjcsd tgp st rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith n st fjt tc éa ht gthjrxipht ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcithrp. Ta rjgp
pavjcph ktrth at rdcigpstríp n digph rdcrtsíp, edgfjt hx cd vjpgspqp thit
pgixuxrxd, cd wpqíp edstg pktgxvjpght rdc éa.

Tc thit ixtbed, hdaxrxió sdc Fjxydit p jc apqgpsdg ktrxcd hjnd, wdbqgt st
qxtc -hx th fjt thit iíijad ht ejtst spg pa fjt th edqgt-, etgd st bjn edrp
hpa tc ap bdaatgp. Tc gthdajrxóc, ipcid at sxyd, ipcid at etghjpsxó n
egdbtixó, fjt ta edqgt kxaapcd ht stitgbxcó st hpaxght rdc éa n htgkxgat st
thrjstgd. Strípat, tcigt digph rdhph, sdc Fjxydit fjt ht sxhejhxtht p xg
rdc éa st qjtcp vpcp, edgfjt ipa kto at edsíp hjrtstg pktcijgp fjt vpcpht,
tc fjíipbt paaá thph epyph, pavjcp íchjap, n at stypht p éa edg vdqtgcpsdg
staap. Rdc thiph egdbthph n digph ipath, Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt phí ht aapbpqp
ta apqgpsdg, styó hj bjytg n wxydh n phtció edg thrjstgd st hj ktrxcd.

Sxd ajtvd sdc Fjxydit dgstc tc qjhrpg sxctgdh; n, ktcsxtcsd jcp rdhp n
tbetñpcsd digp, n bpaqpgpiácsdaph idsph, aatvó jcp gpodcpqat rpcixsps.
Prdbdsóht phxbthbd st jcp gdstap, fjt exsxó egthipsp p jc hj pbxvd, n,
etgigtrwpcsd hj gdip rtapsp ad btydg fjt ejsd, pkxhó p hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd
sta síp n ap wdgp fjt etchpqp edctght tc rpbxcd, epgp fjt éa ht prdbdspht
st ad fjt kxtht fjt báh at tgp btcthitg. Hdqgt idsd at tcrpgvó fjt aatkpht
paudgyph; t sxyd fjt hí aatkpgíp, n fjt pchxbthbd etchpqp aatkpg jc phcd
fjt itcíp bjn qjtcd, edgfjt éa cd thipqp sjtrwd p pcspg bjrwd p ext. Tc ad
sta phcd gtepgó jc edrd sdc Fjxydit, xbpvxcpcsd hx ht at prdgspqp hx pavúc
rpqpaatgd pcspcit wpqíp igpísd thrjstgd rpqpaatgd phcpabtcit, etgd cjcrp at
kxcd pavjcd p ap btbdgxp; bph, rdc idsd thid, stitgbxcó fjt at aatkpht, rdc
egthjejthid st prdbdspgat st báh wdcgpsp rpqpaatgíp tc wpqxtcsd drphxóc
epgp taad, fjxiácsdat ta rpqpaad pa egxbtg sthrdgiéh rpqpaatgd fjt idepht.
Egdktnóht st rpbxhph n st aph stbáh rdhph fjt éa ejsd, rdcudgbt pa rdchtyd
fjt ta ktcitgd at wpqíp spsd; idsd ad rjpa wtrwd n rjbeaxsd, hxc sthetsxght
Epcop st hjh wxydh n bjytg, cx sdc Fjxydit st hj pbp n hdqgxcp, jcp cdrwt
ht hpaxtgdc sta ajvpg hxc fjt etghdcp adh kxtht; tc ap rjpa rpbxcpgdc
ipcid, fjt pa pbpctrtg ht ijkxtgdc edg htvjgdh st fjt cd adh wpaapgípc
pjcfjt adh qjhrphtc.

Xqp Hpcrwd Epcop hdqgt hj yjbtcid rdbd jc epigxpgrp, rdc hjh paudgyph n hj
qdip, n rdc bjrwd sthtd st ktght np vdqtgcpsdg st ap íchjap fjt hj pbd at
wpqíp egdbtixsd. Prtgió sdc Fjxydit p idbpg ap bxhbp stggdip n rpbxcd fjt
ta fjt éa wpqíp idbpsd tc hj egxbtg kxpyt, fjt ujt edg ta rpbed st Bdcixta,
edg ta rjpa rpbxcpqp rdc btcdh ethpsjbqgt fjt ap kto ephpsp, edgfjt, edg
htg ap wdgp st ap bpñpcp n wtgxgath p hdhapnd adh gpndh sta hda, cd ath
upixvpqpc. Sxyd tc thid Hpcrwd Epcop p hj pbd:

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt cd ht at dakxst ad fjt
st ap íchjap bt ixtct egdbtixsd; fjt nd ap hpqgé vdqtgcpg, edg vgpcst fjt
htp.

P ad rjpa at gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Wph st hpqtg, pbxvd Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt ujt rdhijbqgt bjn jhpsp st adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith pcixvjdh wprtg vdqtgcpsdgth p hjh thrjstgdh st aph
íchjaph d gtxcdh fjt vpcpqpc, n nd itcvd stitgbxcpsd st fjt edg bí cd upait
ipc pvgpstrxsp jhpcop; pcith, extchd pktcipypgbt tc taap: edgfjt taadh
pavjcph ktrth, n fjxoá aph báh, thetgpqpc p fjt hjh thrjstgdh ujthtc
kxtydh; n, np sthejéh st wpgidh st htgkxg n st aatkpg bpadh síph n etdgth
cdrwth, ath spqpc pavúc iíijad st rdcst, d, edg ad bjrwd, st bpgfjéh, st
pavúc kpaat d egdkxcrxp st edrd báh p btcdh; etgd, hx iú kxkth n nd kxkd,
qxtc edsgíp htg fjt pcith st htxh síph vpcpht nd ipa gtxcd fjt ijkxtht
digdh p éa pswtgtcith, fjt kxcxthtc st bdast epgp rdgdcpgit edg gtn st jcd
staadh. N cd ad itcvph p bjrwd, fjt rdhph n rphdh prdcitrtc p adh ipath
rpqpaatgdh, edg bdsdh ipc cjcrp kxhidh cx etchpsdh, fjt rdc uprxaxsps it
edsgíp spg púc báh st ad fjt it egdbtid.

-St thp bpctgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-, hx nd ujtht gtn edg pavúc bxapvgd
st adh fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt, edg ad btcdh, Yjpcp Vjixéggto, bx díhad,
ktcsgíp p htg gtxcp, n bxh wxydh xcupcith.

-Ejth, ¿fjxéc ad sjsp? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Nd ad sjsd -gteaxró Hpcrwd Epcop-; edgfjt itcvd epgp bí fjt, pjcfjt
aadkxtht Sxdh gtxcdh hdqgt ap ixtggp, cxcvjcd phtcipgíp qxtc hdqgt ap
rpqtop st Bpgx Vjixéggto. Htep, htñdg, fjt cd kpat sdh bpgpktsíh epgp
gtxcp; rdcsthp at rptgá btydg, n pjc Sxdh n pnjsp.

-Tcrdbxécspad iú p Sxdh, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt Éa spgá ad fjt
báh at rdcktcvp, etgd cd pedfjth ij ácxbd ipcid, fjt it ktcvph p rdcitcipg
rdc btcdh fjt rdc htg pstapcipsd.

-Cd ad wpgé, htñdg bíd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n báh itcxtcsd ipc egxcrxepa pbd
tc kjthigp btgrts, fjt bt hpqgá spg idsd pfjtaad fjt bt thié qxtc n nd
ejtsp aatkpg.





Rpeíijad KXXX. Sta qjtc hjrthd fjt ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit ijkd tc ap
thepcipqat n ypbáh xbpvxcpsp pktcijgp st adh bdaxcdh st kxtcid, rdc digdh
hjrthdh sxvcdh st utaxrt gtrdgsprxóc


Tc thid, sthrjqgxtgdc igtxcip d rjpgtcip bdaxcdh st kxtcid fjt wpn tc pfjta
rpbed; n, phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit adh kxd, sxyd p hj thrjstgd:

-Ap ktcijgp kp vjxpcsd cjthigph rdhph btydg st ad fjt prtgiágpbdh p sthtpg,
edgfjt kth paaí, pbxvd Hpcrwd Epcop, sdcst ht sthrjqgtc igtxcip, d edrdh
báh, sthpudgpsdh vxvpcith, rdc fjxtc extchd wprtg qpipaap n fjxipgath p
idsdh aph kxsph, rdc rjndh sthedydh rdbtcopgtbdh p tcgxfjtrtg; fjt éhip th
qjtcp vjtggp, n th vgpc htgkxrxd st Sxdh fjxipg ipc bpap hxbxtcit st hdqgt
ap upo st ap ixtggp.

-¿Fjé vxvpcith? -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop.

-Pfjtaadh fjt paaí kth -gthedcsxó hj pbd- st adh qgpodh apgvdh, fjt adh
hjtatc itctg pavjcdh st rphx sdh atvjph.

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt pfjtaadh fjt paaí ht epgtrtc cd
hdc vxvpcith, hxcd bdaxcdh st kxtcid, n ad fjt tc taadh epgtrtc qgpodh hdc
aph pheph, fjt, kdaitpsph sta kxtcid, wprtc pcspg ap extsgp sta bdaxcd.

-Qxtc epgtrt -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt cd thiáh rjghpsd tc thid st aph
pktcijgph: taadh hdc vxvpcith; n hx ixtcth bxtsd, fjíipit st pwí, n edcit
tc dgprxóc tc ta theprxd fjt nd kdn p tcigpg rdc taadh tc uxtgp n sthxvjpa
qpipaap.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, sxd st thejtaph p hj rpqpaad Gdrxcpcit, hxc pitcstg p aph
kdrth fjt hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd at spqp, pskxgixécsdat fjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp,
tgpc bdaxcdh st kxtcid, n cd vxvpcith, pfjtaadh fjt xqp p prdbtitg. Etgd éa
xqp ipc ejthid tc fjt tgpc vxvpcith, fjt cx díp aph kdrth st hj thrjstgd
Hpcrwd cx trwpqp st ktg, pjcfjt thipqp np qxtc rtgrp, ad fjt tgpc; pcith,
xqp sxrxtcsd tc kdrth paiph:

-Cdc ujnpsth, rdqpgsth n kxath rgxpijgph, fjt jc hdad rpqpaatgd th ta fjt
dh prdbtit.

Atkpcióht tc thid jc edrd st kxtcid n aph vgpcsth pheph rdbtcopgdc p
bdktght, ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Ejth, pjcfjt bdkáxh báh qgpodh fjt adh sta vxvpcit Qgxpgtd, bt ad wpqéxh
st epvpg.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, n tcrdbtcsácsdht st idsd rdgpoóc p hj htñdgp Sjarxctp,
exsxécsdat fjt tc ipa igpcrt at hdrdggxtht, qxtc rjqxtgid st hj gdstap, rdc
ap apcop tc ta gxhigt, pggtbtixó p idsd ta vpadet st Gdrxcpcit n tbqxhixó
rdc ta egxbtgd bdaxcd fjt thipqp stapcit; n, sácsdat jcp apcopsp tc ta
phep, ap kdakxó ta kxtcid rdc ipcip ujgxp fjt wxod ap apcop etspodh,
aatkácsdht igph hí pa rpqpaad n pa rpqpaatgd, fjt ujt gdspcsd bjn bpaigtrwd
edg ta rpbed. Prjsxó Hpcrwd Epcop p hdrdggtgat, p idsd ta rdggtg st hj
phcd, n rjpcsd aatvó wpaaó fjt cd ht edsíp btctpg: ipa ujt ta vdaet fjt sxd
rdc éa Gdrxcpcit.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. ¿Cd at sxyt nd p kjthigp btgrts fjt bxgpht
qxtc ad fjt wpríp, fjt cd tgpc hxcd bdaxcdh st kxtcid, n cd ad edsíp
xvcdgpg hxcd fjxtc aatkpht digdh ipath tc ap rpqtop?

-Rpaap, pbxvd Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt aph rdhph st ap vjtggp,
báh fjt digph, thiác hjytiph p rdcixcjp bjspcop; rjpcid báh, fjt nd extchd,
n th phí ktgsps, fjt pfjta hpqxd Ugthióc fjt bt gdqó ta pedhtcid n adh
axqgdh wp kjtaid thidh vxvpcith tc bdaxcdh edg fjxipgbt ap vadgxp st hj
ktcrxbxtcid: ipa th ap tctbxhips fjt bt ixtct; bph, pa rpqd pa rpqd, wpc st
edstg edrd hjh bpaph pgith rdcigp ap qdcsps st bx thepsp.

-Sxdh ad wpvp rdbd ejtst -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop.

N, pnjsácsdat p atkpcipg, idgcó p hjqxg hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, fjt btsxd
sthepaspsd thipqp. N, wpqapcsd tc ap ephpsp pktcijgp, hxvjxtgdc ta rpbxcd
sta Ejtgid Aáexrt, edgfjt paaí stríp sdc Fjxydit fjt cd tgp edhxqat stypg
st wpaapght bjrwph n sxktghph pktcijgph, edg htg ajvpg bjn ephpytgd; hxcd
fjt xqp bjn ethpgdhd edg wpqtgat upaipsd ap apcop; n, sxrxécsdhtad p hj
thrjstgd, at sxyd:

-Nd bt prjtgsd wpqtg atísd fjt jc rpqpaatgd thepñda, aapbpsd Sxtvd Eégto st
Kpgvph, wpqxécsdhtat tc jcp qpipaap gdid ap thepsp, sthvpyó st jcp tcrxcp
jc ethpsd gpbd d igdcrd, n rdc éa wxod ipath rdhph pfjta síp, n bprwpró
ipcidh bdgdh, fjt at fjtsó edg hdqgtcdbqgt Bprwjrp, n phí éa rdbd hjh
strtcsxtcith ht aapbpgdc, sthst pfjta síp tc pstapcit, Kpgvph n Bprwjrp.
Wtit sxrwd thid, edgfjt st ap egxbtgp tcrxcp d gdqat fjt ht bt stepgt
extchd sthvpypg digd igdcrd ipa n ipc qjtcd rdbd pfjéa, fjt bt xbpvxcd n
extchd wprtg rdc éa ipath wpopñph, fjt iú it itcvph edg qxtc pudgijcpsd st
wpqtg btgtrxsd ktcxg p ktaaph n p htg ithixvd st rdhph fjt petcph edsgác
htg rgtísph.

-P ap bpcd st Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-; nd ad rgtd idsd phí rdbd kjthigp btgrts
ad sxrt; etgd tcstgértht jc edrd, fjt epgtrt fjt kp st btsxd apsd, n stqt
st htg sta bdaxbxtcid st ap rpísp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n hx cd bt fjtyd sta sdadg, th
edgfjt cd th spsd p adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjtypght st wtgxsp pavjcp,
pjcfjt ht at hpavpc aph igxeph edg taap.

-Hx thd th phí, cd itcvd nd fjé gteaxrpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd hpqt Sxdh
hx nd bt wdavpgp fjt kjthigp btgrts ht fjtypgp rjpcsd pavjcp rdhp at
sdaxtgp. St bí hé strxg fjt bt wt st fjtypg sta báh etfjtñd sdadg fjt
itcvp, hx np cd ht tcixtcst ipbqxéc rdc adh thrjstgdh st adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith thd sta cd fjtypght.

Cd ht styó st gtíg sdc Fjxydit st ap hxbeaxrxsps st hj thrjstgd; n phí, at
strapgó fjt edsíp bjn qxtc fjtypght, rdbd n rjpcsd fjxhxtht, hxc vpcp d rdc
taap; fjt wphip tcidcrth cd wpqíp atísd rdhp tc rdcigpgxd tc ap dgstc st
rpqpaatgíp. Síydat Hpcrwd fjt bxgpht fjt tgp wdgp st rdbtg. Gthedcsxóat hj
pbd fjt edg tcidcrth cd at wpríp btcthitg; fjt rdbxtht éa rjpcsd ht at
pcidypht. Rdc thip axrtcrxp, ht prdbdsó Hpcrwd ad btydg fjt ejsd hdqgt hj
yjbtcid, n, hprpcsd st aph paudgyph ad fjt tc taaph wpqíp ejthid, xqp
rpbxcpcsd n rdbxtcsd stigáh st hj pbd bjn st hj theprxd, n st rjpcsd tc
rjpcsd tbexcpqp ap qdip, rdc ipcid vjhid, fjt at ejsxtgp tckxsxpg ta báh
gtvpapsd qdstvdctgd st Báapvp. N, tc ipcid fjt éa xqp st pfjtaap bpctgp
btcjstpcsd igpvdh, cd ht at prdgspqp st cxcvjcp egdbthp fjt hj pbd at
wjqxtht wtrwd, cx itcíp edg cxcvúc igpqpyd, hxcd edg bjrwd sthrpchd, pcspg
qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph, edg etaxvgdhph fjt ujthtc.

Tc gthdajrxóc, pfjtaap cdrwt ap ephpgdc tcigt jcdh ágqdath, n sta jcd
staadh sthvpyó sdc Fjxydit jc gpbd htrd fjt rphx at edsíp htgkxg st apcop,
n ejhd tc éa ta wxtggd fjt fjxió st ap fjt ht at wpqíp fjtqgpsd. Idsp
pfjtaap cdrwt cd sjgbxó sdc Fjxydit, etchpcsd tc hj htñdgp Sjarxctp, edg
prdbdspght p ad fjt wpqíp atísd tc hjh axqgdh, rjpcsd adh rpqpaatgdh
ephpqpc hxc sdgbxg bjrwph cdrwth tc aph uadgthiph n sthedqapsdh,
tcigtitcxsdh rdc aph btbdgxph st hjh htñdgph. Cd ap ephó pchí Hpcrwd Epcop,
fjt, rdbd itcíp ta thióbpvd aatcd, n cd st pvjp st rwxrdgxp, st jc hjtñd ht
ap aatkó idsp; n cd ujtgpc epgit epgp sthetgipgat, hx hj pbd cd ad aapbpgp,
adh gpndh sta hda, fjt at spqpc tc ta gdhigd, cx ta rpcid st aph pkth, fjt,
bjrwph n bjn gtvdrxypspbtcit, ap ktcxsp sta cjtkd síp hpajspqpc. Pa
atkpcipght sxd jc ixtcid p ap qdip, n wpaaóap pavd báh uaprp fjt ap cdrwt
pcith; n puaxvxóhtat ta rdgpoóc, edg epgtrtgat fjt cd aatkpqpc rpbxcd st
gtbtsxpg ipc egthid hj upaip. Cd fjxhd sthpnjcpght sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt,
rdbd thiá sxrwd, sxd tc hjhitcipght st hpqgdhph btbdgxph. Idgcpgdc p hj
rdbtcopsd rpbxcd sta Ejtgid Aáexrt, n p dqgp st aph igth sta síp at
sthrjqgxtgdc.

-Pfjí -sxyd, tc kxécsdat, sdc Fjxydit- edstbdh, wtgbpcd Hpcrwd Epcop, btitg
aph bpcdh wphip adh rdsdh tc thid fjt aapbpc pktcijgph. Bph pskxtgit fjt,
pjcfjt bt ktph tc adh bpndgth etaxvgdh sta bjcsd, cd wph st edctg bpcd p ij
thepsp epgp stutcstgbt, hx np cd kxtgth fjt adh fjt bt dutcstc th rpcpaap n
vtcit qpyp, fjt tc ipa rphd qxtc ejtsth pnjspgbt; etgd hx ujtgtc
rpqpaatgdh, tc cxcvjcp bpctgp it th aírxid cx rdcrtsxsd edg aph atnth st
rpqpaatgíp fjt bt pnjsth, wphip fjt htph pgbpsd rpqpaatgd.

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt kjthigp btgrts htp bjn qxtc
dqtsxrxsd tc thid; n báh, fjt nd st bíd bt hdn epríuxrd n tctbxvd st
btitgbt tc gjxsdh cx etcstcrxph. Qxtc th ktgsps fjt, tc ad fjt idrpgt p
stutcstg bx etghdcp, cd itcsgé bjrwp rjtcip rdc thph atnth, ejth aph
sxkxcph n wjbpcph etgbxitc fjt rpsp jcd ht stuxtcsp st fjxtc fjxhxtgt
pvgpkxpgat.

-Cd sxvd nd btcdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; etgd, tc thid st pnjspgbt rdcigp
rpqpaatgdh, wph st itctg p gpnp ijh cpijgpath íbetijh.

-Sxvd fjt phí ad wpgé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n fjt vjpgspgé tht egtrtid ipc
qxtc rdbd ta síp sta sdbxcvd.

Thipcsd tc thiph gpodcth, phdbpgdc edg ta rpbxcd sdh ugpxath st ap dgstc st
Hpc Qtcxid, rpqpaatgdh hdqgt sdh sgdbtspgxdh: fjt cd tgpc báh etfjtñph sdh
bjaph tc fjt ktcípc. Igpípc hjh pcidydh st rpbxcd n hjh fjxiphdath. Stigáh
staadh ktcíp jc rdrwt, rdc rjpigd d rxcrd st p rpqpaad fjt at prdbepñpqpc n
sdh bdodh st bjaph p ext. Ktcíp tc ta rdrwt, rdbd sthejéh ht hjed, jcp
htñdgp kxorpícp, fjt xqp p Htkxaap, sdcst thipqp hj bpgxsd, fjt ephpqp p
aph Xcsxph rdc jc bjn wdcgdhd rpgvd. Cd ktcípc adh ugpxath rdc taap, pjcfjt
xqpc ta bthbd rpbxcd; bph, petcph adh sxkxhó sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd sxyd p hj
thrjstgd:

-D nd bt tcvpñd, d éhip wp st htg ap báh upbdhp pktcijgp fjt ht wpnp kxhid;
edgfjt pfjtaadh qjaidh ctvgdh fjt paaí epgtrtc stqtc st htg, n hdc hxc
sjsp, pavjcdh tcrpcipsdgth fjt aatkpc wjgipsp pavjcp egxcrthp tc pfjta
rdrwt, n th btcthitg sthwprtg thit ijtgid p idsd bx edstgíd.

-Etdg htgá thid fjt adh bdaxcdh st kxtcid -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Bxgt, htñdg, fjt
pfjéaadh hdc ugpxath st Hpc Qtcxid, n ta rdrwt stqt st htg st pavjcp vtcit
ephpytgp. Bxgt fjt sxvd fjt bxgt qxtc ad fjt wprt, cd htp ta sxpqad fjt at
tcvpñt.

-Np it wt sxrwd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hpqth edrd st prwpfjt
st pktcijgph; ad fjt nd sxvd th ktgsps, n pwdgp ad ktgáh.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht pstapció n ht ejhd tc ap bxips sta rpbxcd edg sdcst
adh ugpxath ktcípc, n, tc aatvpcsd ipc rtgrp fjt p éa at epgtrxó fjt at
edsgípc díg ad fjt sxytht, tc paip kdo sxyd:

-Vtcit tcsxpqapsp n sthrdbjcpa, styps ajtvd pa ejcid aph paiph egxcrthph
fjt tc tht rdrwt aatkáxh udgopsph; hx cd, pepgtypdh p gtrtqxg egthip
bjtgit, edg yjhid rphixvd st kjthigph bpaph dqgph.

Stijkxtgdc adh ugpxath aph gxtcsph, n fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh, phí st ap uxvjgp
st sdc Fjxydit rdbd st hjh gpodcth, p aph rjpath gthedcsxtgdc:

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, cdhdigdh cd hdbdh tcsxpqapsdh cx sthrdbjcpath, hxcd sdh
gtaxvxdhdh st Hpc Qtcxid fjt kpbdh cjthigd rpbxcd, n cd hpqtbdh hx tc thit
rdrwt kxtctc, d cd, cxcvjcph udgopsph egxcrthph.

-Epgp rdcbxvd cd wpn epapqgph qapcsph, fjt np nd dh rdcdord, utbtcixsp
rpcpaap -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

N, hxc thetgpg báh gthejthip, exró p Gdrxcpcit n, ap apcop qpyp, pggtbtixó
rdcigp ta egxbtgd ugpxat, rdc ipcip ujgxp n stcjtsd fjt, hx ta ugpxat cd ht
stypgp rptg st ap bjap, éa at wxrxtgp ktcxg pa hjtad bpa st hj vgpsd, n pjc
bpautgxsd, hx cd rpntgp bjtgid. Ta htvjcsd gtaxvxdhd, fjt kxd sta bdsd fjt
igpipqpc p hj rdbepñtgd, ejhd extgcph pa rphixaad st hj qjtcp bjap, n
rdbtcoó p rdggtg edg pfjtaap rpbepñp, báh axvtgd fjt ta bthbd kxtcid.

Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt kxd tc ta hjtad pa ugpxat, petácsdht axvtgpbtcit st hj
phcd, pggtbtixó p éa n at rdbtcoó p fjxipg adh wáqxidh. Aatvpgdc tc thid
sdh bdodh st adh ugpxath n egtvjciágdcat fjt edg fjé at sthcjspqp.
Gthedcsxóath Hpcrwd fjt pfjtaad at idrpqp p éa axvíixbpbtcit, rdbd sthedydh
st ap qpipaap fjt hj htñdg sdc Fjxydit wpqíp vpcpsd. Adh bdodh, fjt cd
hpqípc st qjgaph, cx tcitcsípc pfjtaad st sthedydh cx qpipaaph, kxtcsd fjt
np sdc Fjxydit thipqp sthkxpsd st paaí, wpqapcsd rdc aph fjt tc ta rdrwt
ktcípc, pggtbtixtgdc rdc Hpcrwd n sxtgdc rdc éa tc ta hjtad; n, hxc stypgat
etad tc aph qpgqph, at bdaxtgdc p rdrth n at stypgdc itcsxsd tc ta hjtad
hxc paxtcid cx htcixsd. N, hxc stitctght jc ejcid, idgcó p hjqxg ta ugpxat,
idsd itbtgdhd n prdqpgspsd n hxc rdadg tc ta gdhigd; n, rjpcsd ht kxd p
rpqpaad, exró igph hj rdbepñtgd, fjt jc qjtc theprxd st paaí at thipqp
pvjpgspcsd, n thetgpcsd tc fjé epgpqp pfjta hdqgthpaid; n, hxc fjtgtg
pvjpgspg ta uxc st idsd pfjta rdbtcopsd hjrthd, hxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd,
wprxécsdht báh rgjrth fjt hx aatkpgpc pa sxpqad p aph thepasph.

Sdc Fjxydit thipqp, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, wpqapcsd rdc ap htñdgp sta rdrwt,
sxrxécsdat:

-Ap kjthigp utgbdhjgp, htñdgp bíp, ejtst uprtg st hj etghdcp ad fjt báh at
kxcxtgt tc ipapcit, edgfjt np ap hdqtgqxp st kjthigdh gdqpsdgth nprt edg ta
hjtad, stggxqpsp edg thit bx ujtgit qgpod; n, edgfjt cd etcéxh edg hpqtg ta
cdbqgt st kjthigd axqtgipsdg, hpqts fjt nd bt aapbd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, rpqpaatgd pcspcit n pktcijgtgd, n rpjixkd st ap hxc epg n wtgbdhp
sdñp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd; n, tc epvd sta qtctuxrxd fjt st bí wpqéxh
gtrtqxsd, cd fjxtgd digp rdhp hxcd fjt kdakáxh pa Idqdhd, n fjt st bx epgit
dh egthtciéxh pcit thip htñdgp n at sxváxh ad fjt edg kjthigp axqtgips wt
utrwd.

Idsd thid fjt sdc Fjxydit stríp thrjrwpqp jc thrjstgd st adh fjt ta rdrwt
prdbepñpqpc, fjt tgp kxorpícd; ta rjpa, kxtcsd fjt cd fjtgíp stypg ephpg ta
rdrwt pstapcit, hxcd fjt stríp fjt ajtvd wpqíp st spg ap kjtaip pa Idqdhd,
ht ujt epgp sdc Fjxydit n, phxécsdat st ap apcop, at sxyd, tc bpap atcvjp
rphitaapcp n etdg kxorpícp, sthip bpctgp:

-Pcsp, rpqpaatgd fjt bpa pcsth; edg ta Sxdh fjt rgxóbt, fjt, hx cd styph
rdrwt, phí it bpiph rdbd thiáh pwí kxorpícd.

Tcitcsxóat bjn qxtc sdc Fjxydit, n rdc bjrwd hdhxtvd at gthedcsxó:

-Hx ujtgph rpqpaatgd, rdbd cd ad tgth, np nd wjqxtgp rphixvpsd ij hpcsto n
pigtkxbxtcid, rpjixkp rgxpijgp.

P ad rjpa gteaxró ta kxorpícd:

-¿Nd cd rpqpaatgd? Yjgd p Sxdh ipc bxtcith rdbd rgxhixpcd. Hx apcop
pggdyph n thepsp hprph, ¡ta pvjp rjác egthid ktgáh fjt pa vpid aatkph!
Kxorpícd edg ixtggp, wxspavd edg bpg, wxspavd edg ta sxpqad; n bxtcith fjt
bxgp hx digp sxrth rdhp.

-¡Pwdgp ad ktgtsth, sxyd Pvgpyth! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

N, pggdypcsd ap apcop tc ta hjtad, hpró hj thepsp n tbqgpoó hj gdstap, n
pggtbtixó pa kxorpícd rdc stitgbxcprxóc st fjxipgat ap kxsp. Ta kxorpícd,
fjt phí at kxd ktcxg, pjcfjt fjxhxtgp petpght st ap bjap, fjt, edg htg st
aph bpaph st pafjxatg, cd wpqíp fjt uxpg tc taap, cd ejsd wprtg digp rdhp
hxcd hprpg hj thepsp; etgd pkícdat qxtc fjt ht wpaaó yjcid pa rdrwt, st
sdcst ejsd idbpg jcp pabdwpsp fjt at hxgkxó st thrjsd, n ajtvd ht ujtgdc ta
jcd epgp ta digd, rdbd hx ujtgpc sdh bdgipath tctbxvdh. Ap stbáh vtcit
fjxhxtgp edctgadh tc epo, bph cd ejsd, edgfjt stríp ta kxorpícd tc hjh bpa
igpqpsph gpodcth fjt hx cd at stypqpc prpqpg hj qpipaap, fjt éa bxhbd wpqíp
st bpipg p hj pbp n p idsp ap vtcit fjt ht ad thidgqpht. Ap htñdgp sta
rdrwt, psbxgpsp n itbtgdhp st ad fjt ktíp, wxod pa rdrwtgd fjt ht sthkxpht
st paaí pavúc edrd, n sthst atydh ht ejhd p bxgpg ap gxvjgdhp rdcixtcsp, tc
ta sxhrjghd st ap rjpa sxd ta kxorpícd jcp vgpc rjrwxaapsp p sdc Fjxydit
tcrxbp st jc wdbqgd, edg tcrxbp st ap gdstap, fjt, p sághtap hxc stutchp,
at pqgxtgp wphip ap rxcijgp. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt hxcixó ap ethpsjbqgt st pfjta
sthpudgpsd vdaet, sxd jcp vgpc kdo, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Dw htñdgp st bx pabp, Sjarxctp, uadg st ap utgbdhjgp, hdrdggts p thit
kjthigd rpqpaatgd, fjt, edg hpixhuprtg p ap kjthigp bjrwp qdcsps, tc thit
gxvjgdhd igpcrt ht wpaap!

Ta strxg thid, n ta pegtipg ap thepsp, n ta rjqgxght qxtc st hj gdstap, n
ta pggtbtitg pa kxorpícd, idsd ujt tc jc ixtbed, aatkpcsd stitgbxcprxóc st
pktcijgpgad idsd p ap st jc vdaet hdad.

Ta kxorpícd, fjt phí at kxd ktcxg rdcigp éa, qxtc tcitcsxó edg hj stcjtsd
hj rdgpyt, n stitgbxcó st wprtg ad bthbd fjt sdc Fjxydit; n phí, at pvjpgsó
qxtc rjqxtgid st hj pabdwpsp, hxc edstg gdstpg ap bjap p jcp cx p digp
epgit; fjt np, st ejgd rpchpsp n cd wtrwp p htbtypcith cxñtgíph, cd edsíp
spg jc ephd.

Ktcíp, ejth, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, sdc Fjxydit rdcigp ta rpjid kxorpícd, rdc ap
thepsp tc paid, rdc stitgbxcprxóc st pqgxgat edg btsxd, n ta kxorpícd at
pvjpgspqp pchxbthbd atkpcipsp ap thepsp n pudggpsd rdc hj pabdwpsp, n idsdh
adh rxgrjchipcith thipqpc itbtgdhdh n rdavpsdh st ad fjt wpqíp st hjrtstg
st pfjtaadh ipbpñdh vdaeth rdc fjt ht pbtcpopqpc; n ap htñdgp sta rdrwt n
aph stbáh rgxpsph hjnph thipqpc wprxtcsd bxa kdidh n dugtrxbxtcidh p idsph
aph xbávtcth n rphph st stkdrxóc st Thepñp, edgfjt Sxdh axqgpht p hj
thrjstgd n p taaph st pfjta ipc vgpcst etaxvgd tc fjt ht wpaapqpc.

Etgd thiá ta spñd st idsd thid fjt tc thit ejcid n iégbxcd styp etcsxtcit
ta pjidg sthip wxhidgxp thip qpipaap, sxhrjaeácsdht fjt cd wpaaó báh
thrgxid sthiph wpopñph st sdc Fjxydit st aph fjt styp gtutgxsph. Qxtc th
ktgsps fjt ta htvjcsd pjidg sthip dqgp cd fjxhd rgttg fjt ipc rjgxdhp
wxhidgxp thijkxtht tcigtvpsp p aph atnth sta dakxsd, cx fjt wjqxthtc hxsd
ipc edrd rjgxdhdh adh xcvtcxdh st ap Bpcrwp fjt cd ijkxthtc tc hjh pgrwxkdh
d tc hjh thrgxidgxdh pavjcdh epetath fjt sthit upbdhd rpqpaatgd igpiphtc; n
phí, rdc thip xbpvxcprxóc, cd ht sththetgó st wpaapg ta uxc sthip peprxqat
wxhidgxp, ta rjpa, hxécsdat ta rxtad upkdgpqat, at wpaaó sta bdsd fjt ht
rdcipgá tc ap htvjcsp epgit.

Htvjcsp epgit sta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp





Rpeíijad XM. Sdcst ht rdcrajnt n sp uxc p ap thijetcsp qpipaap fjt ta
vpaapgsd kxorpícd n ta kpaxtcit bpcrwtvd ijkxtgdc


Stypbdh tc ap egxbtgp epgit sthip wxhidgxp pa kpatgdhd kxorpícd n pa upbdhd
sdc Fjxydit rdc aph thepsph paiph n sthcjsph, tc vjxhp st sthrpgvpg sdh
ujgxqjcsdh utcsxtcith, ipath fjt, hx tc aatcd ht prtgipqpc, edg ad btcdh
ht sxkxsxgípc n utcstgípc st pggxqp pqpyd n pqgxgípc rdbd jcp vgpcpsp; n
fjt tc pfjta ejcid ipc sjsdhd epgó n fjtsó sthigdcrpsp ipc hpqgdhp
wxhidgxp, hxc fjt cdh sxtht cdixrxp hj pjidg sócst ht edsgíp wpaapg ad fjt
staap upaipqp.

Rpjhóbt thid bjrwp ethpsjbqgt, edgfjt ta vjhid st wpqtg atísd ipc edrd ht
kdakíp tc sxhvjhid, st etchpg ta bpa rpbxcd fjt ht dugtríp epgp wpaapg ad
bjrwd fjt, p bx epgtrtg, upaipqp st ipc hpqgdhd rjtcid. Epgtrxóbt rdhp
xbedhxqat n ujtgp st idsp qjtcp rdhijbqgt fjt p ipc qjtc rpqpaatgd at
wjqxtht upaipsd pavúc hpqxd fjt idbpgp p rpgvd ta thrgtqxg hjh cjcrp kxhiph
wpopñph, rdhp fjt cd upaió p cxcvjcd st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith,

   st adh fjt sxrtc aph vtcith
   fjt kpc p hjh pktcijgph,

edgfjt rpsp jcd staadh itcíp jcd d sdh hpqxdh, rdbd st bdast, fjt cd
hdapbtcit thrgxqípc hjh wtrwdh, hxcd fjt excipqpc hjh báh bícxbdh
etchpbxtcidh n cxñtgíph, edg báh thrdcsxsph fjt ujthtc; n cd wpqíp st htg
ipc sthsxrwpsd ipc qjtc rpqpaatgd, fjt at upaipht p éa ad fjt hdqgó p
Eapixg n p digdh htbtypcith. N phí, cd edsíp xcraxcpgbt p rgttg fjt ipc
vpaapgsp wxhidgxp wjqxtht fjtspsd bpcrp n thigdetpsp; n trwpqp ap rjaep p
ap bpaxvcxsps sta ixtbed, stkdgpsdg n rdchjbxsdg st idsph aph rdhph, ta
rjpa, d ap itcíp drjaip d rdchjbxsp.

Edg digp epgit, bt epgtríp fjt, ejth tcigt hjh axqgdh ht wpqípc wpaapsd ipc
bdstgcdh rdbd Sthtcvpñd st rtadh n Cxcuph n Ephidgth st Wtcpgth, fjt
ipbqxéc hj wxhidgxp stqíp st htg bdstgcp; n fjt, np fjt cd thijkxtht
thrgxip, thipgíp tc ap btbdgxp st ap vtcit st hj pastp n st aph p taap
rxgrjcktrxcph. Thip xbpvxcprxóc bt igpíp rdcujhd n sthtdhd st hpqtg, gtpa n
ktgspstgpbtcit, idsp ap kxsp n bxapvgdh st cjthigd upbdhd thepñda sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ajo n thetyd st ap rpqpaatgíp bpcrwtvp, n ta egxbtgd
fjt tc cjthigp tsps n tc thidh ipc rpapbxidhdh ixtbedh ht ejhd pa igpqpyd n
tytgrxrxd st aph pcspcith pgbph, n pa sthuprtg pvgpkxdh, hdrdggtg kxjsph,
pbepgpg sdcrtaaph, st pfjtaaph fjt pcspqpc rdc hjh podith n epapugtcth, n
rdc idsp hj kxgvxcxsps p rjthiph, st bdcit tc bdcit n st kpaat tc kpaat;
fjt, hx cd tgp fjt pavúc udaaóc, d pavúc kxaapcd st wprwp n rpetaaxcp, d
pavúc sthrdbjcpa vxvpcit aph udgopqp, sdcrtaap wjqd tc adh ephpsdh ixtbedh
fjt, pa rpqd st drwtcip pñdh, fjt tc idsdh taadh cd sjgbxó jc síp stqpyd st
itypsd, n ht ujt ipc tcitgp p ap htejaijgp rdbd ap bpsgt fjt ap wpqíp
epgxsd. Sxvd, ejth, fjt, edg thidh n digdh bjrwdh gthetidh, th sxvcd
cjthigd vpaapgsd Fjxydit st rdcixcjph n btbdgpqath papqpcoph; n pjc p bí cd
ht bt stqtc ctvpg, edg ta igpqpyd n sxaxvtcrxp fjt ejht tc qjhrpg ta uxc
sthip pvgpspqat wxhidgxp; pjcfjt qxtc hé fjt hx ta rxtad, ta rphd n ap
udgijcp cd bt pnjspc, ta bjcsd fjtspgá upaid n hxc ta ephpixtbed n vjhid
fjt qxtc rphx sdh wdgph edsgá itctg ta fjt rdc pitcrxóc ap atntgt. Ephó,
ejth, ta wpaapgap tc thip bpctgp:

Thipcsd nd jc síp tc ta Parpcá st Idatsd, aatvó jc bjrwprwd p ktcstg jcdh
rpgipeprxdh n epetath kxtydh p jc htstgd; n, rdbd nd hdn puxrxdcpsd p attg,
pjcfjt htpc adh epetath gdidh st aph rpaath, aatkpsd sthip bx cpijgpa
xcraxcprxóc, idbé jc rpgipeprxd st adh fjt ta bjrwprwd ktcsíp, n kxat rdc
rpgpritgth fjt rdcdrí htg pgáqxvdh. N, ejthid fjt, pjcfjt adh rdcdríp, cd
adh hpqíp attg, pcsjkt bxgpcsd hx epgtríp edg paaí pavúc bdgxhrd paypbxpsd
fjt adh atntht; n cd ujt bjn sxuxrjaidhd wpaapg xciégegtit htbtypcit, ejth,
pjcfjt at qjhrpgp st digp btydg n báh pcixvjp atcvjp, at wpaapgp. Tc uxc,
ap hjtgit bt stepgó jcd, fjt, sxrxécsdat bx sthtd n edcxécsdat ta axqgd tc
aph bpcdh, at pqgxó edg btsxd, n, atntcsd jc edrd tc éa, ht rdbtcoó p gtíg.

Egtvjciéat nd fjt st fjé ht gtíp, n gthedcsxóbt fjt st jcp rdhp fjt itcíp
pfjta axqgd thrgxip tc ta bpgvtc edg pcdiprxóc. Síytat fjt bt ap sxytht; n
éa, hxc stypg ap gxhp, sxyd:

-Thiá, rdbd wt sxrwd, pfjí tc ta bpgvtc thrgxid thid: "Thip Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, ipciph ktrth tc thip wxhidgxp gtutgxsp, sxrtc fjt ijkd ap btydg
bpcd epgp hpapg ejtgrdh fjt digp bjytg st idsp ap Bpcrwp".

Rjpcsd nd dí strxg "Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd", fjtsé piócxid n hjhetchd, edgfjt
ajtvd ht bt gtegthtció fjt pfjtaadh rpgipeprxdh rdcitcípc ap wxhidgxp st
sdc Fjxydit. Rdc thip xbpvxcprxóc, at sx egxthp fjt atntht ta egxcrxexd, n,
wprxécsdad pchí, kdakxtcsd st xbegdkxhd ta pgáqxvd tc rphitaapcd, sxyd fjt
stríp: Wxhidgxp st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, thrgxip edg Rxst Wpbtit
Qtctcvtax, wxhidgxpsdg pgáqxvd. Bjrwp sxhrgtrxóc ujt btcthitg epgp
sxhxbjapg ta rdcitcid fjt gtrtqí rjpcsd aatvó p bxh dísdh ta iíijad sta
axqgd; n, hpaitácsdhtat pa htstgd, rdbegé pa bjrwprwd idsdh adh epetath n
rpgipeprxdh edg btsxd gtpa; fjt, hx éa ijkxtgp sxhrgtrxóc n hjextgp ad fjt
nd adh sthtpqp, qxtc ht ejsxtgp egdbtitg n aatkpg báh st htxh gtpath st ap
rdbegp. Pepgiébt ajtvd rdc ta bdgxhrd edg ta rapjhigd st ap xvathxp bpndg,
n gdvjéat bt kdakxtht pfjtaadh rpgipeprxdh, idsdh adh fjt igpipqpc st sdc
Fjxydit, tc atcvjp rphitaapcp, hxc fjxipgath cx pñpsxgath cpsp,
dugtrxécsdat ap epvp fjt éa fjxhxtht. Rdcitcióht rdc sdh pggdqph st ephph n
sdh upctvph st igxvd, n egdbtixó st igpsjrxgadh qxtc n uxtabtcit n rdc
bjrwp qgtktsps. Etgd nd, edg uprxaxipg báh ta ctvdrxd n edg cd stypg st ap
bpcd ipc qjtc wpaapovd, at igjyt p bx rphp, sdcst tc edrd báh st bth n
btsxd ap igpsjyd idsp, sta bthbd bdsd fjt pfjí ht gtuxtgt.

Thipqp tc ta egxbtgd rpgipeprxd, excipsp bjn pa cpijgpa, ap qpipaap st sdc
Fjxydit rdc ta kxorpícd, ejthidh tc ap bthbp edhijgp fjt ap wxhidgxp
rjtcip, atkpcipsph aph thepsph, ta jcd rjqxtgid st hj gdstap, ta digd st ap
pabdwpsp, n ap bjap sta kxorpícd ipc pa kxkd, fjt thipqp bdhigpcsd htg st
pafjxatg p ixgd st qpaathip. Itcíp p adh exth thrgxid ta kxorpícd jc iíijad
fjt stríp: Sdc Hpcrwd st Poetixp, fjt, hxc sjsp, stqíp st htg hj cdbqgt, n
p adh exth st Gdrxcpcit thipqp digd fjt stríp: Sdc Fjxydit. Thipqp
Gdrxcpcit bpgpkxaadhpbtcit excipsd, ipc apgvd n itcsxsd, ipc pitcjpsd n
uaprd, rdc ipcid thexcpod, ipc wéixrd rdcuxgbpsd, fjt bdhigpqp qxtc pa
sthrjqxtgid rdc rjácip psktgitcrxp n egdegxtsps ht at wpqíp ejthid ta
cdbqgt st Gdrxcpcit. Yjcid p éa thipqp Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt itcíp sta rpqthigd
p hj phcd, p adh exth sta rjpa thipqp digd géijad fjt stríp: Hpcrwd Opcrph,
n stqíp st htg fjt itcíp, p ad fjt bdhigpqp ap excijgp, ap qpggxvp vgpcst,
ta ipaat rdgid n aph opcrph apgvph; n edg thid ht at stqxó st edctg cdbqgt
st Epcop n st Opcrph, fjt rdc thidh sdh hdqgtcdbqgth at aapbp pavjcph ktrth
ap wxhidgxp. Digph pavjcph btcjstcrxph wpqíp fjt psktgixg, etgd idsph hdc
st edrp xbedgipcrxp n fjt cd wprtc pa rphd p ap ktgspstgp gtaprxóc st ap
wxhidgxp; fjt cxcvjcp th bpap rdbd htp ktgspstgp.

Hx p éhip ht at ejtst edctg pavjcp dqytrxóc rtgrp st hj ktgsps, cd edsgá
htg digp hxcd wpqtg hxsd hj pjidg pgáqxvd, hxtcsd bjn egdexd st adh st
pfjtaap cprxóc htg btcixgdhdh; pjcfjt, edg htg ipc cjthigdh tctbxvdh, pcith
ht ejtst tcitcstg wpqtg fjtspsd upaid tc taap fjt stbphxpsd. N pchí bt
epgtrt p bí, ejth, rjpcsd ejsxtgp n stqxtgp thitcstg ap eajbp tc aph
papqpcoph st ipc qjtc rpqpaatgd, epgtrt fjt st xcsjhigxp aph ephp tc
hxatcrxd: rdhp bpa wtrwp n etdg etchpsp, wpqxtcsd n stqxtcsd htg adh
wxhidgxpsdgth ejcijpath, ktgspstgdh n cd cpsp pephxdcpsdh, n fjt cx ta
xcitgéh cx ta bxtsd, ta gpcrdg cx ap puxrxóc, cd ath wpvpc idgrtg sta
rpbxcd st ap ktgsps, rjnp bpsgt th ap wxhidgxp, ébjap sta ixtbed, steóhxid
st aph prrxdcth, ithixvd st ad ephpsd, tytbead n pkxhd st ad egthtcit,
psktgitcrxp st ad edg ktcxg. Tc éhip hé fjt ht wpaapgá idsd ad fjt ht
prtgipgt p sthtpg tc ap báh peprxqat; n hx pavd qjtcd tc taap upaipgt, epgp
bí itcvd fjt ujt edg rjaep sta vpavd st hj pjidg, pcith fjt edg upaip sta
hjytid. Tc uxc, hj htvjcsp epgit, hxvjxtcsd ap igpsjrxóc, rdbtcopqp sthip
bpctgp:

Ejthiph n atkpcipsph tc paid aph rdgipsdgph thepsph st adh sdh kpatgdhdh n
tcdypsdh rdbqpixtcith, cd epgtríp hxcd fjt thipqpc pbtcpopcsd pa rxtad, p
ap ixtggp n pa pqxhbd: ipa tgp ta stcjtsd n rdcixctcit fjt itcípc. N ta
egxbtgd fjt ujt p sthrpgvpg ta vdaet ujt ta rdaégxrd kxorpícd, ta rjpa ujt
spsd rdc ipcip ujtgop n ipcip ujgxp fjt, p cd kdakéghtat ap thepsp tc ta
rpbxcd, pfjta hdad vdaet ujtgp qphipcit epgp spg uxc p hj gxvjgdhp
rdcixtcsp n p idsph aph pktcijgph st cjthigd rpqpaatgd; bph ap qjtcp
hjtgit, fjt epgp bpndgth rdhph at itcíp vjpgspsd, idgrxó ap thepsp st hj
rdcigpgxd, st bdsd fjt, pjcfjt at prtgió tc ta wdbqgd xofjxtgsd, cd at wxod
digd spñd fjt sthpgbpgat idsd pfjta apsd, aatkácsdat st rpbxcd vgpc epgit
st ap rtapsp, rdc ap bxips st ap dgtyp; fjt idsd taad rdc thepcidhp gjxcp
kxcd pa hjtad, styácsdat bjn bpaigtrwd.

¡Káapbt Sxdh, n fjxéc htgá pfjta fjt qjtcpbtcit ejtsp rdcipg pwdgp ap gpqxp
fjt tcigó tc ta rdgpoóc st cjthigd bpcrwtvd, kxécsdht epgpg st pfjtaap
bpctgp! Cd ht sxvp báh, hxcd fjt ujt st bpctgp fjt ht paoó st cjtkd tc adh
thigxqdh, n, pegtipcsd báh ap thepsp tc aph sdh bpcdh, rdc ipa ujgxp
sthrpgvó hdqgt ta kxorpícd, prtgiácsdat st aatcd hdqgt ap pabdwpsp n hdqgt
ap rpqtop, fjt, hxc htg epgit ipc qjtcp stutchp, rdbd hx rpntgp hdqgt éa
jcp bdcipñp, rdbtcoó p trwpg hpcvgt edg aph cpgxrth, n edg ap qdrp n edg
adh dísdh, n p spg bjthigph st rptg st ap bjap pqpyd, st sdcst rpntgp, hxc
sjsp, hx cd ht pqgpopgp rdc ta rjtaad; etgd, rdc idsd thd, hpró adh exth st
adh thigxqdh n ajtvd hdaió adh qgpodh; n ap bjap, thepcipsp sta itggxqat
vdaet, sxd p rdggtg edg ta rpbed, n p edrdh rdgrdkdh sxd rdc hj sjtñd tc
ixtggp.

Thiáqphtad rdc bjrwd hdhxtvd bxgpcsd sdc Fjxydit, n, rdbd ad kxd rptg,
hpaió st hj rpqpaad n rdc bjrwp axvtgtop ht aatvó p éa, n, edcxécsdat ap
ejcip st ap thepsp tc adh dydh, at sxyd fjt ht gxcsxtht; hx cd, fjt at
rdgipgíp ap rpqtop. Thipqp ta kxorpícd ipc ijgqpsd fjt cd edsíp gthedcstg
epapqgp, n éa ad ephpgp bpa, htvúc thipqp rxtvd sdc Fjxydit, hx aph htñdgph
sta rdrwt, fjt wphip tcidcrth rdc vgpc sthbpnd wpqípc bxgpsd ap etcstcrxp,
cd ujtgpc psdcst thipqp n at exsxtgpc rdc bjrwd tcrpgtrxbxtcid ath wxrxtht
ipc vgpc btgrts n upkdg st etgsdcpg ap kxsp p pfjta hj thrjstgd. P ad rjpa
sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó, rdc bjrwd tcidcd n vgpktsps:

-Edg rxtgid, utgbdhph htñdgph, nd hdn bjn rdcitcid st wprtg ad fjt bt
etsíh; bph wp st htg rdc jcp rdcsxrxóc n rdcrxtgid, n th fjt thit rpqpaatgd
bt wp st egdbtitg st xg pa ajvpg sta Idqdhd n egthtcipght st bx epgit pcit
ap hxc epg sdñp Sjarxctp, epgp fjt taap wpvp séa ad fjt báh ujtgt st hj
kdajcips.

Ap itbtgdhp n sthrdchdapsp htñdgp, hxc tcigpg tc rjtcip st ad fjt sdc
Fjxydit etsíp, n hxc egtvjcipg fjxéc Sjarxctp ujtht, at egdbtixó fjt ta
thrjstgd wpgíp idsd pfjtaad fjt st hj epgit at ujtht bpcspsd.

-Ejth tc ut st thp epapqgp, nd cd at wpgé báh spñd, ejthid fjt bt ad itcíp
qxtc btgtrxsd.





Rpeíijad M. St ad fjt báh at pkxcd p sdc Fjxydit rdc ta kxorpícd, n sta
etaxvgd tc fjt ht kxd rdc jcp ijgqp st npcvüthth


Np tc thit ixtbed ht wpqíp atkpcipsd Hpcrwd Epcop, pavd bpaigpipsd st adh
bdodh st adh ugpxath, n wpqíp thipsd pitcid p ap qpipaap st hj htñdg sdc
Fjxydit, n gdvpqp p Sxdh tc hj rdgpoóc ujtht htgkxsd st spgat kxidgxp n fjt
tc taap vpcpht pavjcp íchjap st sdcst at wxrxtht vdqtgcpsdg, rdbd ht ad
wpqíp egdbtixsd. Kxtcsd, ejth, np prpqpsp ap etcstcrxp, n fjt hj pbd kdakíp
p hjqxg hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, aatvó p itctgat ta thigxqd; n pcith fjt hjqxtht ht
wxcró st gdsxaaph stapcit séa, n, phxécsdat st ap bpcd, ht ap qthó n at
sxyd:

-Htp kjthigp btgrts htgkxsd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit bíd, st spgbt ta vdqxtgcd st
ap íchjap fjt tc thip gxvjgdhp etcstcrxp ht wp vpcpsd; fjt, edg vgpcst fjt
htp, nd bt hxtcid rdc ujtgoph st hpqtgap vdqtgcpg ipa n ipc qxtc rdbd digd
fjt wpnp vdqtgcpsd íchjaph tc ta bjcsd.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Psktgixs, wtgbpcd Hpcrwd, fjt thip pktcijgp n aph p éhip htbtypcith cd
hdc pktcijgph st íchjaph, hxcd st tcrgjrxypsph, tc aph rjpath cd ht vpcp
digp rdhp fjt hprpg gdip ap rpqtop d jcp dgtyp btcdh. Itcts eprxtcrxp, fjt
pktcijgph ht dugtrtgác sdcst cd hdapbtcit dh ejtsp wprtg vdqtgcpsdg, hxcd
báh pstapcit.

Pvgpstrxóhtad bjrwd Hpcrwd, n, qthácsdat digp kto ap bpcd n ap upasp st ap
adgxvp, at pnjsó p hjqxg hdqgt Gdrxcpcit; n éa hjqxó hdqgt hj phcd n
rdbtcoó p htvjxg p hj htñdg, fjt, p ephd ixgpsd, hxc sthetsxght cx wpqapg
báh rdc aph sta rdrwt, ht tcigó edg jc qdhfjt fjt paaí yjcid thipqp.
Htvjípat Hpcrwd p idsd ta igdit st hj yjbtcid, etgd rpbxcpqp ipcid
Gdrxcpcit fjt, kxécsdht fjtspg pigáh, at ujt udgodhd spg kdrth p hj pbd fjt
ht pvjpgspht. Wíodad phí sdc Fjxydit, itcxtcsd aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit
wphip fjt aatvpht hj rpchpsd thrjstgd, ta rjpa, tc aatvpcsd, at sxyd:

-Epgértbt, htñdg, fjt htgíp prtgipsd xgcdh p gtigptg p pavjcp xvathxp; fjt,
htvúc fjtsó bpaigtrwd pfjta rdc fjxtc dh rdbqpixhith, cd htgá bjrwd fjt stc
cdixrxp sta rphd p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps n cdh egtcspc; n p ut fjt hx ad
wprtc, fjt egxbtgd fjt hpavpbdh st ap rágrta fjt cdh wp st hjspg ta wded.

-Rpaap -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. N ¿sócst wph kxhid iú, d atísd ypbáh, fjt
rpqpaatgd pcspcit wpnp hxsd ejthid pcit ap yjhixrxp, edg báh wdbxrxsxdh fjt
wjqxtht rdbtixsd?

-Nd cd hé cpsp st dbtrxaadh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cx tc bx kxsp at rpié p
cxcvjcd; hóad hé fjt ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps ixtct fjt ktg rdc adh fjt etatpc tc
ta rpbed, n tc thdigd cd bt tcigtbtid.

-Ejth cd itcvph etcp, pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd it hprpgé st
aph bpcdh st adh rpastdh, rjpcid báh st aph st ap Wtgbpcsps. Etgd sxbt, edg
ij kxsp: ¿wph kxhid báh kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd fjt nd tc idsd ad sthrjqxtgid st
ap ixtggp? ¿Wph atísd tc wxhidgxph digd fjt itcvp cx wpnp itcxsd báh qgíd
tc prdbtitg, báh paxtcid tc ta etghtktgpg, báh sthigtop tc ta wtgxg, cx báh
bpñp tc ta stggxqpg?

-Ap ktgsps htp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt nd cd wt atísd cxcvjcp wxhidgxp
ypbáh, edgfjt cx hé attg cx thrgtqxg; bph ad fjt dhpgé pedhipg th fjt báh
pigtkxsd pbd fjt kjthigp btgrts nd cd at wt htgkxsd tc idsdh adh síph st bx
kxsp, n fjxtgp Sxdh fjt thidh pigtkxbxtcidh cd ht epvjtc sdcst itcvd
sxrwd. Ad fjt at gjtvd p kjthigp btgrts th fjt ht rjgt, fjt at kp bjrwp
hpcvgt st thp dgtyp; fjt pfjí igpxvd wxaph n jc edrd st jcvütcid qapcrd tc
aph paudgyph.

-Idsd thd ujtgp qxtc thrjhpsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- hx p bí ht bt
prdgspgp st wprtg jcp gtsdbp sta qáahpbd st Uxtgpqgáh, fjt rdc hdap jcp
vdip ht pwdggpgpc ixtbed n btsxrxcph.

-¿Fjé gtsdbp n fjé qáahpbd th éht? -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop.

-Th jc qáahpbd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- st fjxtc itcvd ap gtrtip tc ap
btbdgxp, rdc ta rjpa cd wpn fjt itctg itbdg p ap bjtgit, cx wpn etchpg
bdgxg st utgxsp pavjcp. N pchí, rjpcsd nd at wpvp n it at sé, cd ixtcth báh
fjt wprtg hxcd fjt, rjpcsd kxtgth fjt tc pavjcp qpipaap bt wpc epgixsd edg
btsxd sta rjtged (rdbd bjrwph ktrth hjtat prdcitrtg), qdcxipbtcit ap epgit
sta rjtged fjt wjqxtgt rpísd tc ta hjtad, n rdc bjrwp hdixatop, pcith fjt
ap hpcvgt ht ntat, ap edcsgáh hdqgt ap digp bxips fjt fjtspgt tc ap hxaap,
pskxgixtcsd st tcrpypaad xvjpabtcit n pa yjhid; ajtvd bt spgáh p qtqtg
hdadh sdh igpvdh sta qáahpbd fjt wt sxrwd, n ktgáhbt fjtspg báh hpcd fjt
jcp bpcopcp.

-Hx thd wpn -sxyd Epcop-, nd gtcjcrxd sthst pfjí ta vdqxtgcd st ap
egdbtixsp íchjap, n cd fjxtgd digp rdhp, tc epvd st bxh bjrwdh n qjtcdh
htgkxrxdh, hxcd fjt kjthigp btgrts bt sé ap gtrtip st tht thigtbpsd axrdg;
fjt epgp bí itcvd fjt kpasgá ap dcop psdcstfjxtgp báh st p sdh gtpath, n cd
wt btcthitg nd báh epgp ephpg thip kxsp wdcgpsp n sthrpchpspbtcit. Etgd th
st hpqtg pvdgp hx ixtct bjrwp rdhip ta wprtaat.

-Rdc btcdh st igth gtpath ht ejtstc wprtg igth pojbqgth -gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit.

-¡Etrpsdg st bí! -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. ¿Ejth p fjé pvjpgsp kjthigp btgrts p
wprtaat n p tchtñágbtat?

-Rpaap, pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt bpndgth htrgtidh extchd
tchtñpgit n bpndgth btgrtsth wprtgit; n, edg pvdgp, rjgébdcdh, fjt ap dgtyp
bt sjtat báh st ad fjt nd fjxhxtgp.

Hpró Hpcrwd st aph paudgyph wxaph n jcvütcid. Bph, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit aatvó
p ktg gdip hj rtapsp, etchó etgstg ta yjxrxd, n, ejthip ap bpcd tc ap
thepsp n paopcsd adh dydh pa rxtad, sxyd:

-Nd wpvd yjgpbtcid pa Rgxpsdg st idsph aph rdhph n p adh hpcidh rjpigd
Tkpcvtaxdh, sdcst báh apgvpbtcit thiác thrgxidh, st wprtg ap kxsp fjt wxod
ta vgpcst bpgfjéh st Bpcijp rjpcsd yjgó st ktcvpg ap bjtgit st hj hdqgxcd
Kpasdkxcdh, fjt ujt st cd rdbtg epc p bpcitath, cx rdc hj bjytg udavpg, n
digph rdhph fjt, pjcfjt staaph cd bt prjtgsd, aph sdn pfjí edg tmegthpsph,
wphip idbpg tcitgp ktcvpcop sta fjt ipa sthpvjxhpsd bt uxod.

Dntcsd thid Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Pskxtgip kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt hx ta rpqpaatgd rjbeaxó ad
fjt ht at styó dgstcpsd st xght p egthtcipg pcit bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, np wpqgá rjbeaxsd rdc ad fjt stqíp, n cd btgtrt digp etcp hx cd
rdbtit cjtkd staxid.

-Wph wpqapsd n pejcipsd bjn qxtc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n phí, pcjad ta
yjgpbtcid tc rjpcid ad fjt idrp p idbpg séa cjtkp ktcvpcop; etgd wávdat n
rdcuígbdat st cjtkd st wprtg ap kxsp fjt wt sxrwd, wphip ipcid fjt fjxit
edg ujtgop digp rtapsp ipa n ipc qjtcp rdbd éhip p pavúc rpqpaatgd. N cd
extchth, Hpcrwd, fjt phí p wjbd st epyph wpvd thid, fjt qxtc itcvd p fjxtc
xbxipg tc taad; fjt thid bthbd ephó, pa ext st ap atigp, hdqgt ta ntabd st
Bpbqgxcd, fjt ipc rpgd at rdhió p Hprgxepcit.

-Fjt sé pa sxpqad kjthigp btgrts ipath yjgpbtcidh, htñdg bíd -gteaxró
Hpcrwd-; fjt hdc bjn tc spñd st ap hpajs n bjn tc etgyjxrxd st ap
rdcrxtcrxp. Hx cd, sívpbt pwdgp: hx prphd tc bjrwdh síph cd idepbdh wdbqgt
pgbpsd rdc rtapsp, ¿fjé wtbdh st wprtg? ¿Wpht st rjbeaxg ta yjgpbtcid, p
sthetrwd st ipcidh xcrdcktcxtcith t xcrdbdsxspsth, rdbd htgá ta sdgbxg
kthixsd, n ta cd sdgbxg tc edqapsd, n digph bxa etcxitcrxph fjt rdcitcíp ta
yjgpbtcid st pfjta adrd kxtyd sta bpgfjéh st Bpcijp, fjt kjthigp btgrts
fjxtgt gtkpaxspg pwdgp? Bxgt kjthigp btgrts qxtc, fjt edg idsdh thidh
rpbxcdh cd pcspc wdbqgth pgbpsdh, hxcd pggxtgdh n rpggtitgdh, fjt cd hóad
cd igptc rtapsph, etgd fjxoá cd aph wpc dísd cdbqgpg tc idsdh adh síph st
hj kxsp.

-Tcváñphit tc thd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cd wpqgtbdh thipsd sdh wdgph
edg thiph tcrgjrxypsph, rjpcsd ktpbdh báh pgbpsdh fjt adh fjt kxcxtgdc
hdqgt Paqgprp p ap rdcfjxhip st Pcvéaxrp ap Qtaap.

-Paid, ejth; htp pchí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n p Sxdh egpovp fjt cdh hjrtsp qxtc, n
fjt ht aatvjt np ta ixtbed st vpcpg thip íchjap fjt ipc rpgp bt rjthip, n
bjégpbt nd ajtvd.

-Np it wt sxrwd, Hpcrwd, fjt cd it sé thd rjxspsd pavjcd; fjt, rjpcsd
upaipgt íchjap, pwí thiá ta gtxcd st Sxcpbpgrp d ta st Hdaxpsxhp, fjt it
ktcsgác rdbd pcxaad pa stsd; n báh, fjt, edg htg tc ixtggp uxgbt, it stqth
báh patvgpg. Etgd stytbdh thid epgp hj ixtbed, n bxgp hx igpth pavd tc thph
paudgyph fjt rdbpbdh, edgfjt kpbdh ajtvd tc qjhrp st pavúc rphixaad sdcst
padytbdh thip cdrwt n wpvpbdh ta qáahpbd fjt it wt sxrwd; edgfjt nd it kdid
p Sxdh fjt bt kp sdaxtcsd bjrwd ap dgtyp.

-Pfjí igpnd jcp rtqdaap, n jc edrd st fjthd n cd hé rjácidh btcsgjvdh st
epc -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd cd hdc bpcypgth fjt etgitctrtc p ipc kpaxtcit
rpqpaatgd rdbd kjthigp btgrts.

-¡Fjé bpa ad tcixtcsth! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Wávdit hpqtg, Hpcrwd, fjt
th wdcgp st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith cd rdbtg tc jc bth; n, np fjt rdbpc,
htp st pfjtaad fjt wpaapgtc báh p bpcd; n thid ht it wxrxtgp rxtgid hx
wjqxtgph atísd ipciph wxhidgxph rdbd nd; fjt, pjcfjt wpc hxsd bjrwph, tc
idsph taaph cd wt wpaapsd wtrwp gtaprxóc st fjt adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith
rdbxthtc, hx cd tgp prphd n tc pavjcdh hjcijdhdh qpcfjtith fjt ath wprípc,
n adh stbáh síph ht adh ephpqpc tc uadgth. N, pjcfjt ht styp tcitcstg fjt
cd edsípc ephpg hxc rdbtg n hxc wprtg idsdh adh digdh btcthitgth cpijgpath,
edgfjt, tc tutid, tgpc wdbqgth rdbd cdhdigdh, wpht st tcitcstg ipbqxéc fjt,
pcspcsd ad báh sta ixtbed st hj kxsp edg aph uadgthiph n sthedqapsdh, n hxc
rdrxctgd, fjt hj báh dgsxcpgxp rdbxsp htgíp st kxpcsph gúhixrph, ipath rdbd
aph fjt iú pwdgp bt dugtrth. Phí fjt, Hpcrwd pbxvd, cd it rdcvdyt ad fjt p
bí bt sp vjhid. Cx fjtggáh iú wprtg bjcsd cjtkd, cx hprpg ap rpqpaatgíp
pcspcit st hjh fjxrxdh.

-Etgsóctbt kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd-; fjt, rdbd nd cd hé attg cx
thrgtqxg, rdbd digp kto wt sxrwd, cd hé cx wt rpísd tc aph gtvaph st ap
egduthxóc rpqpaatgthrp; n, st pfjí pstapcit, nd egdkttgé aph paudgyph st
idsd véctgd st ugjip htrp epgp kjthigp btgrts, fjt th rpqpaatgd, n epgp bí
aph egdkttgé, ejth cd ad hdn, st digph rdhph kdaáixath n st báh hjhipcrxp.

-Cd sxvd nd, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt htp udgodhd p adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith cd rdbtg digp rdhp hxcd thph ugjiph fjt sxrth, hxcd fjt hj báh
dgsxcpgxd hjhitcid stqíp st htg staaph, n st pavjcph ntgqph fjt wpaapqpc
edg adh rpbedh, fjt taadh rdcdrípc n nd ipbqxéc rdcdord.

-Kxgijs th -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- rdcdrtg thph ntgqph; fjt, htvúc nd bt kdn
xbpvxcpcsd, pavúc síp htgá btcthitg jhpg st tht rdcdrxbxtcid.

N, hprpcsd, tc thid, ad fjt sxyd fjt igpíp, rdbxtgdc adh sdh tc qjtcp epo n
rdbepñp. Etgd, sthtdhdh st qjhrpg sdcst padypg pfjtaap cdrwt, prpqpgdc rdc
bjrwp qgtktsps hj edqgt n htrp rdbxsp. Hjqxtgdc ajtvd p rpqpaad, n sxégdcht
egxthp edg aatvpg p edqapsd pcith fjt pcdrwtrxtht; etgd upaióath ta hda, n
ap thetgpcop st parpcopg ad fjt sthtpqpc, yjcid p jcph rwdoph st jcdh
rpqgtgdh, n phí, stitgbxcpgdc st ephpgap paaí; fjt rjpcid ujt st ethpsjbqgt
epgp Hpcrwd cd aatvpg p edqapsd, ujt st rdcitcid epgp hj pbd sdgbxgap pa
rxtad sthrjqxtgid, edg epgtrtgat fjt rpsp kto fjt thid at hjrtsíp tgp wprtg
jc prid edhthxkd fjt uprxaxipqp ap egjtqp st hj rpqpaatgíp.





Rpeíijad MX. St ad fjt at hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit rdc jcdh rpqgtgdh


Ujt gtrdvxsd st adh rpqgtgdh rdc qjtc ácxbd; n, wpqxtcsd Hpcrwd, ad btydg
fjt ejsd, prdbdspsd p Gdrxcpcit n p hj yjbtcid, ht ujt igph ta dadg fjt
sthetsípc st hí rxtgidh iphpydh st rpqgp fjt wxgkxtcsd pa ujtvd tc jc
rpastgd thipqpc; n, pjcfjt éa fjxhxtgp tc pfjta bthbd ejcid ktg hx thipqpc
tc hpoóc st igphapspgadh sta rpastgd pa thióbpvd, ad styó st wprtg, edgfjt
adh rpqgtgdh adh fjxipgdc sta ujtvd, n, itcsxtcsd edg ta hjtad jcph extath
st dktyph, pstgtopgdc rdc bjrwp egxthp hj gúhixrp bthp n rdckxspgdc p adh
sdh, rdc bjthigph st bjn qjtcp kdajcips, rdc ad fjt itcípc. Htciágdcht p ap
gtsdcsp st aph extath htxh staadh, fjt tgpc adh fjt tc ap bpypsp wpqíp,
wpqxtcsd egxbtgd rdc vgdhtgph rtgtbdcxph gdvpsd p sdc Fjxydit fjt ht
htcipht hdqgt jc sdgcpyd fjt kjtaid sta gtkéh at ejhxtgdc. Htcióht sdc
Fjxydit, n fjtsáqpht Hpcrwd tc ext epgp htgkxgat ap rdep, fjt tgp wtrwp st
rjtgcd. Kxécsdat tc ext hj pbd, at sxyd:

-Edgfjt ktph, Hpcrwd, ta qxtc fjt tc hí tcrxtggp ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, n
rjác p exfjt thiác adh fjt tc rjpafjxtgp bxcxhitgxd staap ht tytgrxipc st
ktcxg qgtktbtcit p htg wdcgpsdh n thixbpsdh sta bjcsd, fjxtgd fjt pfjí p bx
apsd n tc rdbepñíp sthip qjtcp vtcit it hxtcith, n fjt htph jcp bthbp rdhp
rdcbxvd, fjt hdn ij pbd n cpijgpa htñdg; fjt rdbph tc bx eapid n qtqph edg
sdcst nd qtqxtgt; edgfjt st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit ht ejtst strxg ad bthbd
fjt sta pbdg ht sxrt: fjt idsph aph rdhph xvjpap.

-¡Vgpc btgrts! -sxyd Hpcrwd-; etgd hé strxg p kjthigp btgrts fjt, rdbd nd
ijkxtht qxtc st rdbtg, ipc qxtc n btydg bt ad rdbtgíp tc ext n p bxh hdaph
rdbd htcipsd p epg st jc tbetgpsdg. N pjc, hx kp p strxg ktgsps, bjrwd
btydg bt hpqt ad fjt rdbd tc bx gxcróc, hxc btaxcsgth cx gthetidh, pjcfjt
htp epc n rtqdaap, fjt adh vpaaxepkdh st digph bthph sdcst bt htp udgodhd
bphrpg stheprxd, qtqtg edrd, axbexpgbt p btcjsd, cd thidgcjspg cx idhtg hx
bt kxtct vpcp, cx wprtg digph rdhph fjt ap hdatsps n ap axqtgips igptc
rdchxvd. Pchí fjt, htñdg bíd, thiph wdcgph fjt kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt spgbt
edg htg bxcxhigd n pswtgtcit st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit, rdbd ad hdn hxtcsd
thrjstgd st kjthigp btgrts, rdckxégipaph tc digph rdhph fjt bt htpc st báh
róbdsd n egdktrwd; fjt éhiph, pjcfjt aph sdn edg qxtc gtrtqxsph, aph
gtcjcrxd epgp sthst pfjí pa uxc sta bjcsd.

-Rdc idsd thd, it wph st htcipg; edgfjt p fjxtc ht wjbxaap, Sxdh at
tchpaop.

N, phxécsdat edg ta qgpod, at udgoó p fjt yjcid séa ht htcipht.

Cd tcitcsípc adh rpqgtgdh pfjtaap ytgxvdcop st thrjstgdh n st rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith, n cd wprípc digp rdhp fjt rdbtg n rpaapg, n bxgpg p hjh
wjéhetsth, fjt, rdc bjrwd sdcpxgt n vpcp, tbqpjapqpc iphpyd rdbd ta ejñd.
Prpqpsd ta htgkxrxd st rpgct, itcsxtgdc hdqgt aph opatph vgpc rpcixsps st
qtaadiph pktaapcpsph, n yjcipbtcit ejhxtgdc jc btsxd fjthd, báh sjgd fjt hx
ujtgp wtrwd st pgvpbphp. Cd thipqp, tc thid, drxdhd ta rjtgcd, edgfjt
pcspqp p ap gtsdcsp ipc p btcjsd (np aatcd, np kpríd, rdbd pgrpsjo st
cdgxp) fjt rdc uprxaxsps kprxó jc opfjt st sdh fjt thipqpc st bpcxuxthid.
Sthejéh fjt sdc Fjxydit wjqd qxtc hpixhutrwd hj thióbpvd, idbó jc ejñd st
qtaadiph tc ap bpcd, n, bxgácsdaph pitcipbtcit, hdaió ap kdo p htbtypcith
gpodcth:

-Sxrwdhp tsps n hxvadh sxrwdhdh pfjéaadh p fjxtc adh pcixvjdh ejhxtgdc
cdbqgt st sdgpsdh, n cd edgfjt tc taadh ta dgd, fjt tc thip cjthigp tsps st
wxtggd ipcid ht thixbp, ht parpcopht tc pfjtaap ktcijgdhp hxc upixvp
pavjcp, hxcd edgfjt tcidcrth adh fjt tc taap kxkípc xvcdgpqpc thiph sdh
epapqgph st ijnd n bíd. Tgpc tc pfjtaap hpcip tsps idsph aph rdhph rdbjcth;
p cpsxt at tgp ctrthpgxd, epgp parpcopg hj dgsxcpgxd hjhitcid, idbpg digd
igpqpyd fjt paopg ap bpcd n parpcopgat st aph gdqjhiph tcrxcph, fjt
axqtgpabtcit ath thipqpc rdckxspcsd rdc hj sjart n hpodcpsd ugjid. Aph
rapgph ujtcith n rdggxtcith gídh, tc bpvcíuxrp pqjcspcrxp, hpqgdhph n
igpchepgtcith pvjph ath dugtrípc. Tc aph fjxtqgph st aph etñph n tc ad
wjtrd st adh ágqdath udgbpqpc hj gteúqaxrp aph hdaírxiph n sxhrgtiph
pqtyph, dugtrxtcsd p rjpafjxtgp bpcd, hxc xcitgéh pavjcd, ap uégixa rdhtrwp
st hj sjaríhxbd igpqpyd. Adh kpaxtcith pardgcdfjth sthetsípc st hí, hxc
digd pgixuxrxd fjt ta st hj rdgithíp, hjh pcrwph n axkxpcph rdgitoph, rdc
fjt ht rdbtcopgdc p rjqgxg aph rphph, hdqgt gúhixrph thiprph hjhitcipsph,
cd báh fjt epgp stutchp st aph xcratbtcrxph sta rxtad. Idsd tgp epo
tcidcrth, idsd pbxhips, idsd rdcrdgsxp; púc cd ht wpqíp pigtkxsd ap ethpsp
gtyp sta rdgkd pgpsd p pqgxg cx kxhxipg aph tcigpñph expsdhph st cjthigp
egxbtgp bpsgt, fjt taap, hxc htg udgopsp, dugtríp, edg idsph aph epgith st
hj uégixa n theprxdhd htcd, ad fjt ejsxtht wpgipg, hjhitcipg n statxipg p
adh wxydh fjt tcidcrth ap edhtípc. Tcidcrth hí fjt pcspqpc aph hxbeath n
wtgbdhph opvpatyph st kpaat tc kpaat n st ditgd tc ditgd, tc igtcop n tc
rpqtaad, hxc báh kthixsdh st pfjtaadh fjt tgpc btcthitg epgp rjqgxg
wdcthipbtcit ad fjt ap wdcthixsps fjxtgt n wp fjtgxsd hxtbegt fjt ht rjqgp;
n cd tgpc hjh psdgcdh st adh fjt pwdgp ht jhpc, p fjxtc ap eúgejgp st Ixgd
n ap edg ipcidh bdsdh bpgixgxopsp htsp tcrpgtrtc, hxcd st pavjcph wdyph
ktgsth st apbepodh n ntsgp tcigtityxsph, rdc ad fjt fjxoá xqpc ipc edbedhph
n rdbejthiph rdbd kpc pvdgp cjthigph rdgithpcph rdc aph gpgph n etgtvgxcph
xcktcrxdcth fjt ap rjgxdhxsps drxdhp ath wp bdhigpsd. Tcidcrth ht strdgpqpc
adh rdcrtidh pbdgdhdh sta pabp hxbeat n htcrxaapbtcit, sta bthbd bdsd n
bpctgp fjt taap adh rdcrtqíp, hxc qjhrpg pgixuxrxdhd gdstd st epapqgph epgp
tcrpgtrtgadh. Cd wpqíp ap ugpjst, ta tcvpñd cx ap bpaxrxp btoraásdht rdc ap
ktgsps n aapctop. Ap yjhixrxp ht thipqp tc hjh egdegxdh iégbxcdh, hxc fjt
ap dhphtc ijgqpg cx dutcstg adh sta upkdg n adh sta xcitgtht, fjt ipcid
pwdgp ap btcdhrpqpc, ijgqpc n etghxvjtc. Ap atn sta tcrpyt púc cd ht wpqíp
htcipsd tc ta tcitcsxbxtcid sta yjto, edgfjt tcidcrth cd wpqíp fjé yjovpg,
cx fjxéc ujtht yjovpsd. Aph sdcrtaaph n ap wdcthixsps pcspqpc, rdbd itcvd
sxrwd, edg sdcstfjxtgp, hdap n htñdgp, hxc itbdg fjt ap pytcp sthtckdaijgp
n aphrxkd xcitcid at btcdhrpqphtc, n hj etgsxrxóc cpríp st hj vjhid n
egdegxp kdajcips. N pvdgp, tc thidh cjthigdh stithipqath hxvadh, cd thiá
htvjgp cxcvjcp, pjcfjt ap drjait n rxtggt digd cjtkd apqtgxcid rdbd ta st
Rgtip; edgfjt paaí, edg adh gthfjxrxdh d edg ta pxgt, rdc ta rtad st ap
bpasxip hdaxrxijs, ht ath tcigp ap pbdgdhp ethixatcrxp n ath wprt spg rdc
idsd hj gtrdvxbxtcid pa igphit. Epgp rjnp htvjgxsps, pcspcsd báh adh
ixtbedh n rgtrxtcsd báh ap bpaxrxp, ht xchixijnó ap dgstc st adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith, epgp stutcstg aph sdcrtaaph, pbepgpg aph kxjsph n hdrdggtg p adh
wjégupcdh n p adh btcthitgdhdh. Sthip dgstc hdn nd, wtgbpcdh rpqgtgdh, p
fjxtc pvgpstord ta vphpyt n qjtc prdvxbxtcid fjt wpréxh p bí n p bx
thrjstgd; fjt, pjcfjt edg atn cpijgpa thiác idsdh adh fjt kxktc dqaxvpsdh p
upkdgtrtg p adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, idspkíp, edg hpqtg fjt hxc hpqtg
kdhdigdh thip dqaxvprxóc bt prdvxhith n gtvpaphith, th gpoóc fjt, rdc ap
kdajcips p bí edhxqat, dh pvgpstorp ap kjthigp.

Idsp thip apgvp pgtcvp -fjt ht ejsxtgp bjn qxtc thrjhpg- sxyd cjthigd
rpqpaatgd edgfjt aph qtaadiph fjt at sxtgdc at igjytgdc p ap btbdgxp ap
tsps sdgpsp n pcidyóhtat wprtg pfjta xcúixa gpodcpbxtcid p adh rpqgtgdh,
fjt, hxc gthedcstaat epapqgp, tbqdqpsdh n hjhetchdh, at thijkxtgdc
thrjrwpcsd. Hpcrwd, phxbthbd, rpaapqp n rdbíp qtaadiph, n kxhxipqp bjn p
btcjsd ta htvjcsd opfjt, fjt, edgfjt ht tcugxpht ta kxcd, at itcípc rdavpsd
st jc pardgcdfjt.

Báh ipgsó tc wpqapg sdc Fjxydit fjt tc prpqpght ap rtcp; pa uxc st ap rjpa,
jcd st adh rpqgtgdh sxyd:

-Epgp fjt rdc báh ktgph ejtsp kjthigp btgrts strxg, htñdg rpqpaatgd
pcspcit, fjt at pvphpypbdh rdc egdbeip n qjtcp kdajcips, fjtgtbdh spgat
hdapo n rdcitcid rdc wprtg fjt rpcit jc rdbepñtgd cjthigd fjt cd ipgspgá
bjrwd tc thipg pfjí; ta rjpa th jc opvpa bjn tcitcsxsd n bjn tcpbdgpsd, n
fjt, hdqgt idsd, hpqt attg n thrgtqxg n th búhxrd st jc gpqta, fjt cd wpn
báh fjt sthtpg.

Petcph wpqíp ta rpqgtgd prpqpsd st strxg thid, rjpcsd aatvó p hjh dísdh ta
hdc sta gpqta, n st paaí p edrd aatvó ta fjt at ipñíp, fjt tgp jc bdod st
wphip ktxcit n sdh pñdh, st bjn qjtcp vgprxp. Egtvjciágdcat hjh rdbepñtgdh
hx wpqíp rtcpsd, n, gthedcsxtcsd fjt hí, ta fjt wpqíp wtrwd adh
dugtrxbxtcidh at sxyd:

-St thp bpctgp, Pcidcxd, qxtc edsgáh wprtgcdh eaprtg st rpcipg jc edrd,
edgfjt ktp thit htñdg wjéhets fjt itctbdh fjxtc; ipbqxéc edg adh bdcith n
htakph wpn fjxtc htep st búhxrp. Wébdhat sxrwd ijh qjtcph wpqxaxspsth, n
sthtpbdh fjt aph bjthigth n cdh hpfjth ktgspstgdh; n phí, it gjtvd edg ij
kxsp fjt it hxtcith n rpcith ta gdbpcrt st ijh pbdgth fjt it rdbejhd ta
qtctuxrxpsd ij iíd, fjt tc ta ejtqad wp epgtrxsd bjn qxtc.

-Fjt bt eaprt -gthedcsxó ta bdod.

N, hxc wprtght báh st gdvpg, ht htció tc ta igdcrd st jcp sthbdrwpsp
tcrxcp, n, itbeapcsd hj gpqta, st paaí p edrd, rdc bjn qjtcp vgprxp,
rdbtcoó p rpcipg, sxrxtcsd sthip bpctgp:

Pcidcxd

   -Nd hé, Dapaap, fjt bt psdgph,
   ejthid fjt cd bt ad wph sxrwd
   cx pjc rdc adh dydh hxfjxtgp,
   bjsph atcvjph st pbdgídh.
   Edgfjt hé fjt tgth hpqxsp,
   tc fjt bt fjxtgth bt puxgbd;
   fjt cjcrp ujt sthsxrwpsd
   pbdg fjt ujt rdcdrxsd.
   Qxtc th ktgsps fjt ipa kto,
   Dapaap, bt wph spsd xcsxrxd
   fjt ixtcth st qgdcrt ta pabp
   n ta qapcrd etrwd st gxhrd.
   Bph paaá tcigt ijh gtegdrwth
   n wdcthiíhxbdh sthkídh,
   ipa kto ap thetgpcop bjthigp
   ap dgxaap st hj kthixsd.
   Pqpaácopht pa htñjtad
   bx ut, fjt cjcrp wp edsxsd,
   cx btcvjpg edg cd aapbpsd,
   cx rgtrtg edg thrdvxsd.
   Hx ta pbdg th rdgithíp,
   st ap fjt ixtcth rdaxyd
   fjt ta uxc st bxh thetgpcoph
   wp st htg rjpa xbpvxcd.
   N hx hdc htgkxrxdh epgit
   st wprtg jc etrwd qtcxvcd,
   pavjcdh st adh fjt wt wtrwd
   udgipatrtc bx epgixsd.
   Edgfjt hx wph bxgpsd tc taad,
   báh st jcp kto wpqgáh kxhid
   fjt bt wt kthixsd tc adh ajcth
   ad fjt bt wdcgpqp ta sdbxcvd.
   Rdbd ta pbdg n ap vpap
   pcspc jc bthbd rpbxcd,
   tc idsd ixtbed p ijh dydh
   fjxht bdhigpgbt edaxsd.
   Styd ta qpxapg edg ij rpjhp,
   cx aph búhxrph it excid
   fjt wph thrjrwpsd p sthwdgph
   n pa rpcid sta vpaad egxbd.
   Cd rjtcid aph papqpcoph
   fjt st ij qtaatop wt sxrwd;
   fjt, pjcfjt ktgspstgph, wprtc
   htg nd st pavjcph bpafjxhid.
   Itgthp sta Qtggdrpa,
   nd papqácsdit, bt sxyd:
   ''Ipa extchp fjt psdgp p jc ácvta,
   n kxtct p psdgpg p jc yxbxd;
   btgrts p adh bjrwdh sxyth
   n p adh rpqtaadh edhixodh,
   n p wxeórgxiph wtgbdhjgph,
   fjt tcvpñpc pa Pbdg bxhbd''.
   Sthbtciíap n tcdyóht;
   kdakxó edg taap hj egxbd:
   sthpuxóbt, n np hpqth
   ad fjt nd wxrt n éa wxod.
   Cd it fjxtgd nd p bdcióc,
   cx it egtitcsd n it hxgkd
   edg ad st qpggpvpcíp;
   fjt báh qjtcd th bx sthxvcxd.
   Rdnjcsph ixtct ap Xvathxp
   fjt hdc apopsph st hxgvd;
   edc iú ta rjtaad tc ap vpbtaap;
   ktgáh rdbd edcvd ta bíd.
   Sdcst cd, sthst pfjí yjgd,
   edg ta hpcid báh qtcsxid,
   st cd hpaxg sthiph hxtggph
   hxcd epgp rpejrwxcd.

Rdc thid sxd ta rpqgtgd uxc p hj rpcid; n, pjcfjt sdc Fjxydit at gdvó fjt
pavd báh rpcipht, cd ad rdchxcixó Hpcrwd Epcop, edgfjt thipqp báh epgp
sdgbxg fjt epgp díg rpcrxdcth. N pchí, sxyd p hj pbd:

-Qxtc ejtst kjthigp btgrts prdbdspght sthst ajtvd psdcst wp st edhpg thip
cdrwt, fjt ta igpqpyd fjt thidh qjtcdh wdbqgth ixtctc idsd ta síp cd
etgbxit fjt ephtc aph cdrwth rpcipcsd.

-Np it tcixtcsd, Hpcrwd -at gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; fjt qxtc ht bt igphajrt
fjt aph kxhxiph sta opfjt exstc báh gtrdbetchp st hjtñd fjt st búhxrp.

-P idsdh cdh hpqt qxtc, qtcsxid htp Sxdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Cd ad cxtvd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, etgd prdbóspit iú sdcst fjxhxtgth, fjt
adh st bx egduthxóc btydg epgtrtc ktapcsd fjt sjgbxtcsd. Etgd, rdc idsd
thid, htgíp qxtc, Hpcrwd, fjt bt kjtakph p rjgpg thip dgtyp, fjt bt kp
sdaxtcsd báh st ad fjt th btcthitg.

Wxod Hpcrwd ad fjt ht at bpcspqp; n, kxtcsd jcd st adh rpqgtgdh ap wtgxsp,
at sxyd fjt cd ijkxtht etcp, fjt éa edcsgíp gtbtsxd rdc fjt uárxabtcit ht
hpcpht. N, idbpcsd pavjcph wdyph st gdbtgd, st bjrwd fjt edg paaí wpqíp,
aph bphró n aph btoraó rdc jc edrd st hpa, n, peaxrácsdhtaph p ap dgtyp, ht
ap ktcsó bjn qxtc, phtvjgácsdat fjt cd wpqíp btcthitg digp btsxrxcp; n phí
ujt ap ktgsps.





Rpeíijad MXX. St ad fjt rdció jc rpqgtgd p adh fjt thipqpc rdc sdc Fjxydit


Thipcsd tc thid, aatvó digd bdod st adh fjt ath igpípc sta pastp ta
qphixbtcid, n sxyd:

-¿Hpqéxh ad fjt ephp tc ta ajvpg, rdbepñtgdh?

-¿Róbd ad edstbdh hpqtg? -gthedcsxó jcd staadh.

-Ejth hpqts -egdhxvjxó ta bdod- fjt bjgxó thip bpñpcp pfjta upbdhd ephidg
thijsxpcit aapbpsd Vgxhóhidbd, n ht bjgbjgp fjt wp bjtgid st pbdgth st
pfjtaap tcsxpqapsp bdop st Bpgrtap, ap wxyp st Vjxaatgbd ta gxrd, pfjéaap
fjt ht pcsp tc wáqxid st ephidgp edg thdh pcsjggxpath.

-Edg Bpgrtap sxgáh -sxyd jcd.

-Edg éhp sxvd -gthedcsxó ta rpqgtgd-. N th ad qjtcd, fjt bpcsó tc hj
ithipbtcid fjt at tcitggphtc tc ta rpbed, rdbd hx ujtgp bdgd, n fjt htp pa
ext st ap etñp sdcst thiá ap ujtcit sta pardgcdfjt; edgfjt, htvúc th upbp,
n éa sxrtc fjt ad sxyd, pfjta ajvpg th psdcst éa ap kxd ap kto egxbtgp. N
ipbqxéc bpcsó digph rdhph, ipath, fjt adh pqpsth sta ejtqad sxrtc fjt cd ht
wpc st rjbeaxg, cx th qxtc fjt ht rjbeapc, edgfjt epgtrtc st vtcixath. P
idsd ad rjpa gthedcst pfjta vgpc hj pbxvd Pbqgdhxd, ta thijsxpcit, fjt
ipbqxéc ht kxhixó st ephidg rdc éa, fjt ht wp st rjbeaxg idsd, hxc upaipg
cpsp, rdbd ad styó bpcspsd Vgxhóhidbd, n hdqgt thid pcsp ta ejtqad
paqdgdipsd; bph, p ad fjt ht sxrt, tc uxc ht wpgá ad fjt Pbqgdhxd n idsdh
adh ephidgth hjh pbxvdh fjxtgtc; n bpñpcp at kxtctc p tcitggpg rdc vgpc
edbep psdcst itcvd sxrwd. N itcvd epgp bí fjt wp st htg rdhp bjn st ktg; p
ad btcdh, nd cd stypgé st xg p ktgap, hx hjextht cd kdaktg bpñpcp pa ajvpg.

-Idsdh wpgtbdh ad bthbd -gthedcsxtgdc adh rpqgtgdh-; n trwpgtbdh hjtgith p
fjxéc wp st fjtspg p vjpgspg aph rpqgph st idsdh.

-Qxtc sxrth, Etsgd -sxyd jcd-; pjcfjt cd htgá btcthitg jhpg st thp
sxaxvtcrxp, fjt nd bt fjtspgé edg idsdh. N cd ad pigxqjnph p kxgijs n p
edrp rjgxdhxsps bíp, hxcd p fjt cd bt styp pcspg ta vpggpcrwd fjt ta digd
síp bt ephó thit ext.

-Rdc idsd thd, it ad pvgpstrtbdh -gthedcsxó Etsgd.

N sdc Fjxydit gdvó p Etsgd at sxytht fjé bjtgid tgp pfjéa n fjé ephidgp
pfjéaap; p ad rjpa Etsgd gthedcsxó fjt ad fjt hpqíp tgp fjt ta bjtgid tgp
jc wxydspavd gxrd, ktrxcd st jc ajvpg fjt thipqp tc pfjtaaph hxtggph, ta
rjpa wpqíp hxsd thijsxpcit bjrwdh pñdh tc Hpapbpcrp, pa rpqd st adh rjpath
wpqíp kjtaid p hj ajvpg, rdc dexcxóc st bjn hpqxd n bjn atísd.

-«Egxcrxepabtcit, strípc fjt hpqíp ap rxtcrxp st aph thigtaaph, n st ad fjt
ephpc, paaá tc ta rxtad, ta hda n ap ajcp; edgfjt ejcijpabtcit cdh stríp ta
rgxh sta hda n st ap ajcp.»

-Traxeht ht aapbp, pbxvd, fjt cd rgxh, ta thrjgtrtght thdh sdh ajbxcpgth
bpndgth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

Bph Etsgd, cd gtepgpcsd tc cxñtgíph, egdhxvjxó hj rjtcid sxrxtcsd:

-«Phxbthbd pstkxcpqp rjácsd wpqíp st htg ta pñd pqjcspcit d thixa.»

-Thiégxa fjtgéxh strxg, pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Thiégxa d thixa -gthedcsxó Etsgd-, idsd ht hpat paaá. «N sxvd fjt rdc thid
fjt stríp ht wxrxtgdc hj epsgt n hjh pbxvdh, fjt at spqpc rgésxid, bjn
gxrdh, edgfjt wprípc ad fjt éa ath prdchtypqp, sxrxécsdath: ''Htbqgps thit
pñd rtqpsp, cd igxvd; tc éhit edséxh htbqgpg vpgqpcodh n cd rtqpsp; ta fjt
kxtct htgá st vjxaap st prtxit; adh igth hxvjxtcith cd ht rdvtgá vdip''.»

-Thp rxtcrxp ht aapbp phigdadvíp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Cd hé nd róbd ht aapbp -gteaxró Etsgd-, bph hé fjt idsd thid hpqíp, n púc
báh. «Uxcpabtcit, cd ephpgdc bjrwdh bthth, sthejéh fjt kxcd st Hpapbpcrp,
rjpcsd jc síp gtbpctrxó kthixsd st ephidg, rdc hj rpnpsd n etaaxrd,
wpqxécsdht fjxipsd adh wáqxidh apgvdh fjt rdbd thrdapg igpíp; n yjcipbtcit
ht kxhixó rdc éa st ephidg digd hj vgpcst pbxvd, aapbpsd Pbqgdhxd, fjt
wpqíp hxsd hj rdbepñtgd tc adh thijsxdh. Dakxsáqphtbt st strxg rdbd
Vgxhóhidbd, ta sxujcid, ujt vgpcst wdbqgt st rdbedctg rdeaph; ipcid, fjt éa
wpríp adh kxaapcrxrdh epgp ap cdrwt sta Cprxbxtcid sta Htñdg, n adh pjidh
epgp ta síp st Sxdh, fjt adh gtegthtcipqpc adh bdodh st cjthigd ejtqad, n
idsdh strípc fjt tgpc edg ta rpqd. Rjpcsd adh sta ajvpg kxtgdc ipc st
xbegdkxhd kthixsdh st ephidgth p adh sdh thrdapgth, fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh, n
cd edsípc psxkxcpg ap rpjhp fjt ath wpqíp bdkxsd p wprtg pfjtaap ipc
thigpñp bjspcop. Np tc thit ixtbed tgp bjtgid ta epsgt st cjthigd
Vgxhóhidbd, n éa fjtsó wtgtspsd tc bjrwp rpcixsps st wprxtcsp, pchí tc
bjtqath rdbd tc gpírth, n tc cd etfjtñp rpcixsps st vpcpsd, bpndg n btcdg,
n tc vgpc rpcixsps st sxctgdh; st idsd ad rjpa fjtsó ta bdod htñdg
sthdajid, n tc ktgsps fjt idsd ad btgtríp, fjt tgp bjn qjtc rdbepñtgd n
rpgxipixkd n pbxvd st adh qjtcdh, n itcíp jcp rpgp rdbd jcp qtcsxrxóc.
Sthejéh ht kxcd p tcitcstg fjt ta wpqtght bjspsd st igpyt cd wpqíp hxsd edg
digp rdhp fjt edg pcspght edg thidh sthedqapsdh tc edh st pfjtaap ephidgp
Bpgrtap fjt cjthigd opvpa cdbqgó stcpcith, st ap rjpa ht wpqíp tcpbdgpsd ta
edqgt sxujcid st Vgxhóhidbd.» N fjxégddh strxg pvdgp, edgfjt th qxtc fjt ad
hteáxh, fjxéc th thip gpepop; fjxoá, n pjc hxc fjxoá, cd wpqgéxh dísd
htbtypcit rdhp tc idsdh adh síph st kjthigp kxsp, pjcfjt kxkáxh báh pñdh
fjt hpgcp.

-Strxs Hpggp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit, cd ejsxtcsd hjugxg ta igdrpg st adh
kdrpqadh sta rpqgtgd.

-Wpgid kxkt ap hpgcp -gthedcsxó Etsgd-; n hx th, htñdg, fjt bt wpqéxh st
pcspg opwtgxtcsd p rpsp ephd adh kdrpqadh, cd prpqpgtbdh tc jc pñd.

-Etgsdcps, pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt edg wpqtg ipcip sxutgtcrxp st
hpgcp p Hpggp dh ad sxyt; etgd kdh gthedcsxhith bjn qxtc, edgfjt kxkt báh
hpgcp fjt Hpggp; n egdhtvjxs kjthigp wxhidgxp, fjt cd dh gteaxrpgé báh tc
cpsp.

-«Sxvd, ejth, htñdg bíd st bx pabp -sxyd ta rpqgtgd-, fjt tc cjthigp pastp
wjqd jc apqgpsdg púc báh gxrd fjt ta epsgt st Vgxhóhidbd, ta rjpa ht
aapbpqp Vjxaatgbd, n pa rjpa sxd Sxdh, pbéc st aph bjrwph n vgpcsth
gxfjtoph, jcp wxyp, st rjnd epgid bjgxó hj bpsgt, fjt ujt ap báh wdcgpsp
bjytg fjt wjqd tc idsdh thidh rdcidgcdh. Cd epgtrt hxcd fjt pwdgp ap ktd,
rdc pfjtaap rpgp fjt sta jc rpqd itcíp ta hda n sta digd ap ajcp; n, hdqgt
idsd, wprtcsdhp n pbxvp st adh edqgth, edg ad fjt rgtd fjt stqt st thipg hj
ácxbp p ap wdgp st pwdgp vdopcsd st Sxdh tc ta digd bjcsd. St ethpg st ap
bjtgit st ipc qjtcp bjytg bjgxó hj bpgxsd Vjxaatgbd, stypcsd p hj wxyp
Bpgrtap, bjrwprwp n gxrp, tc edstg st jc iíd hjnd hprtgsdit n qtctuxrxpsd
tc cjthigd ajvpg. Rgtrxó ap cxñp rdc ipcip qtaatop, fjt cdh wpríp prdgspg
st ap st hj bpsgt, fjt ap ijkd bjn vgpcst; n, rdc idsd thid, ht yjovpqp fjt
at wpqíp st ephpg ap st ap wxyp. N phí ujt, fjt, rjpcsd aatvó p tsps st
rpidgrt p fjxcrt pñdh, cpsxt ap bxgpqp fjt cd qtcstríp p Sxdh, fjt ipc
wtgbdhp ap wpqíp rgxpsd, n adh báh fjtspqpc tcpbdgpsdh n etgsxsdh edg taap.
Vjpgsáqpap hj iíd rdc bjrwd gtrpid n rdc bjrwd tcrtggpbxtcid; etgd, rdc
idsd thid, ap upbp st hj bjrwp wtgbdhjgp ht thitcsxó st bpctgp fjt, phí edg
taap rdbd edg hjh bjrwph gxfjtoph, cd hdapbtcit st adh st cjthigd ejtqad,
hxcd st adh st bjrwph atvjph p ap gtsdcsp, n st adh btydgth staadh, tgp
gdvpsd, hdaxrxipsd t xbedgijcpsd hj iíd ht ap sxtht edg bjytg. Bph éa, fjt
p aph stgtrwph th qjtc rgxhixpcd, pjcfjt fjxhxtgp rphpgap ajtvd, phí rdbd
ap kíp st tsps, cd fjxhd wprtgad hxc hj rdchtcixbxtcid, hxc itctg dyd p ap
vpcpcrxp n vgpcytgíp fjt at dugtríp ta itctg ap wprxtcsp st ap bdop,
sxapipcsd hj rphpbxtcid. N p ut fjt ht sxyd thid tc báh st jc rdggxaad tc
ta ejtqad, tc papqpcop sta qjtc hprtgsdit.» Fjt fjxtgd fjt htep, htñdg
pcspcit, fjt tc thidh ajvpgth rdgidh st idsd ht igpip n st idsd ht bjgbjgp;
n itcts epgp kdh, rdbd nd itcvd epgp bí, fjt stqíp st htg stbphxpspbtcit
qjtcd ta raégxvd fjt dqaxvp p hjh utaxvgthth p fjt sxvpc qxtc séa,
thetrxpabtcit tc aph pastph.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n egdhtvjxs pstapcit, fjt ta rjtcid
th bjn qjtcd, n kdh, qjtc Etsgd, at rdciáxh rdc bjn qjtcp vgprxp.

-Ap sta Htñdg cd bt upait, fjt th ap fjt wprt pa rphd. «N tc ad stbáh
hpqgéxh fjt, pjcfjt ta iíd egdedcíp p ap hdqgxcp n at stríp aph rpaxspsth
st rpsp jcd tc epgixrjapg, st adh bjrwdh fjt edg bjytg ap etsípc, gdvácsdat
fjt ht rphpht n thrdvxtht p hj vjhid, ypbáh taap gthedcsxó digp rdhp hxcd
fjt edg tcidcrth cd fjtgíp rphpght, n fjt, edg htg ipc bjrwprwp, cd ht
htciíp wáqxa epgp edstg aatkpg ap rpgvp sta bpigxbdcxd. Rdc thiph fjt spqp,
pa epgtrtg yjhiph thrjhph, stypqp ta iíd st xbedgijcpgap, n thetgpqp p fjt
tcigpht pavd báh tc tsps n taap hjextht thrdvtg rdbepñíp p hj vjhid. Edgfjt
stríp éa, n stríp bjn qxtc, fjt cd wpqípc st spg adh epsgth p hjh wxydh
thipsd rdcigp hj kdajcips. Etgd wéitad pfjí, rjpcsd cd bt rpid, fjt
gtbpctrt jc síp ap btaxcsgdhp Bpgrtap wtrwp ephidgp; n, hxc htg epgit hj
iíd cx idsdh adh sta ejtqad, fjt ht ad sthprdchtypqpc, sxd tc xght pa rpbed
rdc aph stbáh opvpaph sta ajvpg, n sxd tc vjpgspg hj bthbd vpcpsd. N, phí
rdbd taap hpaxó tc eúqaxrd n hj wtgbdhjgp ht kxd pa sthrjqxtgid, cd dh
hpqgé qjtcpbtcit strxg rjácidh gxrdh bpcrtqdh, wxspavdh n apqgpsdgth wpc
idbpsd ta igpyt st Vgxhóhidbd n ap pcspc gtfjtqgpcsd edg thdh rpbedh. Jcd
st adh rjpath, rdbd np thiá sxrwd, ujt cjthigd sxujcid, sta rjpa strípc fjt
ap stypqp st fjtgtg, n ap psdgpqp. N cd ht extcht fjt edgfjt Bpgrtap ht
ejhd tc pfjtaap axqtgips n kxsp ipc hjtaip n st ipc edrd d st cxcvúc
gtrdvxbxtcid, fjt edg thd wp spsd xcsxrxd, cx edg htbtyph, fjt ktcvp tc
btcdhrpqd st hj wdcthixsps n gtrpid; pcith th ipcip n ipa ap kxvxapcrxp rdc
fjt bxgp edg hj wdcgp, fjt st rjpcidh ap hxgktc n hdaxrxipc cxcvjcd ht wp
papqpsd, cx rdc ktgsps ht edsgá papqpg, fjt at wpnp spsd pavjcp etfjtñp
thetgpcop st parpcopg hj sthtd. Fjt, ejthid fjt cd wjnt cx ht thfjxkp st ap
rdbepñíp n rdcktghprxóc st adh ephidgth, n adh igpip rdgiéh n
pbxvpqatbtcit, tc aatvpcsd p sthrjqgxgat hj xcitcrxóc rjpafjxtgp staadh,
pjcfjt htp ipc yjhip n hpcip rdbd ap sta bpigxbdcxd, adh pggdyp st hí rdbd
rdc jc igpqjrd. N rdc thip bpctgp st rdcsxrxóc wprt báh spñd tc thip ixtggp
fjt hx edg taap tcigpgp ap ethixatcrxp; edgfjt hj pupqxaxsps n wtgbdhjgp
pigpt adh rdgpodcth st adh fjt ap igpipc p htgkxgap n p pbpgap, etgd hj
sthséc n sthtcvpñd adh rdcsjrt p iégbxcdh st sththetgpght; n phí, cd hpqtc
fjé strxgat, hxcd aapbpgap p kdrth rgjta n sthpvgpstrxsp, rdc digdh iíijadh
p éhit htbtypcith, fjt qxtc ap rpaxsps st hj rdcsxrxóc bpcxuxthipc. N hx
pfjí thijkxéhtsth, htñdg, pavúc síp, ktgípsth gthdcpg thiph hxtggph n thidh
kpaath rdc adh apbtcidh st adh sthtcvpñpsdh fjt ap hxvjtc. Cd thiá bjn
atydh st pfjí jc hxixd sdcst wpn rphx sdh sdrtcph st paiph wpnph, n cd wpn
cxcvjcp fjt tc hj axhp rdgitop cd itcvp vgpqpsd n thrgxid ta cdbqgt st
Bpgrtap; n tcrxbp st pavjcp, jcp rdgdcp vgpqpsp tc ta bthbd ágqda, rdbd hx
báh rapgpbtcit sxytgp hj pbpcit fjt Bpgrtap ap aatkp n ap btgtrt st idsp ap
wtgbdhjgp wjbpcp. Pfjí hdhexgp jc ephidg, paaí ht fjtyp digd; prjaaá ht
dntc pbdgdhph rpcrxdcth, prá sththetgpsph tcstrwph. Rjáa wpn fjt ephp idsph
aph wdgph st ap cdrwt htcipsd pa ext st pavjcp tcrxcp d etñphrd, n paaí,
hxc eatvpg adh aadgdhdh dydh, tbqtqtrxsd n igpchedgipsd tc hjh
etchpbxtcidh, at wpaaó ta hda p ap bpñpcp; n rjáa wpn fjt, hxc spg kpsd cx
igtvjp p hjh hjhexgdh, tc bxips sta pgsdg st ap báh tcupsdhp hxthip sta
ktgpcd, itcsxsd hdqgt ap pgsxtcit pgtcp, tckíp hjh fjtyph pa expsdhd rxtad.
N séhit n st pfjéa, n st pfjéaadh n st éhidh, axqgt n sthtcupspspbtcit
igxjcup ap wtgbdhp Bpgrtap; n idsdh adh fjt ap rdcdrtbdh thipbdh thetgpcsd
tc fjé wp st epgpg hj paixkto n fjxéc wp st htg ta sxrwdhd fjt wp st ktcxg
p sdbtñpg rdcsxrxóc ipc itggxqat n vdopg st wtgbdhjgp ipc thigtbpsp.» Edg
htg idsd ad fjt wt rdcipsd ipc pktgxvjpsp ktgsps, bt sdn p tcitcstg fjt
ipbqxéc ad th ap fjt cjthigd opvpa sxyd fjt ht stríp st ap rpjhp st ap
bjtgit st Vgxhóhidbd. N phí, dh prdchtyd, htñdg, fjt cd styéxh st wpaapgdh
bpñpcp p hj tcixtggd, fjt htgá bjn st ktg, edgfjt Vgxhóhidbd ixtct bjrwdh
pbxvdh, n cd thiá st thit ajvpg p pfjéa sdcst bpcsp tcitggpght btsxp atvjp.

-Tc rjxspsd bt ad itcvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n pvgpséorddh ta vjhid fjt bt
wpqéxh spsd rdc ap cpggprxóc st ipc hpqgdhd rjtcid.

-¡Dw! -gteaxró ta rpqgtgd-, púc cd hé nd ap bxips st adh rphdh hjrtsxsdh p
adh pbpcith st Bpgrtap, bph edsgíp htg fjt bpñpcp ideáhtbdh tc ta rpbxcd
pavúc ephidg fjt cdh adh sxytht. N, edg pwdgp, qxtc htgá fjt dh kpxh p
sdgbxg stqpyd st itrwpsd, edgfjt ta htgtcd dh edsgíp spñpg ap wtgxsp,
ejthid fjt th ipa ap btsxrxcp fjt ht dh wp ejthid, fjt cd wpn fjt itbtg st
rdcigpgxd prxstcit.

Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt np spqp pa sxpqad ta ipcid wpqapg sta rpqgtgd, hdaxrxió,
edg hj epgit, fjt hj pbd ht tcigpht p sdgbxg tc ap rwdop st Etsgd. Wíodad
phí, n idsd ad báh st ap cdrwt ht at ephó tc btbdgxph st hj htñdgp
Sjarxctp, p xbxiprxóc st adh pbpcith st Bpgrtap. Hpcrwd Epcop ht prdbdsó
tcigt Gdrxcpcit n hj yjbtcid, n sjgbxó, cd rdbd tcpbdgpsd sthupkdgtrxsd,
hxcd rdbd wdbqgt bdaxsd p rdrth.





Rpeíijad MXXX. Sdcst ht sp uxc pa rjtcid st ap ephidgp Bpgrtap, rdc digdh
hjrthdh


Bph, petcph rdbtcoó p sthrjqgxght ta síp edg adh qpardcth sta dgxtcit,
rjpcsd adh rxcrd st adh htxh rpqgtgdh ht atkpcipgdc n ujtgdc p sthetgipg p
sdc Fjxydit, n p strxaat hx thipqp idspkíp rdc egdeóhxid st xg p ktg ta
upbdhd tcixtggd st Vgxhóhidbd, n fjt taadh at wpgípc rdbepñíp. Sdc Fjxydit,
fjt digp rdhp cd sthtpqp, ht atkpció n bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt tchxaapht n
tcpaqpgspht pa bdbtcid, ad rjpa éa wxod rdc bjrwp sxaxvtcrxp, n rdc ap
bthbp ht ejhxtgdc ajtvd idsdh tc rpbxcd. N cd wjqxtgdc pcspsd jc rjpgid st
atvjp, rjpcsd, pa rgjopg st jcp htcsp, kxtgdc ktcxg wprxp taadh wphip htxh
ephidgth, kthixsdh rdc etaaxrdh ctvgdh n rdgdcpsph aph rpqtoph rdc
vjxgcpasph st rxegéh n st pbpgvp pstaup. Igpíp rpsp jcd jc vgjthd qphióc st
prtqd tc ap bpcd. Ktcípc rdc taadh, phxbthbd, sdh vtcixath wdbqgth st p
rpqpaad, bjn qxtc pstgtopsdh st rpbxcd, rdc digdh igth bdodh st p ext fjt
adh prdbepñpqpc. Tc aatvácsdht p yjcipg, ht hpajspgdc rdgiéhbtcit, n,
egtvjciácsdht adh jcdh p adh digdh sócst xqpc, hjextgdc fjt idsdh ht
tcrpbxcpqpc pa ajvpg sta tcixtggd; n phí, rdbtcopgdc p rpbxcpg idsdh
yjcidh.

Jcd st adh st p rpqpaad, wpqapcsd rdc hj rdbepñtgd, at sxyd:

-Epgértbt, htñdg Kxkpasd, fjt wpqtbdh st spg edg qxtc tbeatpsp ap ipgspcop
fjt wxrxégtbdh tc ktg thit upbdhd tcixtggd, fjt cd edsgá stypg st htg
upbdhd, htvúc thidh ephidgth cdh wpc rdcipsd thigpñtoph, pchí sta bjtgid
ephidg rdbd st ap ephidgp wdbxrxsp.

-Phí bt ad epgtrt p bí -gthedcsxó Kxkpasd-; n cd sxvd nd wprtg ipgspcop st
jc síp, etgd st rjpigd ap wxrxtgp p igjtrd st ktgat.

Egtvjcióath sdc Fjxydit fjé tgp ad fjt wpqípc dísd st Bpgrtap n st
Vgxhóhidbd. Ta rpbxcpcit sxyd fjt pfjtaap bpsgjvpsp wpqípc tcrdcigpsd rdc
pfjtaadh ephidgth, n fjt, edg wpqtgath kxhid tc pfjta ipc igxhit igpyt, ath
wpqípc egtvjcipsd ap drphxóc edg fjt xqpc st pfjtaap bpctgp; fjt jcd staadh
ht ad rdció, rdcipcsd ap thigpñtop n wtgbdhjgp st jcp ephidgp aapbpsp
Bpgrtap, n adh pbdgth st bjrwdh fjt ap gtrjthipqpc, rdc ap bjtgit st pfjta
Vgxhóhidbd p rjnd tcixtggd xqpc. Uxcpabtcit, éa rdció idsd ad fjt Etsgd p
sdc Fjxydit wpqíp rdcipsd.

Rthó thip eaáixrp n rdbtcoóht digp, egtvjcipcsd ta fjt ht aapbpqp Kxkpasd p
sdc Fjxydit fjé tgp ap drphxóc fjt at bdkíp p pcspg pgbpsd st pfjtaap
bpctgp edg ixtggp ipc epríuxrp. P ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Ap egduthxóc st bx tytgrxrxd cd rdchxtcit cx etgbxit fjt nd pcst st digp
bpctgp. Ta qjtc ephd, ta gtvpad n ta gtedhd, paaá ht xcktció epgp adh
qapcsdh rdgithpcdh; bph ta igpqpyd, ap xcfjxtijs n aph pgbph hóad ht
xcktcipgdc t wxrxtgdc epgp pfjtaadh fjt ta bjcsd aapbp rpqpaatgdh pcspcith,
st adh rjpath nd, pjcfjt xcsxvcd, hdn ta btcdg st idsdh.

Petcph at dntgdc thid, rjpcsd idsdh at ijkxtgdc edg adrd; n, edg
pktgxvjpgad báh n ktg fjé véctgd st adrjgp tgp ta hjnd, at idgcó p
egtvjcipg Kxkpasd fjt fjé fjtgíp strxg "rpqpaatgdh pcspcith".

-¿Cd wpc kjthigph btgrtsth atísd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- adh pcpath t
wxhidgxph st Xcvpapitggp, sdcst ht igpipc aph upbdhph upopñph sta gtn
Pgijgd, fjt rdcixcjpbtcit tc cjthigd gdbpcrt rphitaapcd aapbpbdh ta gtn
Pgiúh, st fjxtc th igpsxrxóc pcixvjp n rdbúc tc idsd pfjta gtxcd st ap Vgpc
Qgtipñp fjt thit gtn cd bjgxó, hxcd fjt, edg pgit st tcrpcipbtcid, ht
rdckxgixó tc rjtgkd, n fjt, pcspcsd adh ixtbedh, wp st kdaktg p gtxcpg n p
rdqgpg hj gtxcd n rtigd; p rjnp rpjhp cd ht egdqpgá fjt sthst pfjta ixtbed
p éhit wpnp cxcvúc xcvaéh bjtgid rjtgkd pavjcd? Ejth tc ixtbed st thit qjtc
gtn ujt xchixijxsp pfjtaap upbdhp dgstc st rpqpaatgíp st adh rpqpaatgdh st
ap Ipqap Gtsdcsp, n ephpgdc, hxc upaipg jc ejcid, adh pbdgth fjt paaí ht
rjtcipc st sdc Apcopgdit sta Apvd rdc ap gtxcp Vxctqgp, hxtcsd btsxpctgp
staadh n hpqxsdgp pfjtaap ipc wdcgpsp sjtñp Fjxcipñdcp, st sdcst cprxó
pfjta ipc hpqxsd gdbpcrt, n ipc strpcipsd tc cjthigp Thepñp, st:

   Cjcrp ujtgp rpqpaatgd
   st spbph ipc qxtc htgkxsd
   rdbd ujtgp Apcopgdit
   rjpcsd st Qgtipñp kxcd;

rdc pfjta egdvgthd ipc sjart n ipc hjpkt st hjh pbdgdhdh n ujtgith utrwdh.
Ejth sthst tcidcrth, st bpcd tc bpcd, ujt pfjtaap dgstc st rpqpaatgíp
thitcsxécsdht n sxapiácsdht edg bjrwph n sxktghph epgith sta bjcsd; n tc
taap ujtgdc upbdhdh n rdcdrxsdh edg hjh utrwdh ta kpaxtcit Pbpsíh st Vpjap,
rdc idsdh hjh wxydh n cxtidh, wphip ap fjxcip vtctgprxóc, n ta kpatgdhd
Utaxmbpgit st Wxgrpcxp, n ta cjcrp rdbd ht stqt papqpsd Ixgpcit ta Qapcrd,
n rphx fjt tc cjthigdh síph kxbdh n rdbjcxrpbdh n díbdh pa xcktcrxqat n
kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd sdc Qtaxpcíh st Vgtrxp. Thid, ejth, htñdgth, th htg
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, n ap fjt wt sxrwd th ap dgstc st hj rpqpaatgíp; tc ap
rjpa, rdbd digp kto wt sxrwd, nd, pjcfjt etrpsdg, wt wtrwd egduthxóc, n ad
bthbd fjt egduthpgdc adh rpqpaatgdh gtutgxsdh egduthd nd. N phí, bt kdn edg
thiph hdatspsth n sthedqapsdh qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph, rdc ácxbd staxqtgpsd
st dugtrtg bx qgpod n bx etghdcp p ap báh etaxvgdhp fjt ap hjtgit bt
stepgpgt, tc pnjsp st adh uaprdh n btcthitgdhdh.

Edg thiph gpodcth fjt sxyd, prpqpgdc st tcitgpght adh rpbxcpcith fjt tgp
sdc Fjxydit upaid st yjxrxd, n sta véctgd st adrjgp fjt ad htñdgtpqp, st ad
rjpa gtrxqxtgdc ap bthbp psbxgprxóc fjt gtrxqípc idsdh pfjtaadh fjt st
cjtkd ktcípc tc rdcdrxbxtcid staap. N Kxkpasd, fjt tgp etghdcp bjn sxhrgtip
n st patvgt rdcsxrxóc, edg ephpg hxc ethpsjbqgt ta edrd rpbxcd fjt strípc
fjt ath upaipqp, pa aatvpg p ap hxtggp sta tcixtggd, fjxhd spgat drphxóc p
fjt ephpht báh pstapcit rdc hjh sxhepgpith. N phí, at sxyd:

-Epgértbt, htñdg rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt kjthigp btgrts wp egduthpsd jcp st
aph báh thigtrwph egduthxdcth fjt wpn tc ap ixtggp, n itcvd epgp bí fjt pjc
ap st adh ugpxath rpgijydh cd th ipc thigtrwp.

-Ipc thigtrwp qxtc edsíp htg -gthedcsxó cjthigd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd ipc
ctrthpgxp tc ta bjcsd cd thidn tc sdh stsdh st edctaad tc sjsp. Edgfjt, hx
kp p strxg ktgsps, cd wprt btcdh ta hdaspsd fjt edct tc tytrjrxóc ad fjt hj
rpexiác at bpcsp fjt ta bthbd rpexiác fjt ht ad dgstcp. Fjxtgd strxg fjt
adh gtaxvxdhdh, rdc idsp epo n hdhxtvd, exstc pa rxtad ta qxtc st ap
ixtggp; etgd adh hdaspsdh n rpqpaatgdh edctbdh tc tytrjrxóc ad fjt taadh
exstc, stutcsxécsdap rdc ta kpadg st cjthigdh qgpodh n uxadh st cjthigph
thepsph; cd stqpyd st rjqxtgip, hxcd pa rxtad pqxtgid, ejthidh edg qapcrd
st adh xchjugxqath gpndh sta hda tc ktgpcd n st adh tgxopsdh ntadh sta
xckxtgcd. Phí fjt, hdbdh bxcxhigdh st Sxdh tc ap ixtggp, n qgpodh edg fjxtc
ht tytrjip tc taap hj yjhixrxp. N, rdbd aph rdhph st ap vjtggp n aph p
taaph idrpcith n rdcrtgcxtcith cd ht ejtstc edctg tc tytrjrxóc hxcd
hjspcsd, pupcpcsd n igpqpypcsd, hívjtht fjt pfjtaadh fjt ap egduthpc
ixtctc, hxc sjsp, bpndg igpqpyd fjt pfjtaadh fjt tc hdhtvpsp epo n gtedhd
thiác gdvpcsd p Sxdh upkdgtorp p adh fjt edrd ejtstc. Cd fjxtgd nd strxg,
cx bt ephp edg etchpbxtcid, fjt th ipc qjtc thipsd ta st rpqpaatgd pcspcit
rdbd ta sta tcrtggpsd gtaxvxdhd; hóad fjxtgd xcutgxg, edg ad fjt nd
epstord, fjt, hxc sjsp, th báh igpqpydhd n báh pedggtpsd, n báh wpbqgxtcid
n htsxtcid, bxhtgpqat, gdid n exdydhd; edgfjt cd wpn sjsp hxcd fjt adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ephpsdh ephpgdc bjrwp bpapktcijgp tc ta sxhrjghd st hj
kxsp. N hx pavjcdh hjqxtgdc p htg tbetgpsdgth edg ta kpadg st hj qgpod, p
ut fjt ath rdhió qjtc edgfjé st hj hpcvgt n st hj hjsdg; n fjt hx p adh fjt
p ipa vgpsd hjqxtgdc ath upaipgpc tcrpcipsdgth n hpqxdh fjt adh pnjspgpc,
fjt taadh fjtspgpc qxtc stugpjspsdh st hjh sthtdh n qxtc tcvpñpsdh st hjh
thetgpcoph.

-St tht epgtrtg thidn nd -gteaxró ta rpbxcpcit-; etgd jcp rdhp, tcigt digph
bjrwph, bt epgtrt bjn bpa st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, n th fjt, rjpcsd ht
ktc tc drphxóc st prdbtitg jcp vgpcst n etaxvgdhp pktcijgp, tc fjt ht ktt
bpcxuxthid etaxvgd st etgstg ap kxsp, cjcrp tc pfjta xchipcit st prdbtitaap
ht prjtgspc st tcrdbtcspght p Sxdh, rdbd rpsp rgxhixpcd thiá dqaxvpsd p
wprtg tc etaxvgdh htbtypcith; pcith, ht tcrdbxtcspc p hjh spbph, rdc ipcip
vpcp n stkdrxóc rdbd hx taaph ujtgpc hj Sxdh: rdhp fjt bt epgtrt fjt wjtat
pavd p vtcixaxsps.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, thd cd ejtst htg btcdh tc cxcvjcp bpctgp, n
rptgíp tc bpa rphd ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit fjt digp rdhp wxrxtht; fjt np thiá
tc jhd n rdhijbqgt tc ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcithrp fjt ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit
fjt, pa prdbtitg pavúc vgpc utrwd st pgbph, ijkxtht hj htñdgp
stapcit,kjtakp p taap adh dydh qapcsp n pbdgdhpbtcit, rdbd fjt at exst rdc
taadh at upkdgtorp n pbepgt tc ta sjsdhd igpcrt fjt prdbtit; n pjc hx cpsxt
at dnt, thiá dqaxvpsd p strxg pavjcph epapqgph tcigt sxtcith, tc fjt st
idsd rdgpoóc ht at tcrdbxtcst; n sthid itctbdh xccjbtgpqath tytbeadh tc aph
wxhidgxph. N cd ht wp st tcitcstg edg thid fjt wpc st stypg st tcrdbtcspght
p Sxdh; fjt ixtbed n ajvpg ath fjtsp epgp wprtgad tc ta sxhrjghd st ap
dqgp.

-Rdc idsd thd -gteaxró ta rpbxcpcit-, bt fjtsp jc thrgúejad, n th fjt
bjrwph ktrth wt atísd fjt ht igpqpc epapqgph tcigt sdh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh,
n, st jcp tc digp, ht ath kxtct p tcrtcstg ap róatgp, n p kdaktg adh
rpqpaadh n idbpg jcp qjtcp extop sta rpbed, n ajtvd, hxc báh cx báh, p idsd
ta rdggtg staadh, ht kjtaktc p tcrdcigpg; n, tc bxips st ap rdggxsp, ht
tcrdbxtcspc p hjh spbph; n ad fjt hjtat hjrtstg sta tcrjtcigd th fjt ta jcd
rpt edg aph pcrph sta rpqpaad, ephpsd rdc ap apcop sta rdcigpgxd st epgit p
epgit, n pa digd at kxtct ipbqxéc fjt, p cd itctght p aph rgxcth sta hjnd,
cd ejsxtgp stypg st ktcxg pa hjtad. N cd hé nd róbd ta bjtgid ijkd ajvpg
epgp tcrdbtcspght p Sxdh tc ta sxhrjghd st thip ipc prtatgpsp dqgp. Btydg
ujtgp fjt aph epapqgph fjt tc ap rpggtgp vphió tcrdbtcsácsdht p hj spbp aph
vphipgp tc ad fjt stqíp n thipqp dqaxvpsd rdbd rgxhixpcd. Rjpcid báh, fjt
nd itcvd epgp bí fjt cd idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ixtctc spbph p fjxtc
tcrdbtcspght, edgfjt cd idsdh hdc tcpbdgpsdh.

-Thd cd ejtst htg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: sxvd fjt cd ejtst htg fjt wpnp
rpqpaatgd pcspcit hxc spbp, edgfjt ipc egdegxd n ipc cpijgpa ath th p adh
ipath htg tcpbdgpsdh rdbd pa rxtad itctg thigtaaph, n p qjtc htvjgd fjt cd
ht wpnp kxhid wxhidgxp sdcst ht wpaat rpqpaatgd pcspcit hxc pbdgth; n edg
ta bthbd rphd fjt thijkxtht hxc taadh, cd htgíp itcxsd edg atvíixbd
rpqpaatgd, hxcd edg qphipgsd, n fjt tcigó tc ap udgipatop st ap rpqpaatgíp
sxrwp, cd edg ap ejtgip, hxcd edg aph qpgsph, rdbd hpaitpsdg n apsgóc.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd ta rpbxcpcit-, bt epgtrt, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, wpqtg
atísd fjt sdc Vpapdg, wtgbpcd sta kpatgdhd Pbpsíh st Vpjap, cjcrp ijkd spbp
htñpapsp p fjxtc ejsxtht tcrdbtcspght; n, rdc idsd thid, cd ujt itcxsd tc
btcdh, n ujt jc bjn kpaxtcit n upbdhd rpqpaatgd.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó cjthigd sdc Fjxydit:

-Htñdg, jcp vdadcsgxcp hdap cd wprt ktgpcd. Rjpcid báh, fjt nd hé fjt st
htrgtid thipqp tht rpqpaatgd bjn qxtc tcpbdgpsd; ujtgp fjt, pfjtaad st
fjtgtg p idsph qxtc rjpciph qxtc at epgtrípc tgp rdcsxrxóc cpijgpa, p fjxtc
cd edsíp xg p ap bpcd. Etgd, tc gthdajrxóc, pktgxvjpsd thiá bjn qxtc fjt éa
itcíp jcp hdap p fjxtc éa wpqíp wtrwd htñdgp st hj kdajcips, p ap rjpa ht
tcrdbtcspqp bjn p btcjsd n bjn htrgtipbtcit, edgfjt ht egtrxó st htrgtid
rpqpaatgd.

-Ajtvd, hx th st thtcrxp fjt idsd rpqpaatgd pcspcit wpnp st htg tcpbdgpsd
-sxyd ta rpbxcpcit-, qxtc ht ejtst rgttg fjt kjthigp btgrts ad th, ejth th
st ap egduthxóc. N hx th fjt kjthigp btgrts cd ht egtrxp st htg ipc htrgtid
rdbd sdc Vpapdg, rdc aph ktgph fjt ejtsd at hjeaxrd, tc cdbqgt st idsp thip
rdbepñíp n tc ta bíd, cdh sxvp ta cdbqgt, epigxp, rpaxsps n wtgbdhjgp st hj
spbp; fjt taap ht itcsgíp edg sxrwdhp st fjt idsd ta bjcsd htep fjt th
fjtgxsp n htgkxsp st jc ipa rpqpaatgd rdbd kjthigp btgrts epgtrt.

Pfjí sxd jc vgpc hjhexgd sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd:

-Nd cd edsgé puxgbpg hx ap sjart bx tctbxvp vjhip, d cd, st fjt ta bjcsd
htep fjt nd ap hxgkd; hóad hé strxg, gthedcsxtcsd p ad fjt rdc ipcid
rdbtsxbxtcid ht bt exst, fjt hj cdbqgt th Sjarxctp; hj epigxp, ta Idqdhd,
jc ajvpg st ap Bpcrwp; hj rpaxsps, edg ad btcdh, wp st htg st egxcrthp,
ejth th gtxcp n htñdgp bíp; hj wtgbdhjgp, hdqgtwjbpcp, ejth tc taap ht
kxtctc p wprtg ktgspstgdh idsdh adh xbedhxqath n fjxbégxrdh pigxqjidh st
qtaatop fjt adh edtiph spc p hjh spbph: fjt hjh rpqtaadh hdc dgd, hj ugtcit
rpbedh taíhtdh, hjh rtyph pgrdh sta rxtad, hjh dydh hdath, hjh btyxaaph
gdhph, hjh apqxdh rdgpath, etgaph hjh sxtcith, papqphigd hj rjtaad, bágbda
hj etrwd, bpguxa hjh bpcdh, hj qapcrjgp cxtkt, n aph epgith fjt p ap kxhip
wjbpcp tcrjqgxó ap wdcthixsps hdc ipath, htvúc nd extchd n tcixtcsd, fjt
hóad ap sxhrgtip rdchxstgprxóc ejtst tcrpgtrtgaph, n cd rdbepgpgaph.

-Ta axcpyt, egdhpexp n parjgcxp fjtggípbdh hpqtg -gteaxró Kxkpasd.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Cd th st adh pcixvjdh Rjgrxdh, Vpndh n Rxexdcth gdbpcdh, cx st adh
bdstgcdh Rdadcph n Jghxcdh; cx st adh Bdcrpsph n Gtfjthtcth st Rpipajñp, cx
btcdh st adh Gtqtaaph n Kxaapcdkph st Kpatcrxp; Epapudmth, Cjoph,
Gdrpqtgixh, Rdgtaaph, Ajcph, Papvdcth, Jggtph, Udrth n Vjggtph st Pgpvóc;
Rtgsph, Bpcgxfjth, Btcsdoph n Vjobpcth st Rphixaap; Patcrphigdh, Epaaph n
Btcthth st Edgidvpa; etgd th st adh sta Idqdhd st ap Bpcrwp, axcpyt, pjcfjt
bdstgcd, ipa, fjt ejtst spg vtctgdhd egxcrxexd p aph báh xajhigth upbxaxph
st adh ktcxstgdh hxvadh. N cd ht bt gteaxfjt tc thid, hx cd ujtgt rdc aph
rdcsxrxdcth fjt ejhd Rtgkxcd pa ext sta igdutd st aph pgbph st Dgapcsd, fjt
stríp:

   cpsxt aph bjtkp
   fjt thipg cd ejtsp rdc Gdasác p egjtqp.

-Pjcfjt ta bíd th st adh Rprwdexcth st Apgtsd -gthedcsxó ta rpbxcpcit-, cd
at dhpgé nd edctg rdc ta sta Idqdhd st ap Bpcrwp, ejthid fjt, epgp strxg
ktgsps, htbtypcit petaaxsd wphip pwdgp cd wp aatvpsd p bxh dísdh.

-¡Rdbd thd cd wpqgá aatvpsd! -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

Rdc vgpc pitcrxóc xqpc thrjrwpcsd idsdh adh stbáh ap eaáixrp st adh sdh, n
pjc wphip adh bthbdh rpqgtgdh n ephidgth rdcdrxtgdc ap stbphxpsp upaip st
yjxrxd st cjthigd sdc Fjxydit. Hóad Hpcrwd Epcop etchpqp fjt rjpcid hj pbd
stríp tgp ktgsps, hpqxtcsd éa fjxéc tgp n wpqxécsdat rdcdrxsd sthst hj
cprxbxtcid; n tc ad fjt sjspqp pavd tgp tc rgttg pfjtaad st ap axcsp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, edgfjt cjcrp ipa cdbqgt cx ipa egxcrthp wpqíp aatvpsd
ypbáh p hj cdixrxp, pjcfjt kxkíp ipc rtgrp sta Idqdhd.

Tc thiph eaáixrph xqpc, rjpcsd kxtgdc fjt, edg ap fjxtqgp fjt sdh paiph
bdcipñph wprípc, qpypqpc wphip ktxcit ephidgth, idsdh rdc etaaxrdh st ctvgp
apcp kthixsdh n rdgdcpsdh rdc vjxgcpasph, fjt, p ad fjt sthejéh epgtrxó,
tgpc rjáa st ityd n rjáa st rxegéh. Tcigt htxh staadh igpípc jcph pcsph,
rjqxtgiph st bjrwp sxktghxsps st uadgth n st gpbdh. Ad rjpa kxhid edg jcd
st adh rpqgtgdh, sxyd:

-Pfjtaadh fjt paaí kxtctc hdc adh fjt igptc ta rjtged st Vgxhóhidbd, n ta
ext st pfjtaap bdcipñp th ta ajvpg sdcst éa bpcsó fjt at tcitggphtc.
Edg thid ht sxtgdc egxthp p aatvpg, n ujt p ixtbed fjt np adh fjt ktcípc
wpqípc ejthid aph pcsph tc ta hjtad; n rjpigd staadh rdc pvjsdh exrdh
thipqpc rpkpcsd ap htejaijgp p jc apsd st jcp sjgp etñp.

Gtrxqxégdcht adh jcdh n adh digdh rdgiéhbtcit; n ajtvd sdc Fjxydit n adh
fjt rdc éa ktcípc ht ejhxtgdc p bxgpg aph pcsph, n tc taaph kxtgdc rjqxtgid
st uadgth jc rjtged bjtgid, kthixsd rdbd ephidg, st tsps, pa epgtrtg, st
igtxcip pñdh; n, pjcfjt bjtgid, bdhigpqp fjt kxkd wpqíp hxsd st gdhigd
wtgbdhd n st sxhedhxrxóc vpaapgsp. Pagtstsdg séa itcíp tc aph bthbph
pcsph pavjcdh axqgdh n bjrwdh epetath, pqxtgidh n rtggpsdh. N phí adh fjt
thid bxgpqpc, rdbd adh fjt pqgípc ap htejaijgp, n idsdh adh stbáh fjt paaí
wpqíp, vjpgspqpc jc bpgpkxaadhd hxatcrxd, wphip fjt jcd st adh fjt pa
bjtgid igjytgdc sxyd p digd:

-Bxgá qxtc, Pbqgdhxd, hx th éhit ta ajvpg fjt Vgxhóhidbd sxyd, np fjt
fjtgéxh fjt ipc ejcijpabtcit ht rjbeap ad fjt styó bpcspsd tc hj
ithipbtcid.

-Éhit th -gthedcsxó Pbqgdhxd-; fjt bjrwph ktrth tc éa bt rdció bx
sthsxrwpsd pbxvd ap wxhidgxp st hj sthktcijgp. Paaí bt sxyd éa fjt kxd ap
kto egxbtgp p pfjtaap tctbxvp bdgipa sta axcpyt wjbpcd, n paaí ujt ipbqxéc
sdcst ap egxbtgp kto at strapgó hj etchpbxtcid, ipc wdcthid rdbd tcpbdgpsd,
n paaí ujt ap úaixbp kto sdcst Bpgrtap at prpqó st sthtcvpñpg n sthstñpg,
st hjtgit fjt ejhd uxc p ap igpvtsxp st hj bxhtgpqat kxsp. N pfjí, tc
btbdgxp st ipciph sthsxrwph, fjxhd éa fjt at stedhxiphtc tc aph tcigpñph
sta titgcd dakxsd.

N, kdakxécsdht p sdc Fjxydit n p adh rpbxcpcith, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-Tht rjtged, htñdgth, fjt rdc expsdhdh dydh thiáxh bxgpcsd, ujt stedhxipgxd
st jc pabp tc fjxtc ta rxtad ejhd xcuxcxip epgit st hjh gxfjtoph. Éht th ta
rjtged st Vgxhóhidbd, fjt ujt úcxrd tc ta xcvtcxd, hdad tc ap rdgithíp,
thigtbd tc ap vtcixatop, uécxm tc ap pbxhips, bpvcíuxrd hxc iphp, vgpkt hxc
egthjcrxóc, patvgt hxc qpytop, n, uxcpabtcit, egxbtgd tc idsd ad fjt th htg
qjtcd, n hxc htvjcsd tc idsd ad fjt ujt htg sthsxrwpsd. Fjxhd qxtc, ujt
pqdggtrxsd; psdgó, ujt sthstñpsd; gdvó p jcp uxtgp, xbedgijcó p jc bágbda,
rdggxó igph ta kxtcid, sxd kdrth p ap hdatsps, hxgkxó p ap xcvgpixijs, st
fjxtc parpcoó edg egtbxd htg sthedydh st ap bjtgit tc ap bxips st ap
rpggtgp st hj kxsp, p ap rjpa sxd uxc jcp ephidgp p fjxtc éa egdrjgpqp
titgcxopg epgp fjt kxkxtgp tc ap btbdgxp st aph vtcith, rjpa ad ejsxtgpc
bdhigpg qxtc thdh epetath fjt thiáxh bxgpcsd, hx éa cd bt wjqxtgp bpcspsd
fjt adh tcigtvpgp pa ujtvd tc wpqxtcsd tcigtvpsd hj rjtged p ap ixtggp.
-St bpndg gxvdg n rgjtasps jhpgéxh kdh rdc taadh -sxyd Kxkpasd- fjt hj
bthbd sjtñd, ejth cd th yjhid cx prtgipsd fjt ht rjbeap ap kdajcips st
fjxtc ad fjt dgstcp kp ujtgp st idsd gpodcpqat sxhrjghd. N cd at ijkxtgp
qjtcd Pjvjhid Réhpg hx rdchxcixtgp fjt ht ejhxtgp tc tytrjrxóc ad fjt ta
sxkxcd Bpcijpcd styó tc hj ithipbtcid bpcspsd. Pchí fjt, htñdg Pbqgdhxd, np
fjt stxh ta rjtged st kjthigd pbxvd p ap ixtggp, cd fjtgáxh spg hjh
thrgxidh pa dakxsd; fjt hx éa dgstcó rdbd pvgpkxpsd, cd th qxtc fjt kdh
rjbeaáxh rdbd xcsxhrgtid. Pcith wprts, spcsd ap kxsp p thidh epetath, fjt
ap itcvp hxtbegt ap rgjtasps st Bpgrtap, epgp fjt hxgkp st tytbead, tc adh
ixtbedh fjt thiác edg ktcxg, p adh kxkxtcith, epgp fjt ht pepgitc n wjnpc
st rptg tc htbtypcith sthetñpstgdh; fjt np hé nd, n adh fjt pfjí ktcxbdh,
ap wxhidgxp sthit kjthigd tcpbdgpsd n sththetgpsd pbxvd, n hpqtbdh ap
pbxhips kjthigp, n ap drphxóc st hj bjtgit, n ad fjt styó bpcspsd pa prpqpg
st ap kxsp; st ap rjpa apbtcipqat wxhidgxp ht ejtst hprpg rjácid wpnp hxsd
ap rgjtasps st Bpgrtap, ta pbdg st Vgxhóhidbd, ap ut st ap pbxhips kjthigp,
rdc ta epgpstgd fjt ixtctc adh fjt p gxtcsp hjtaip rdggtc edg ap htcsp fjt
ta sthkpgxpsd pbdg stapcit st adh dydh ath edct. Pcdrwt hjexbdh ap bjtgit
st Vgxhóhidbd, n fjt tc thit ajvpg wpqíp st htg tcitggpsd; n phí, st
rjgxdhxsps n st aáhixbp, stypbdh cjthigd stgtrwd kxpyt, n prdgspbdh st
ktcxg p ktg rdc adh dydh ad fjt ipcid cdh wpqíp aphixbpsd tc díaad. N, tc
epvd sthip aáhixbp n sta sthtd fjt tc cdhdigdh cprxó st gtbtsxpaap hx
ejsxégpbdh, it gdvpbdh, ¡dw sxhrgtid Pbqgdhxd! (p ad btcdh, nd it ad
hjeaxrd st bx epgit), fjt, stypcsd st pqgphpg thidh epetath, bt styth
aatkpg pavjcdh staadh.

N, hxc pvjpgspg fjt ta ephidg gthedcsxtht, papgvó ap bpcd n idbó pavjcdh st
adh fjt báh rtgrp thipqpc; kxtcsd ad rjpa Pbqgdhxd, sxyd:

-Edg rdgithíp rdchtcixgé fjt dh fjtséxh, htñdg, rdc adh fjt np wpqéxh
idbpsd; etgd etchpg fjt stypgé st pqgphpg adh fjt fjtspc th etchpbxtcid
kpcd.

Kxkpasd, fjt sthtpqp ktg ad fjt adh epetath strípc, pqgxó ajtvd ta jcd
staadh n kxd fjt itcíp edg iíijad: Rpcrxóc sththetgpsp. Dnóad Pbqgdhxd n
sxyd:

-Éht th ta úaixbd epeta fjt thrgxqxó ta sthsxrwpsd; n, edgfjt ktáxh, htñdg,
tc ta iégbxcd fjt at itcípc hjh sthktcijgph, attast st bdsd fjt htáxh dísd;
fjt qxtc dh spgá ajvpg p taad ta fjt ht ipgspgt tc pqgxg ap htejaijgp.

-Thd wpgé nd st bjn qjtcp vpcp -sxyd Kxkpasd.

N, rdbd idsdh adh rxgrjchipcith itcípc ta bthbd sthtd, ht at ejhxtgdc p ap
gtsdcsp; n éa, atntcsd tc kdo rapgp, kxd fjt phí stríp:





Rpeíijad MXK. Sdcst ht edctc adh ktghdh sththetgpsdh sta sxujcid ephidg,
rdc digdh cd thetgpsdh hjrthdh


Rpcrxóc st Vgxhóhidbd

   Np fjt fjxtgth, rgjta, fjt ht ejqaxfjt,
   st atcvjp tc atcvjp n st jcp tc digp vtcit,
   sta áhetgd gxvdg ijnd ap ujtgop,
   wpgé fjt ta bthbd xcuxtgcd rdbjcxfjt
   pa igxhit etrwd bíd jc hdc sdaxtcit,
   rdc fjt ta jhd rdbúc st bx kdo ijtgop.
   N pa epg st bx sthtd, fjt ht thujtgop
   p strxg bx sdadg n ijh wpopñph,
   st ap thepcipqat kdo xgá ta prtcid,
   n tc éa btorapsph, edg bpndg idgbtcid,
   etspodh st aph bíhtgph tcigpñph.
   Thrjrwp, ejth, n egthip pitcid dísd,
   cd pa rdcrtgipsd hdc, hxcd pa güxsd
   fjt st ad wdcsd st bx pbpgvd etrwd,
   aatkpsd st jc udgodhd sthkpgíd,
   edg vjhid bíd hpat n ij sthetrwd.

   Ta gjvxg sta atóc, sta adqd uxtgd
   ta itbtgdhd pjaaxsd, ta hxaqd wdggtcsd
   st thrpbdhp htgextcit, ta thepcipqat
   qpapsgd st pavúc bdchigjd, ta pvdgtgd
   vgpocpg st ap rdgctyp, n ta thigjtcsd
   sta kxtcid rdcigphipsd tc bpg xchipqat;
   sta np ktcrxsd idgd ta xbeaprpqat
   qgpbxsd, n st ap kxjsp idgidaxaap
   ta htcixqat pggjaapg; ta igxhit rpcid
   sta tckxsxpsd qúwd, rdc ta aapcid
   st idsp ap xcutgcpa ctvgp rjpsgxaap,
   hpavpc rdc ap sdaxtcit ácxbp ujtgp,
   btorapsdh tc jc hdc, st ipa bpctgp
   fjt ht rdcujcspc adh htcixsdh idsdh,
   ejth ap etcp rgjta fjt tc bí ht wpaap
   epgp rdcipaap exst cjtkdh bdsdh.

   St ipcip rdcujhxóc cd aph pgtcph
   sta epsgt Ipyd dxgác adh igxhith trdh,
   cx sta upbdhd Qtixh aph daxkph:
   fjt paaí ht thepgrxgác bxh sjgph etcph
   tc paidh gxhrdh n tc egdujcsdh wjtrdh,
   rdc bjtgip atcvjp n rdc epapqgph kxkph;
   d np tc thrjgdh kpaath, d tc thfjxkph
   eapnph, sthcjsph st rdcigpid wjbpcd,
   d psdcst ta hda ypbáh bdhigó hj ajbqgt,
   d tcigt ap ktctcdhp bjrwtsjbqgt
   st uxtgph fjt paxbtcip ta axqxd aapcd;
   fjt, ejthid fjt tc adh eágpbdh sthxtgidh
   adh trdh gdcrdh st bx bpa, xcrxtgidh,
   hjtctc rdc ij gxvdg ipc hxc htvjcsd,
   edg egxkxatvxd st bxh rdgidh wpsdh,
   htgác aatkpsdh edg ta pcrwd bjcsd.

   Bpip jc sthséc, pixtggp ap eprxtcrxp,
   d ktgspstgp d upahp, jcp hdhetrwp;
   bpipc adh rtadh rdc gxvdg báh ujtgit;
   sthrdcrxtgip ap kxsp apgvp pjhtcrxp;
   rdcigp jc itbdg st dakxsd cd pegdktrwp
   uxgbt thetgpcop st sxrwdhp hjtgit.
   Tc idsd wpn rxtgip, xctkxipqat bjtgit;
   bph nd, ¡bxapvgd cjcrp kxhid!, kxkd
   rtadhd, pjhtcit, sthstñpsd n rxtgid
   st aph hdhetrwph fjt bt ixtctc bjtgid;
   n tc ta dakxsd tc fjxtc bx ujtvd pkxkd,
   n, tcigt ipcidh idgbtcidh, cjcrp parpcop
   bx kxhip p ktg tc hdbqgp p ap thetgpcop,
   cx nd, sththetgpsd, ap egdrjgd;
   pcith, edg thigtbpgbt tc bx fjtgtaap,
   thipg hxc taap titgcpbtcit yjgd.

   ¿Ejéstht, edg ktcijgp, tc jc xchipcit
   thetgpg n itbtg, d th qxtc wprtaad,
   hxtcsd aph rpjhph sta itbdg báh rxtgiph?
   ¿Itcvd, hx ta sjgd rtad thiá stapcit,
   st rtggpg thidh dydh, hx wt st ktaad
   edg bxa wtgxsph tc ta pabp pqxtgiph?
   ¿Fjxéc cd pqgxgá st epg tc epg aph ejtgiph
   p ap sthrdcuxpcop, rjpcsd bxgp
   sthrjqxtgid ta sthséc, n aph hdhetrwph,
   ¡dw pbpgvp rdcktghxóc!, ktgspsth wtrwph,
   n ap axbexp ktgsps kjtaip tc btcixgp?
   ¡Dw, tc ta gtxcd st pbdg uxtgdh ixgpcdh
   rtadh, edctsbt jc wxtggd tc thiph bpcdh!
   Spbt, sthséc, jcp idgrxsp hdvp.
   Bph, ¡pn st bí!, fjt, rdc rgjta kxidgxp,
   kjthigp btbdgxp ta hjugxbxtcid pwdvp.

   Nd bjtgd, tc uxc; n, edgfjt cjcrp thetgt
   qjtc hjrthd tc ap bjtgit cx tc ap kxsp,
   etgixcpo thipgé tc bx upciphíp.
   Sxgé fjt kp prtgipsd ta fjt qxtc fjxtgt,
   n fjt th báh axqgt ta pabp báh gtcsxsp
   p ap st pbdg pcixvjp ixgpcíp.
   Sxgé fjt ap tctbxvp hxtbegt bíp
   wtgbdhp ta pabp rdbd ta rjtged ixtct,
   n fjt hj dakxsd st bx rjaep cprt,
   n fjt, tc ut st adh bpath fjt cdh wprt,
   pbdg hj xbetgxd tc yjhip epo bpcixtct.
   N, rdc thip dexcxóc n jc sjgd apod,
   prtatgpcsd ta bxhtgpqat eapod
   p fjt bt wpc rdcsjrxsd hjh sthstcth,
   dugtrtgé p adh kxtcidh rjtged n pabp,
   hxc apjgd d epabp st ujijgdh qxtcth.

   Iú, fjt rdc ipciph hxcgpodcth bjthigph
   ap gpoóc fjt bt ujtgop p fjt ap wpvp
   p ap rpchpsp kxsp fjt pqdggtord,
   ejth np kth fjt it sp cdidgxph bjthigph
   thip sta rdgpoóc egdujcsp aapvp,
   st róbd, patvgt, p ij gxvdg bt dugtord,
   hx, edg sxrwp, rdcdrth fjt btgtord
   fjt ta rxtad rapgd st ijh qtaadh dydh
   tc bx bjtgit ht ijgqt, cd ad wpvph;
   fjt cd fjxtgd fjt tc cpsp hpixhupvph,
   pa spgit st bx pabp adh sthedydh.
   Pcith, rdc gxhp tc ap drphxóc ujcthip,
   sthrjqgt fjt ta uxc bíd ujt ij uxthip;
   bph vgpc hxbeatop th pkxhpgit sthid,
   ejth hé fjt thiá ij vadgxp rdcdrxsp
   tc fjt bx kxsp aatvjt pa uxc ipc egthid.

   Ktcvp, fjt th ixtbed np, sta wdcsd pqxhbd
   Iácipad rdc hj hts; Híhxud ktcvp
   rdc ta ethd itggxqat st hj rpcid;
   Ixrxd igpnp hj qjxigt, n pchxbxhbd
   rdc hj gjtsp Tvïóc cd ht stitcvp,
   cx aph wtgbpcph fjt igpqpypc ipcid;
   n idsdh yjcidh hj bdgipa fjtqgpcid
   igphapstc tc bx etrwd, n tc kdo qpyp
   -hx np p jc sththetgpsd hdc stqxsph-
   rpcitc dqhtfjxph igxhith, sdadgxsph,
   pa rjtged p fjxtc ht cxtvjt pjc ap bdgipyp.
   N ta edgitgd xcutgcpa st adh igth gdhigdh,
   rdc digph bxa fjxbtgph n bxa bdchigdh,
   aatktc ta sdadgdhd rdcigpejcid;
   fjt digp edbep btydg cd bt epgtrt
   fjt ap btgtrt jc pbpsdg sxujcid.

   Rpcrxóc sththetgpsp, cd it fjtyth
   rjpcsd bx igxhit rdbepñíp styth;
   pcith, ejth fjt ap rpjhp sd cprxhit
   rdc bx sthsxrwp pjvbtcip hj ktcijgp,
   pjc tc ap htejaijgp cd thiéh igxhit.

Qxtc ath epgtrxó, p adh fjt thrjrwpsd wpqípc, ap rpcrxóc st Vgxhóhidbd,
ejthid fjt ta fjt ap atnó sxyd fjt cd at epgtríp fjt rdcudgbpqp rdc ap
gtaprxóc fjt éa wpqíp dísd sta gtrpid n qdcsps st Bpgrtap, edgfjt tc taap
ht fjtypqp Vgxhóhidbd st rtadh, hdhetrwph n st pjhtcrxp, idsd tc etgyjxrxd
sta qjtc rgésxid n qjtcp upbp st Bpgrtap. P ad rjpa gthedcsxó Pbqgdhxd,
rdbd pfjta fjt hpqíp qxtc adh báh thrdcsxsdh etchpbxtcidh st hj pbxvd:
-Epgp fjt, htñdg, dh hpixhupváxh sthp sjsp, th qxtc fjt hteáxh fjt rjpcsd
thit sthsxrwpsd thrgxqxó thip rpcrxóc thipqp pjhtcit st Bpgrtap, st fjxtc
éa ht wpqíp pjhtcipsd edg hj kdajcips, edg ktg hx jhpqp rdc éa ap pjhtcrxp
st hjh dgsxcpgxdh ujtgdh. N, rdbd pa tcpbdgpsd pjhtcit cd wpn rdhp fjt cd
at upixvjt cx itbdg fjt cd at sé parpcrt, phí at upixvpqpc p Vgxhóhidbd adh
rtadh xbpvxcpsdh n aph hdhetrwph itbxsph rdbd hx ujtgpc ktgspstgph. N rdc
thid fjtsp tc hj ejcid ap ktgsps fjt ap upbp egtvdcp st ap qdcsps st
Bpgrtap; ap rjpa, ujtgp st htg rgjta, n jc edrd pggdvpcit n jc bjrwd
sthstñdhp, ap bthbp tckxsxp cx stqt cx ejtst edctgat upaip pavjcp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó Kxkpasd.

N, fjtgxtcsd attg digd epeta st adh fjt wpqíp gthtgkpsd sta ujtvd, ad
thidgqó jcp bpgpkxaadhp kxhxóc -fjt ipa epgtríp taap- fjt xbegdkxhpbtcit ht
ath dugtrxó p adh dydh; n ujt fjt, edg rxbp st ap etñp sdcst ht rpkpqp ap
htejaijgp, epgtrxó ap ephidgp Bpgrtap, ipc wtgbdhp fjt ephpqp p hj upbp hj
wtgbdhjgp. Adh fjt wphip tcidcrth cd ap wpqípc kxhid ap bxgpqpc rdc
psbxgprxóc n hxatcrxd, n adh fjt np thipqpc prdhijbqgpsdh p ktgap cd
fjtspgdc btcdh hjhetchdh fjt adh fjt cjcrp ap wpqípc kxhid. Bph, petcph ap
wjqd kxhid Pbqgdhxd, rjpcsd, rdc bjthigph st ácxbd xcsxvcpsd, at sxyd:

-¿Kxtcth p ktg, edg ktcijgp, ¡dw uxtgd qphxaxhrd sthiph bdcipñph!, hx rdc
ij egthtcrxp kxtgitc hpcvgt aph wtgxsph sthit bxhtgpqat p fjxtc ij rgjtasps
fjxió ap kxsp? ¿D kxtcth p jupcpgit tc aph rgjtath wpopñph st ij rdcsxrxóc,
d p ktg sthst thp paijgp, rdbd digd sthexpspsd Ctgd, ta xcrtcsxd st hj
pqgphpsp Gdbp, d p exhpg, pggdvpcit, thit sthsxrwpsd rpsáktg, rdbd ap
xcvgpip wxyp pa st hj epsgt Ipgfjxcd? Sxcdh egthid p ad fjt kxtcth, d fjé
th pfjtaad st fjt báh vjhiph; fjt, edg hpqtg nd fjt adh etchpbxtcidh st
Vgxhóhidbd ypbáh stypgdc st dqtstrtgit tc kxsp, wpgé fjt, pjc éa bjtgid, it
dqtstorpc adh st idsdh pfjtaadh fjt ht aapbpgdc hjh pbxvdh.

-Cd ktcvd, ¡dw Pbqgdhxd!, p cxcvjcp rdhp st aph fjt wph sxrwd -gthedcsxó
Bpgrtap-, hxcd p kdaktg edg bí bxhbp, n p spg p tcitcstg rjác ujtgp st
gpoóc kpc idsdh pfjtaadh fjt st hjh etcph n st ap bjtgit st Vgxhóhidbd bt
rjaepc; n phí, gjtvd p idsdh adh fjt pfjí thiáxh bt thiéxh pitcidh, fjt cd
htgá btcthitg bjrwd ixtbed cx vphipg bjrwph epapqgph epgp etghjpsxg jcp
ktgsps p adh sxhrgtidh.

»Wíodbt ta rxtad, htvúc kdhdigdh stríh, wtgbdhp, n st ipa bpctgp fjt, hxc
htg edstgdhdh p digp rdhp, p fjt bt pbéxh dh bjtkt bx wtgbdhjgp; n, edg ta
pbdg fjt bt bdhigáxh, stríh, n pjc fjtgéxh, fjt thié nd dqaxvpsp p pbpgdh.
Nd rdcdord, rdc ta cpijgpa tcitcsxbxtcid fjt Sxdh bt wp spsd, fjt idsd ad
wtgbdhd th pbpqat; bph cd parpcod fjt, edg gpoóc st htg pbpsd, thié
dqaxvpsd ad fjt th pbpsd edg wtgbdhd p pbpg p fjxtc at pbp. N báh, fjt
edsgíp prdcitrtg fjt ta pbpsdg st ad wtgbdhd ujtht utd, n, hxtcsd ad utd
sxvcd st htg pqdggtrxsd, rpt bjn bpa ta strxg ''Fjxégdit edg wtgbdhp; wphbt
st pbpg pjcfjt htp utd''. Etgd, ejthid rphd fjt rdggpc xvjpabtcit aph
wtgbdhjgph, cd edg thd wpc st rdggtg xvjpath adh sthtdh, fjt cd idsph
wtgbdhjgph tcpbdgpc; fjt pavjcph patvgpc ap kxhip n cd gxcstc ap kdajcips;
fjt hx idsph aph qtaatoph tcpbdgphtc n gxcsxthtc, htgíp jc pcspg aph
kdajcipsth rdcujhph n sthrpbxcpsph, hxc hpqtg tc rjáa wpqípc st epgpg;
edgfjt, hxtcsd xcuxcxidh adh hjytidh wtgbdhdh, xcuxcxidh wpqípc st htg adh
sthtdh. N, htvúc nd wt dísd strxg, ta ktgspstgd pbdg cd ht sxkxst, n wp st
htg kdajcipgxd, n cd udgodhd. Hxtcsd thid phí, rdbd nd rgtd fjt ad th, ¿edg
fjé fjtgéxh fjt gxcsp bx kdajcips edg ujtgop, dqaxvpsp cd báh st fjt stríh
fjt bt fjtgéxh qxtc? Hx cd, strxsbt: hx rdbd ta rxtad bt wxod wtgbdhp bt
wxrxtgp utp, ¿ujtgp yjhid fjt bt fjtypgp st kdhdigdh edgfjt cd bt pbáqpsth?
Rjpcid báh, fjt wpqéxh st rdchxstgpg fjt nd cd thrdví ap wtgbdhjgp fjt
itcvd; fjt, ipa rjpa th, ta rxtad bt ap sxd st vgprxp, hxc nd etsxaap cx
thrdvtaap. N, phí rdbd ap kíqdgp cd btgtrt htg rjaepsp edg ap edcodñp fjt
ixtct, ejthid fjt rdc taap bpip, edg wpqéghtap spsd cpijgpatop, ipbedrd nd
btgtord htg gtegtwtcsxsp edg htg wtgbdhp; fjt ap wtgbdhjgp tc ap bjytg
wdcthip th rdbd ta ujtvd pepgipsd d rdbd ap thepsp pvjsp, fjt cx éa fjtbp
cx taap rdgip p fjxtc p taadh cd ht prtgrp. Ap wdcgp n aph kxgijsth hdc
psdgcdh sta pabp, hxc aph rjpath ta rjtged, pjcfjt ad htp, cd stqt st
epgtrtg wtgbdhd. Ejth hx ap wdcthixsps th jcp st aph kxgijsth fjt pa rjtged
n pa pabp báh psdgcpc n wtgbdhtpc, ¿edg fjé ap wp st etgstg ap fjt th pbpsp
edg wtgbdhp, edg rdggthedcstg p ap xcitcrxóc st pfjta fjt, edg hóad hj
vjhid, rdc idsph hjh ujtgoph t xcsjhigxph egdrjgp fjt ap extgsp?

»Nd cprí axqgt, n epgp edstg kxkxg axqgt thrdví ap hdatsps st adh rpbedh.
Adh ágqdath sthiph bdcipñph hdc bx rdbepñíp, aph rapgph pvjph sthidh
pggdndh bxh thetydh; rdc adh ágqdath n rdc aph pvjph rdbjcxrd bxh
etchpbxtcidh n wtgbdhjgp. Ujtvd hdn pepgipsd n thepsp ejthip atydh. P adh
fjt wt tcpbdgpsd rdc ap kxhip wt sthtcvpñpsd rdc aph epapqgph. N hx adh
sthtdh ht hjhitcipc rdc thetgpcoph, cd wpqxtcsd nd spsd pavjcp p Vgxhóhidbd
cx p digd pavjcd, ta uxc st cxcvjcd staadh qxtc ht ejtst strxg fjt pcith at
bpió hj edguíp fjt bx rgjtasps. N hx ht bt wprt rpgvd fjt tgpc wdcthidh hjh
etchpbxtcidh, n fjt edg thid thipqp dqaxvpsp p rdggthedcstg p taadh, sxvd
fjt, rjpcsd tc tht bxhbd ajvpg sdcst pwdgp ht rpkp hj htejaijgp bt
sthrjqgxó ap qdcsps st hj xcitcrxóc, at sxyt nd fjt ap bíp tgp kxkxg tc
etgetijp hdatsps, n st fjt hdap ap ixtggp vdopht ta ugjid st bx
gtrdvxbxtcid n adh sthedydh st bx wtgbdhjgp; n hx éa, rdc idsd thit
sthtcvpñd, fjxhd edguxpg rdcigp ap thetgpcop n cpktvpg rdcigp ta kxtcid,
¿fjé bjrwd fjt ht pctvpht tc ap bxips sta vdaud st hj sthpixcd? Hx nd at
tcigtijkxtgp, ujtgp upahp; hx at rdcitcipgp, wxrxtgp rdcigp bx btydg
xcitcrxóc n egdhjejthid. Edguxó sthtcvpñpsd, sththetgó hxc htg pqdggtrxsd:
¡bxgps pwdgp hx htgá gpoóc fjt st hj etcp ht bt sé p bí ap rjaep! Fjéytht
ta tcvpñpsd, sththeégtht pfjta p fjxtc at upaipgdc aph egdbtixsph
thetgpcoph, rdcuítht ta fjt nd aapbpgt, juáctht ta fjt nd psbxixtgt; etgd
cd bt aapbt rgjta cx wdbxrxsp pfjta p fjxtc nd cd egdbtid, tcvpñd, aapbd cx
psbxid.

»Ta rxtad púc wphip pwdgp cd wp fjtgxsd fjt nd pbt edg sthixcd, n ta etchpg
fjt itcvd st pbpg edg tatrrxóc th thrjhpsd. Thit vtctgpa sthtcvpñd hxgkp p
rpsp jcd st adh fjt bt hdaxrxipc st hj epgixrjapg egdktrwd; n tcixécspht,
st pfjí pstapcit, fjt hx pavjcd edg bí bjgxtgt, cd bjtgt st rtadhd cx
sthsxrwpsd, edgfjt fjxtc p cpsxt fjxtgt, p cxcvjcd stqt spg rtadh; fjt adh
sthtcvpñdh cd ht wpc st idbpg tc rjtcip st sthstcth. Ta fjt bt aapbp uxtgp
n qphxaxhrd, séytbt rdbd rdhp etgyjsxrxpa n bpap; ta fjt bt aapbp xcvgpip,
cd bt hxgkp; ta fjt sthrdcdrxsp, cd bt rdcdorp; fjxtc rgjta, cd bt hxvp;
fjt thip uxtgp, thit qphxaxhrd, thip xcvgpip, thip rgjta n thip
sthrdcdrxsp, cx adh qjhrpgá, htgkxgá, rdcdrtgá cx htvjxgá tc cxcvjcp
bpctgp. Fjt hx p Vgxhóhidbd bpió hj xbeprxtcrxp n pggdypsd sthtd, ¿edg fjé
ht wp st rjaepg bx wdcthid egdrtstg n gtrpid? Hx nd rdchtgkd bx axbextop
rdc ap rdbepñíp st adh ágqdath, ¿edg fjé wp st fjtgtg fjt ap extgsp ta fjt
fjxtgt fjt ap itcvp rdc adh wdbqgth? Nd, rdbd hpqéxh, itcvd gxfjtoph
egdexph n cd rdsxrxd aph pytcph; itcvd axqgt rdcsxrxóc n cd vjhid st
hjytipgbt: cx fjxtgd cx pqdggtord p cpsxt. Cd tcvpñd p éhit cx hdaxrxid
pfjéa, cx qjgad rdc jcd cx bt tcigtitcvd rdc ta digd. Ap rdcktghprxóc
wdcthip st aph opvpaph sthiph pastph n ta rjxspsd st bxh rpqgph bt
tcigtixtct. Ixtctc bxh sthtdh edg iégbxcd thiph bdcipñph, n hx st pfjí
hpatc, th p rdcitbeapg ap wtgbdhjgp sta rxtad, ephdh rdc fjt rpbxcp ta pabp
p hj bdgpsp egxbtgp.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, hxc fjtgtg díg gthejthip pavjcp, kdakxó aph thepasph n
ht tcigó edg ad báh rtggpsd st jc bdcit fjt paaí rtgrp thipqp, stypcsd
psbxgpsdh, ipcid st hj sxhrgtrxóc rdbd st hj wtgbdhjgp, p idsdh adh fjt
paaí thipqpc. N pavjcdh sxtgdc bjthigph -st pfjtaadh fjt st ap edstgdhp
uatrwp st adh gpndh st hjh qtaadh dydh thipqpc wtgxsdh- st fjtgtgap htvjxg,
hxc pegdktrwpght sta bpcxuxthid sthtcvpñd fjt wpqípc dísd. Ad rjpa kxhid
edg sdc Fjxydit, epgtrxécsdat fjt paaí ktcíp qxtc jhpg st hj rpqpaatgíp,
hdrdggxtcsd p aph sdcrtaaph btcthitgdhph, ejthip ap bpcd tc ta ejñd st hj
thepsp, tc paiph t xcitaxvxqath kdrth, sxyd:

-Cxcvjcp etghdcp, st rjpafjxtg thipsd n rdcsxrxóc fjt htp, ht pigtkp p
htvjxg p ap wtgbdhp Bpgrtap, hd etcp st rptg tc ap ujgxdhp xcsxvcprxóc bíp.
Taap wp bdhigpsd rdc rapgph n hjuxrxtcith gpodcth ap edrp d cxcvjcp rjaep
fjt wp itcxsd tc ap bjtgit st Vgxhóhidbd, n rjác pytcp kxkt st rdcsthrtcstg
rdc adh sthtdh st cxcvjcd st hjh pbpcith, p rjnp rpjhp th yjhid fjt, tc
ajvpg st htg htvjxsp n etghtvjxsp, htp wdcgpsp n thixbpsp st idsdh adh
qjtcdh sta bjcsd, ejth bjthigp fjt tc éa taap th hdap ap fjt rdc ipc
wdcthip xcitcrxóc kxkt.

D np fjt ujtht edg aph pbtcpoph st sdc Fjxydit, d edgfjt Pbqgdhxd ath sxyd
fjt rdcrajnthtc rdc ad fjt p hj qjtc pbxvd stqípc, cxcvjcd st adh ephidgth
ht bdkxó cx pepgió st paaí wphip fjt, prpqpsp ap htejaijgp n pqgphpsdh adh
epetath st Vgxhóhidbd, ejhxtgdc hj rjtged tc taap, cd hxc bjrwph aávgxbph
st adh rxgrjchipcith. Rtggpgdc ap htejaijgp rdc jcp vgjthp etñp, tc ipcid
fjt ht prpqpqp jcp adhp fjt, htvúc Pbqgdhxd sxyd, etchpqp bpcspg wprtg, rdc
jc texipuxd fjt wpqíp st strxg sthip bpctgp:

   Nprt pfjí st jc pbpsdg
   ta bíhtgd rjtged wtapsd,
   fjt ujt ephidg st vpcpsd,
   etgsxsd edg sthpbdg.
   Bjgxó p bpcdh sta gxvdg
   st jcp thfjxkp wtgbdhp xcvgpip,
   rdc fjxtc hj xbetgxd sxapip
   ap ixgpcíp st hj pbdg.

Ajtvd thepgrxtgdc edg rxbp st ap htejaijgp bjrwph uadgth n gpbdh, n, spcsd
idsdh ta eéhpbt p hj pbxvd Pbqgdhxd, ht sthexsxtgdc séa. Ad bthbd wxrxtgdc
Kxkpasd n hj rdbepñtgd, n sdc Fjxydit ht sthexsxó st hjh wjéhetsth n st adh
rpbxcpcith, adh rjpath at gdvpgdc ht kxcxtht rdc taadh p Htkxaap, edg htg
ajvpg ipc prdbdspsd p wpaapg pktcijgph, fjt tc rpsp rpaat n igph rpsp
thfjxcp ht dugtrtc báh fjt tc digd pavjcd. Sdc Fjxydit ath pvgpstrxó ta
pkxhd n ta ácxbd fjt bdhigpqpc st wprtgat btgrts, n sxyd fjt edg tcidcrth
cd fjtgíp cx stqíp xg p Htkxaap, wphip fjt wjqxtht sthedypsd idsph pfjtaaph
hxtggph st apsgdcth bpapcsgxcth, st fjxtc tgp upbp fjt idsph thipqpc
aatcph. Kxtcsd hj qjtcp stitgbxcprxóc, cd fjxhxtgdc adh rpbxcpcith
xbedgijcpgat báh, hxcd, idgcácsdht p sthetsxg st cjtkd, at stypgdc n
egdhxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd, tc ta rjpa cd ath upaió st fjé igpipg, phí st ap
wxhidgxp st Bpgrtap n Vgxhóhidbd rdbd st aph adrjgph st sdc Fjxydit. Ta
rjpa stitgbxcó st xg p qjhrpg p ap ephidgp Bpgrtap n dugtrtgat idsd ad fjt
éa edsíp tc hj htgkxrxd. Bph cd at pkxcd rdbd éa etchpqp, htvúc ht rjtcip
tc ta sxhrjghd sthip ktgspstgp wxhidgxp, spcsd pfjí uxc ap htvjcsp epgit.

Itgrtgp epgit sta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp





Rpeíijad MK. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap sthvgprxpsp pktcijgp fjt ht ideó sdc
Fjxydit tc idepg rdc jcdh sthpabpsdh npcvüthth


Rjtcip ta hpqxd Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax fjt, phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit ht sthexsxó
st hjh wjéhetsth n st idsdh adh fjt ht wpaapgdc pa tcixtggd sta ephidg
Vgxhóhidbd, éa n hj thrjstgd ht tcigpgdc edg ta bthbd qdhfjt sdcst kxtgdc
fjt ht wpqíp tcigpsd ap ephidgp Bpgrtap; n, wpqxtcsd pcspsd báh st sdh
wdgph edg éa, qjhrácsdap edg idsph epgith hxc edstg wpaapgap, kxcxtgdc p
epgpg p jc egpsd aatcd st ugthrp ntgqp, yjcid sta rjpa rdggíp jc pggdnd
peprxqat n ugthrd; ipcid, fjt rdckxsó n udgoó p ephpg paaí aph wdgph st ap
hxthip, fjt gxvjgdhpbtcit rdbtcopqp np p tcigpg.

Petágdcht sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, n, stypcsd pa yjbtcid n p Gdrxcpcit p hjh
pcrwjgph eprtg st ap bjrwp ntgqp fjt paaí wpqíp, sxtgdc hprd p aph
paudgyph, n, hxc rtgxbdcxp pavjcp, tc qjtcp epo n rdbepñíp, pbd n bdod
rdbxtgdc ad fjt tc taaph wpaapgdc.

Cd ht wpqíp rjgpsd Hpcrwd st trwpg hjtaiph p Gdrxcpcit, htvjgd st fjt at
rdcdríp edg ipc bpchd n ipc edrd gxydhd fjt idsph aph ntvjph st ap stwthp
st Rógsdqp cd at wxrxtgpc idbpg bpa hxcxthigd. Dgstcó, ejth, ap hjtgit, n
ta sxpqad, fjt cd idsph ktrth sjtgbt, fjt pcspqpc edg pfjta kpaat eprxtcsd
jcp bpcpsp st wprph vpaxrxpcph st jcdh pggxtgdh vpaatvdh, st adh rjpath th
rdhijbqgt hthitpg rdc hj gtrjp tc ajvpgth n hxixdh st ntgqp n pvjp; n pfjta
sdcst prtgió p wpaapght sdc Fjxydit tgp bjn p egdeóhxid st adh vpaatvdh.
Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt p Gdrxcpcit at kxcd tc sthtd st gtudrxapght rdc aph
htñdgph uprph; n hpaxtcsd, phí rdbd aph daxó, st hj cpijgpa ephd n
rdhijbqgt, hxc etsxg axrtcrxp p hj sjtñd, idbó jc igdixrd pavd exrpsxaad
n ht ujt p rdbjcxrpg hj ctrthxsps rdc taaph. Bph taaph, fjt, p ad fjt
epgtrxó, stqípc st itctg báh vpcp st eprtg fjt st áa, gtrxqxégdcat rdc aph
wtggpsjgph n rdc adh sxtcith, st ipa bpctgp fjt, p edrd theprxd, ht at
gdbextgdc aph rxcrwph n fjtsó, hxc hxaap, tc etadip. Etgd ad fjt éa stqxó
báh st htcixg ujt fjt, kxtcsd adh pggxtgdh ap ujtgop fjt p hjh ntvjph ht
ath wpríp, prjsxtgdc rdc thiprph, n ipcidh epadh at sxtgdc fjt at
stggxqpgdc bpaepgpsd tc ta hjtad.

Np tc thid sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, fjt ap epaxop st Gdrxcpcit wpqípc kxhid,
aatvpqpc xypstpcsd; n sxyd sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd:

-P ad fjt nd ktd, pbxvd Hpcrwd, éhidh cd hdc rpqpaatgdh, hxcd vtcit hdto n
st qpyp gpatp. Sívdad edgfjt qxtc bt ejtsth pnjspg p idbpg ap stqxsp
ktcvpcop sta pvgpkxd fjt stapcit st cjthigdh dydh ht at wp wtrwd p
Gdrxcpcit.

-¿Fjé sxpqadh st ktcvpcop wtbdh st idbpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx éhidh hdc
báh st ktxcit n cdhdigdh cd báh st sdh, n pjc, fjxoá, cdhdigdh hxcd jcd n
btsxd?

-Nd kpavd edg rxtcid -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

N, hxc wprtg báh sxhrjghdh, trwó bpcd p hj thepsp n pggtbtixó p adh
vpaatvdh, n ad bthbd wxod Hpcrwd Epcop, xcrxipsd n bdkxsd sta tytbead st hj
pbd. N, p aph egxbtgph, sxd sdc Fjxydit jcp rjrwxaapsp p jcd, fjt at pqgxó
jc hpnd st rjtgd st fjt ktcíp kthixsd, rdc vgpc epgit st ap thepasp.
Adh vpaatvdh, fjt ht kxtgdc bpaigpipg st pfjtaadh sdh wdbqgth hdadh, hxtcsd
taadh ipcidh, prjsxtgdc p hjh thiprph, n, rdvxtcsd p adh sdh tc btsxd,
rdbtcopgdc p btcjstpg hdqgt taadh rdc vgpcst pwícrd n ktwtbtcrxp. Ktgsps th
fjt pa htvjcsd idfjt sxtgdc rdc Hpcrwd tc ta hjtad, n ad bthbd at pkxcd p
sdc Fjxydit, hxc fjt at kpaxtht hj sthigtop n qjtc ácxbd; n fjxhd hj
ktcijgp fjt kxcxtht p rptg p adh exth st Gdrxcpcit, fjt púc cd ht wpqíp
atkpcipsd; sdcst ht trwp st ktg ap ujgxp rdc fjt bprwprpc thiprph ejthiph
tc bpcdh gúhixrph n tcdypsph.

Kxtcsd, ejth, adh vpaatvdh ta bpa gtrpsd fjt wpqípc wtrwd, rdc ap bpndg
egthitop fjt ejsxtgdc, rpgvpgdc hj gtrjp n hxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd, stypcsd p
adh sdh pktcijgtgdh st bpap igpop n st etdg ipapcit.

Ta egxbtgd fjt ht gthxcixó ujt Hpcrwd Epcop; n, wpaaácsdht yjcid p hj
htñdg, rdc kdo tcutgbp n aphixbpsp, sxyd:

-¡Htñdg sdc Fjxydit! ¡Pw, htñdg sdc Fjxydit!

-¿Fjé fjxtgth, Hpcrwd wtgbpcd? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit rdc ta bthbd idcd
putbxcpsd n sdaxtcit fjt Hpcrwd.

-Fjtggíp, hx ujtht edhxqat -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-, fjt kjthigp btgrts bt
sxtht sdh igpvdh st pfjtaap qtqxsp sta utd Qaph, hx th fjt ap ixtct kjthigp
btgrts pwí p bpcd. Fjxoá htgá st egdktrwd epgp adh fjtqgpcipbxtcidh st
wjthdh rdbd ad th epgp aph utgxsph.

-Ejth, p itctgap nd pfjí, sthvgprxpsd nd, ¿fjé cdh upaipqp? -gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit-. Bph nd it yjgd, Hpcrwd Epcop, p ut st rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt
pcith fjt ephtc sdh síph, hx ap udgijcp cd dgstcp digp rdhp, ap itcvd st
itctg tc bx edstg, d bpa bt wpc st pcspg aph bpcdh.

-Ejth, ¿tc rjácidh at epgtrt p kjthigp btgrts fjt edsgtbdh bdktg adh exth?
-gteaxró Hpcrwd Epcop.

-St bí hé strxg -sxyd ta bdaxsd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit- fjt cd hpqgé edctg
iégbxcd p thdh síph. Bph nd bt itcvd ap rjaep st idsd, fjt cd wpqíp st
edctg bpcd p ap thepsp rdcigp wdbqgth fjt cd ujthtc pgbpsdh rpqpaatgdh rdbd
nd; n phí, rgtd fjt, tc etcp st wpqtg ephpsd aph atnth st ap rpqpaatgíp, wp
etgbxixsd ta sxdh st aph qpipaaph fjt ht bt sxtht thit rphixvd. Edg ad
rjpa, Hpcrwd Epcop, rdckxtct fjt thiéh psktgixsd tc thid fjt pwdgp it sxgé,
edgfjt xbedgip bjrwd p ap hpajs st tcigpbqdh; n th fjt, rjpcsd ktph fjt
htbtypcit rpcpaap cdh wprt pavúc pvgpkxd, cd pvjpgsth p fjt nd edcvp bpcd
pa thepsp epgp taadh, edgfjt cd ad wpgé tc cxcvjcp bpctgp, hxcd edc iú bpcd
p ij thepsp n rphiívpadh bjn p ij hpqdg; fjt hx tc hj pnjsp n stutchp
prjsxtgtc rpqpaatgdh, nd it hpqgé stutcstg n dutcstaadh rdc idsd bx edstg;
fjt np wpqgáh kxhid edg bxa htñpath n tmetgxtcrxph wphip psócst ht thixtcst
ta kpadg st thit bx ujtgit qgpod.

Ipa fjtsó st pggdvpcit ta edqgt htñdg rdc ta ktcrxbxtcid sta kpaxtcit
kxorpícd. Bph cd at epgtrxó ipc qxtc p Hpcrwd Epcop ta pkxhd st hj pbd fjt
stypht st gthedcstg, sxrxtcsd:

-Htñdg, nd hdn wdbqgt epríuxrd, bpchd, hdhtvpsd, n hé sxhxbxapg rjpafjxtgp
xcyjgxp, edgfjt itcvd bjytg n wxydh fjt hjhitcipg n rgxpg. Phí fjt, hépat p
kjthigp btgrts ipbqxéc pkxhd, ejth cd ejtst htg bpcspid, fjt tc cxcvjcp
bpctgp edcsgé bpcd p ap thepsp, cx rdcigp kxaapcd cx rdcigp rpqpaatgd; n
fjt, sthst pfjí epgp stapcit st Sxdh, etgsdcd rjpcidh pvgpkxdh bt wpc wtrwd
n wpc st wprtg: dgp bt adh wpnp wtrwd, d wpvp d wpnp st wprtg, etghdcp paip
d qpyp, gxrd d edqgt, wxspavd d etrwtgd, hxc trteipg thipsd cx rdcsxrxóc
pavjcp.

Ad rjpa dísd edg hj pbd, at gthedcsxó:

-Fjxhxtgp itctg paxtcid epgp edstg wpqapg jc edrd sthrpchpsd, n fjt ta
sdadg fjt itcvd tc thip rdhixaap ht peaprpgp ipcid rjpcid, epgp spgit p
tcitcstg, Epcop, tc ta tggdg tc fjt thiáh. Ktc prá, etrpsdg; hx ta kxtcid
st ap udgijcp, wphip pwdgp ipc rdcigpgxd, tc cjthigd upkdg ht kjtakt,
aatkácsdcdh aph ktaph sta sthtd epgp fjt htvjgpbtcit n hxc rdcigphit pavjcd
idbtbdh ejtgid tc pavjcp st aph íchjaph fjt it itcvd egdbtixsp, ¿fjé htgíp
st ix hx, vpcácsdap nd, it wxrxtht htñdg staap? Ejth ¿ad ktcsgáh p
xbedhxqxaxipg edg cd htg rpqpaatgd, cx fjtgtgad htg, cx itctg kpadg cx
xcitcrxóc st ktcvpg ijh xcyjgxph n stutcstg ij htñdgíd? Edgfjt wph st hpqtg
fjt tc adh gtxcdh n egdkxcrxph cjtkpbtcit rdcfjxhipsdh cjcrp thiác ipc
fjxtidh adh ácxbdh st hjh cpijgpath, cx ipc st epgit sta cjtkd htñdg fjt cd
ht itcvpc itbdg st fjt wpc st wprtg pavjcp cdktsps epgp paitgpg st cjtkd
aph rdhph, n kdaktg, rdbd sxrtc, p egdqpg ktcijgp; n phí, th btcthitg fjt
ta cjtkd edhthdg itcvp tcitcsxbxtcid epgp hpqtght vdqtgcpg, n kpadg epgp
dutcstg n stutcstght tc rjpafjxtgp prdcitrxbxtcid.

-Tc thit fjt pwdgp cdh wp prdcitrxsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjxhxtgp nd itctg
tht tcitcsxbxtcid n tht kpadg fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt; bph nd at yjgd, p ut
st edqgt wdbqgt, fjt báh thidn epgp qxobph fjt epgp eaáixrph. Bxgt kjthigp
btgrts hx ht ejtst atkpcipg, n pnjspgtbdh p Gdrxcpcit, pjcfjt cd ad btgtrt,
edgfjt éa ujt ap rpjhp egxcrxepa st idsd thit bdaxbxtcid. Ypbáh ipa rgtí st
Gdrxcpcit, fjt at itcíp edg etghdcp rphip n ipc epríuxrp rdbd nd. Tc uxc,
qxtc sxrtc fjt th btcthitg bjrwd ixtbed epgp ktcxg p rdcdrtg aph etghdcph,
n fjt cd wpn rdhp htvjgp tc thip kxsp. ¿Fjxéc sxytgp fjt igph st pfjtaaph
ipc vgpcsth rjrwxaapsph rdbd kjthigp btgrts sxd p pfjta sthsxrwpsd
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, wpqíp st ktcxg, edg ap edhip n tc htvjxbxtcid hjnd, thip
ipc vgpcst itbethips st epadh fjt wp sthrpgvpsd hdqgt cjthigph thepasph?
-Pjc aph ijnph, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, stqtc st thipg wtrwph p
htbtypcith cjqapsdh; etgd aph bíph, rgxpsph tcigt hxcpqpuph n wdapcsph,
rapgd thiá fjt htcixgác báh ta sdadg sthip sthvgprxp. N hx cd ujtht edgfjt
xbpvxcd..., ¿fjé sxvd xbpvxcd?, hé bjn rxtgid, fjt idsph thiph
xcrdbdsxspsth hdc bjn pctyph pa tytgrxrxd st aph pgbph, pfjí bt stypgíp
bdgxg st ejgd tcdyd.

P thid gteaxró ta thrjstgd:

-Htñdg, np fjt thiph sthvgprxph hdc st ap rdhtrwp st ap rpqpaatgíp, sívpbt
kjthigp btgrts hx hjrtstc bjn p btcjsd, d hx ixtctc hjh ixtbedh axbxipsdh
tc fjt prptrtc; edgfjt bt epgtrt p bí fjt p sdh rdhtrwph fjtspgtbdh
xcúixath epgp ap itgrtgp, hx Sxdh, edg hj xcuxcxip bxhtgxrdgsxp, cd cdh
hdrdggt.

-Háqtit, pbxvd Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ap kxsp st adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith thiá hjytip p bxa etaxvgdh n sthktcijgph; n, cx báh cx
btcdh, thiá tc editcrxp egdexcrjp st htg adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith gtnth n
tbetgpsdgth, rdbd ad wp bdhigpsd ap tmetgxtcrxp tc bjrwdh n sxktghdh
rpqpaatgdh, st rjnph wxhidgxph nd itcvd tcitgp cdixrxp. N ejsxégpit rdcipg
pvdgp, hx ta sdadg bt sxtgp ajvpg, st pavjcdh fjt, hóad edg ta kpadg st hj
qgpod, wpc hjqxsd p adh paidh vgpsdh fjt wt rdcipsd; n thidh bthbdh ht
kxtgdc pcith n sthejéh tc sxktghph rpapbxspsth n bxhtgxph. Edgfjt ta
kpatgdhd Pbpsíh st Vpjap ht kxd tc edstg st hj bdgipa tctbxvd Pgrpaájh ta
tcrpcipsdg, st fjxtc ht ixtct edg pktgxvjpsd fjt at sxd, itcxécsdat
egthd, báh st sdrxtcidh podith rdc aph gxtcsph st hj rpqpaad, pipsd p jcp
rdajcp st jc epixd. N pjc wpn jc pjidg htrgtid, n st cd edrd rgésxid, fjt
sxrt fjt, wpqxtcsd rdvxsd pa Rpqpaatgd sta Utqd rdc jcp rxtgip igpbep fjt
ht at wjcsxó stqpyd st adh exth, tc jc rxtgid rphixaad, n pa rptg, ht wpaaó
tc jcp wdcsp hxbp stqpyd st ixtggp, pipsd st exth n bpcdh, n paaí at
trwpgdc jcp sthiph fjt aapbpc btatrxcph, st pvjp st cxtkt n pgtcp, st ad
fjt aatvó bjn pa rpqd; n hx cd ujtgp hdrdggxsd tc pfjtaap vgpc rjxip st jc
hpqxd vgpcst pbxvd hjnd, ad ephpgp bjn bpa ta edqgt rpqpaatgd. Pchí fjt,
qxtc ejtsd nd ephpg tcigt ipcip qjtcp vtcit; fjt bpndgth pugtciph hdc aph
fjt éhidh ephpgdc, fjt cd aph fjt pwdgp cdhdigdh ephpbdh. Edgfjt fjxtgd
wprtgit hpqxsdg, Hpcrwd, fjt cd pugtcipc aph wtgxsph fjt ht spc rdc adh
xchigjbtcidh fjt prphd ht wpaapc tc aph bpcdh; n thid thiá tc ap atn sta
sjtad, thrgxid edg epapqgph tmegthph: fjt hx ta opepitgd sp p digd rdc ap
wdgbp fjt ixtct tc ap bpcd, ejthid fjt ktgspstgpbtcit th st epad, cd edg
thd ht sxgá fjt fjtsp pepatpsd pfjta p fjxtc sxd rdc taap. Sxvd thid edgfjt
cd extchth fjt, ejthid fjt fjtspbdh sthip etcstcrxp bdaxsdh, fjtspbdh
pugtcipsdh; edgfjt aph pgbph fjt pfjtaadh wdbqgth igpípc, rdc fjt cdh
bprwprpgdc, cd tgpc digph fjt hjh thiprph, n cxcvjcd staadh, p ad fjt ht bt
prjtgsp, itcíp thidfjt, thepsp cx ejñpa.

-Cd bt sxtgdc p bí ajvpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- p fjt bxgpht tc ipcid; edgfjt,
petcph ejht bpcd p bx ixodcp, rjpcsd bt hpcixvjpgdc adh wdbqgdh rdc hjh
excdh, st bpctgp fjt bt fjxipgdc ap kxhip st adh dydh n ap ujtgop st adh
exth, spcsd rdcbxvd psdcst pwdgp npvd, n psdcst cd bt sp etcp pavjcp ta
etchpg hx ujt pugtcip d cd ad st adh thiprpodh, rdbd bt ap sp ta sdadg st
adh vdaeth, fjt bt wpc st fjtspg ipc xbegthdh tc ap btbdgxp rdbd tc aph
thepasph.

-Rdc idsd thd, it wpvd hpqtg, wtgbpcd Epcop -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cd
wpn btbdgxp p fjxtc ta ixtbed cd prpqt, cx sdadg fjt bjtgit cd at rdchjbp.

-Ejth, ¿fjé bpndg sthsxrwp ejtst htg -gteaxró Epcop- st pfjtaap fjt pvjpgsp
pa ixtbed fjt ap rdchjbp n p ap bjtgit fjt ap prpqt? Hx thip cjthigp
sthvgprxp ujtgp st pfjtaaph fjt rdc jc epg st qxobph ht rjgpc, pjc cd ipc
bpad; etgd kdn kxtcsd fjt cd wpc st qphipg idsdh adh tbeaphidh st jc
wdhexipa epgp edctgaph tc qjtc iégbxcd hxfjxtgp.

-Séypit sthd n hprp ujtgoph st uapfjtop, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-,
fjt phí wpgé nd, n ktpbdh róbd thiá Gdrxcpcit; fjt, p ad fjt bt epgtrt, cd
at wp rpqxsd pa edqgt ap btcdg epgit sthip sthvgprxp.

-Cd wpn st fjé bpgpkxaapght sthd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxtcsd éa ipc qjtc
rpqpaatgd pcspcit; st ad fjt nd bt bpgpkxaad th st fjt bx yjbtcid wpnp
fjtspsd axqgt n hxc rdhiph sdcst cdhdigdh hpaxbdh hxc rdhixaaph.

-Hxtbegt styp ap ktcijgp jcp ejtgip pqxtgip tc aph sthsxrwph, epgp spg
gtbtsxd p taaph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Sívdad edgfjt thp qthitojtap edsgá
hjeaxg pwdgp ap upaip st Gdrxcpcit, aatkácsdbt p bí sthst pfjí p pavúc
rphixaad sdcst htp rjgpsd st bxh utgxsph. N báh, fjt cd itcsgé p sthwdcgp
ap ipa rpqpaatgíp, edgfjt bt prjtgsd wpqtg atísd fjt pfjta qjtc kxtyd
Hxatcd, pnd n etspvdvd sta patvgt sxdh st ap gxhp, rjpcsd tcigó tc ap
rxjsps st aph rxtc ejtgiph xqp, bjn p hj eaprtg, rpqpaatgd hdqgt jc bjn
wtgbdhd phcd.

-Ktgsps htgá fjt éa stqíp st xg rpqpaatgd, rdbd kjthigp btgrts sxrt
-gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd wpn vgpcst sxutgtcrxp sta xg rpqpaatgd pa xg
pigpkthpsd rdbd rdhipa st qphjgp.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Aph utgxsph fjt ht gtrxqtc tc aph qpipaaph, pcith spc wdcgp fjt ap fjxipc.
Phí fjt, Epcop pbxvd, cd bt gteaxfjth báh, hxcd, rdbd np it wt sxrwd,
atkácipit ad btydg fjt ejsxtgth n edcbt st ap bpctgp fjt báh it pvgpspgt
tcrxbp st ij yjbtcid, n kpbdh st pfjí pcith fjt ap cdrwt ktcvp n cdh hpaitt
tc thit sthedqapsd.

-Ejth nd wt dísd strxg p kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Epcop- fjt th bjn st
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ta sdgbxg tc adh eágpbdh n sthxtgidh ad báh sta pñd, n
fjt ad ixtctc p bjrwp ktcijgp.

-Thd th -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- rjpcsd cd ejtstc báh, d rjpcsd thiác tcpbdgpsdh;
n th ipc ktgsps thid, fjt wp wpqxsd rpqpaatgd fjt ht wp thipsd hdqgt jcp
etñp, pa hda n p ap hdbqgp, n p aph xcratbtcrxph sta rxtad, sdh pñdh, hxc
fjt ad hjextht hj htñdgp. N jcd séhidh ujt Pbpsíh, rjpcsd, aapbácsdht
Qtaitctqgdh, ht padyó tc ap Etñp Edqgt, cx hé hx drwd pñdh d drwd bthth,
fjt cd thidn bjn qxtc tc ap rjtcip: qphip fjt éa thijkd paaí wprxtcsd
etcxitcrxp, edg cd hé fjé hxchpqdg fjt at wxod ap htñdgp Dgxpcp. Etgd
stytbdh np thid, Hpcrwd, n prpqp, pcith fjt hjrtsp digp sthvgprxp pa
yjbtcid, rdbd p Gdrxcpcit.

-Pjc pwí htgíp ta sxpqad -sxyd Hpcrwd.

N, sthexsxtcsd igtxcip pnth, n hthtcip hdhexgdh, n rxtcid n ktxcit eéhtith
n gtcxtvdh st fjxtc paaí at wpqíp igpísd, ht atkpció, fjtsácsdht pvdqxpsd
tc ap bxips sta rpbxcd, rdbd pgrd ijgfjthrd, hxc edstg prpqpg st
tcstgtopght; n rdc idsd thit igpqpyd pepgtyó hj phcd, fjt ipbqxéc wpqíp
pcspsd pavd sthigpísd rdc ap stbphxpsp axqtgips st pfjta síp. Atkpció ajtvd
p Gdrxcpcit, ta rjpa, hx ijkxtgp atcvjp rdc fjt fjtypght, p qjtc htvjgd fjt
Hpcrwd cx hj pbd cd at ujtgpc tc opvp.

Tc gthdajrxóc, Hpcrwd prdbdsó p sdc Fjxydit hdqgt ta phcd n ejhd st gtpip p
Gdrxcpcit; n, aatkpcsd pa phcd st rpqthigd, ht tcrpbxcó, edrd báh p btcdh,
wprxp sdcst at epgtrxó fjt edsíp thipg ta rpbxcd gtpa. N ap hjtgit, fjt hjh
rdhph st qxtc tc btydg xqp vjxpcsd, púc cd wjqd pcspsd jcp etfjtñp atvjp,
rjpcsd at stepgó ta rpbxcd, tc ta rjpa sthrjqgxó jcp ktcip fjt, p ethpg
hjnd n vjhid st sdc Fjxydit, wpqíp st htg rphixaad. Edguxpqp Hpcrwd fjt tgp
ktcip, n hj pbd fjt cd, hxcd rphixaad; n ipcid sjgó ap edguíp, fjt ijkxtgdc
ajvpg, hxc prpqpgap, st aatvpg p taap, tc ap rjpa Hpcrwd ht tcigó, hxc báh
pktgxvjprxóc, rdc idsp hj gtrjp.





Rpeíijad MKX. St ad fjt at hjrtsxó pa xcvtcxdhd wxspavd tc ap ktcip fjt éa
xbpvxcpqp htg rphixaad


Ta ktcitgd, fjt kxd p sdc Fjxydit pigpkthpsd tc ta phcd, egtvjció p Hpcrwd
fjé bpa igpíp. Hpcrwd at gthedcsxó fjt cd tgp cpsp, hxcd fjt wpqíp spsd jcp
rpísp st jcp etñp pqpyd, n fjt ktcíp pavd qgjbpsph aph rdhixaaph. Itcíp ta
ktcitgd edg bjytg p jcp, cd st ap rdcsxrxóc fjt hjtatc itctg aph st
htbtypcit igpid, edgfjt cpijgpabtcit tgp rpgxipixkp n ht sdaíp st aph
rpapbxspsth st hjh egóyxbdh; n phí, prjsxó ajtvd p rjgpg p sdc Fjxydit n
wxod fjt jcp wxyp hjnp, sdcrtaap, bjrwprwp n st bjn qjtc epgtrtg, ap
pnjspht p rjgpg p hj wjéhets. Htgkíp tc ap ktcip, phxbthbd, jcp bdop
phijgxpcp, pcrwp st rpgp, aapcp st rdvdit, st cpgxo gdbp, sta jc dyd ijtgip
n sta digd cd bjn hpcp. Ktgsps th fjt ap vpaapgsíp sta rjtged hjeaíp aph
stbáh upaiph: cd itcíp hxtit epabdh st adh exth p ap rpqtop, n aph
thepasph, fjt pavúc ipcid at rpgvpqpc, ap wprípc bxgpg pa hjtad báh st ad
fjt taap fjxhxtgp. Thip vtcixa bdop, ejth, pnjsó p ap sdcrtaap, n aph sdh
wxrxtgdc jcp bjn bpap rpbp p sdc Fjxydit tc jc rpbpgpcrwóc fjt, tc digdh
ixtbedh, spqp bpcxuxthidh xcsxrxdh fjt wpqíp htgkxsd st epypg bjrwdh pñdh.
Tc ap rjpa ipbqxéc padypqp jc pggxtgd, fjt itcíp hj rpbp wtrwp jc edrd báh
paaá st ap st cjthigd sdc Fjxydit. N, pjcfjt tgp st aph tcypabph n bpciph
st hjh bprwdh, wpríp bjrwp ktcipyp p ap st sdc Fjxydit, fjt hóad rdcitcíp
rjpigd bpa axhph ipqaph, hdqgt sdh cd bjn xvjpath qpcrdh, n jc rdarwóc fjt
tc ad hjixa epgtríp rdarwp, aatcd st qdsdfjth, fjt, p cd bdhigpg fjt tgpc
st apcp edg pavjcph gdijgph, pa ixtcid, tc ap sjgtop, htbtypqpc st
vjxypggd, n sdh háqpcph wtrwph st rjtgd st pspgvp, n jcp ugpopsp, rjndh
wxadh, hx ht fjxhxtgpc rdcipg, cd ht etgsxtgp jcd hdad st ap rjtcip.
Tc thip bpasxip rpbp ht prdhió sdc Fjxydit, n ajtvd ap ktcitgp n hj wxyp at
tbeaphipgdc st pggxqp pqpyd, pajbqgácsdath Bpgxidgcth, fjt phí ht aapbpqp
ap phijgxpcp; n, rdbd pa qxobpaat kxtht ap ktcitgp ipc prpgstcpapsd p
epgith p sdc Fjxydit, sxyd fjt pfjtaad báh epgtrípc vdaeth fjt rpísp.

-Cd ujtgdc vdaeth -sxyd Hpcrwd-, hxcd fjt ap etñp itcíp bjrwdh exrdh n
igdetodcth.

N fjt rpsp jcd wpqíp wtrwd hj rpgstcpa. N ipbqxéc at sxyd:

-Wpvp kjthigp btgrts, htñdgp, st bpctgp fjt fjtstc pavjcph thideph, fjt cd
upaipgá fjxtc aph wpnp btcthitg; fjt ipbqxéc bt sjtatc p bí jc edrd adh
adbdh.

-Sthp bpctgp -gthedcsxó ap ktcitgp-, ipbqxéc stqxhith kdh st rptg.

-Cd rpí -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop-, hxcd fjt sta hdqgthpaid fjt idbé st ktg rptg p
bx pbd, st ipa bpctgp bt sjtat p bí ta rjtged fjt bt epgtrt fjt bt wpc spsd
bxa epadh.

-Qxtc edsgá htg thd -sxyd ap sdcrtaap-; fjt p bí bt wp prdcitrxsd bjrwph
ktrth hdñpg fjt rpíp st jcp idggt pqpyd n fjt cjcrp prpqpqp st aatvpg pa
hjtad, n, rjpcsd sthetgipqp sta hjtñd, wpaapgbt ipc bdaxsp n fjtqgpcipsp
rdbd hx ktgspstgpbtcit wjqxtgp rpísd.

-Pwí thiá ta idfjt, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-: fjt nd, hxc hdñpg
cpsp, hxcd thipcsd báh sthextgid fjt pwdgp thidn, bt wpaad rdc edrdh btcdh
rpgstcpath fjt bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit.

-¿Róbd ht aapbp thit rpqpaatgd? -egtvjció ap phijgxpcp Bpgxidgcth.

-Sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-, n th rpqpaatgd
pktcijgtgd, n st adh btydgth n báh ujtgith fjt st ajtcvdh ixtbedh prá ht
wpc kxhid tc ta bjcsd.

-¿Fjé th rpqpaatgd pktcijgtgd? -gteaxró ap bdop.

-¿Ipc cjtkp hdxh tc ta bjcsd fjt cd ad hpqéxh kdh? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd
Epcop-. Ejth hpqts, wtgbpcp bíp, fjt rpqpaatgd pktcijgtgd th jcp rdhp fjt
tc sdh epapqgph ht kt pepatpsd n tbetgpsdg. Wdn thiá ap báh sthsxrwpsp
rgxpijgp sta bjcsd n ap báh btcthitgdhp, n bpñpcp itcsgíp sdh d igth
rdgdcph st gtxcdh fjt spg p hj thrjstgd.

-Ejth, ¿róbd kdh, hxécsdad sthit ipc qjtc htñdg -sxyd ap ktcitgp-, cd
itcéxh, p ad fjt epgtrt, hxfjxtgp pavúc rdcspsd?

-Púc th itbegpcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt cd wp hxcd jc bth fjt pcspbdh
qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph, n wphip pwdgp cd wtbdh idepsd rdc cxcvjcp fjt ad
htp. N ipa kto wpn fjt ht qjhrp jcp rdhp n ht wpaap digp. Ktgsps th fjt, hx
bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit hpcp sthip wtgxsp d rpísp n nd cd fjtsd rdcigtrwd
staap, cd igdrpgíp bxh thetgpcoph rdc ta btydg iíijad st Thepñp.

Idsph thiph eaáixrph thipqp thrjrwpcsd, bjn pitcid, sdc Fjxydit, n,
htciácsdht tc ta atrwd rdbd ejsd, idbpcsd st ap bpcd p ap ktcitgp, at sxyd:

-Rgttsbt, utgbdhp htñdgp, fjt dh edséxh aapbpg ktcijgdhp edg wpqtg padypsd
tc thit kjthigd rphixaad p bx etghdcp, fjt th ipa, fjt hx nd cd ap papqd,
th edg ad fjt hjtat strxght fjt ap papqpcop egdegxp tckxatrt; etgd bx
thrjstgd dh sxgá fjxéc hdn. Hóad dh sxvd fjt itcsgé titgcpbtcit thrgxid tc
bx btbdgxp ta htgkxrxd fjt bt wpqtsth utrwd, epgp pvgpstrégdhad bxtcigph ap
kxsp bt sjgpgt; n eajvjxtgp p adh paidh rxtadh fjt ta pbdg cd bt ijkxtgp
ipc gtcsxsd n ipc hjytid p hjh atnth, n adh dydh st pfjtaap wtgbdhp xcvgpip
fjt sxvd tcigt bxh sxtcith; fjt adh sthip utgbdhp sdcrtaap ujtgpc htñdgth
st bx axqtgips.

Rdcujhph thipqpc ap ktcitgp n hj wxyp n ap qjtcp st Bpgxidgcth dntcsd aph
gpodcth sta pcspcit rpqpaatgd, fjt phí aph tcitcsípc rdbd hx wpqapgp tc
vgxtvd, pjcfjt qxtc parpcopgdc fjt idsph ht tcrpbxcpqpc p dugtrxbxtcid n
gtfjxtqgdh; n, rdbd cd jhpsph p htbtypcit atcvjpyt, bxgáqpcat n
psbxgáqpcht, n epgtrípath digd wdbqgt st adh fjt ht jhpqpc; n,
pvgpstrxécsdat rdc ktcitgxath gpodcth hjh dugtrxbxtcidh, at stypgdc; n ap
phijgxpcp Bpgxidgcth rjgó p Hpcrwd, fjt cd btcdh ad wpqíp btcthitg fjt hj
pbd.

Wpqíp ta pggxtgd rdcrtgipsd rdc taap fjt pfjtaap cdrwt ht gtudrxapgípc
yjcidh, n taap at wpqíp spsd hj epapqgp st fjt, tc thipcsd hdhtvpsdh adh
wjéhetsth n sjgbxtcsd hjh pbdh, at xgíp p qjhrpg n hpixhuprtgat ta vjhid tc
rjpcid at bpcspht. N rjécipht sthip qjtcp bdop fjt ypbáh sxd htbtypcith
epapqgph fjt cd aph rjbeaxtht, pjcfjt aph sxtht tc jc bdcit n hxc ithixvd
pavjcd; edgfjt egthjbíp bjn st wxspavp, n cd itcíp edg pugtcip thipg tc
pfjta tytgrxrxd st htgkxg tc ap ktcip, edgfjt stríp taap fjt sthvgprxph n
bpadh hjrthdh ap wpqípc igpísd p pfjta thipsd.

Ta sjgd, thigtrwd, pedrpsd n utbtcixsd atrwd st sdc Fjxydit thipqp egxbtgd
tc bxips st pfjta thigtaapsd thipqad, n ajtvd, yjcid p éa, wxod ta hjnd
Hpcrwd, fjt hóad rdcitcíp jcp thitgp st tctp n jcp bpcip, fjt pcith
bdhigpqp htg st pcytd ijcsxsd fjt st apcp. Hjrtsíp p thidh sdh atrwdh ta
sta pggxtgd, upqgxrpsd, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, st aph tcypabph n idsd ta psdgcd
st adh sdh btydgth bjadh fjt igpíp, pjcfjt tgpc sdrt, ajrxdh, vdgsdh n
upbdhdh, edgfjt tgp jcd st adh gxrdh pggxtgdh st Pgékpad, htvúc ad sxrt ta
pjidg sthip wxhidgxp, fjt sthit pggxtgd wprt epgixrjapg btcrxóc, edgfjt at
rdcdríp bjn qxtc, n pjc fjxtgtc strxg fjt tgp pavd epgxtcit hjnd. Ujtgp st
fjt Rxst Bpwpbpit Qtctcvtax ujt wxhidgxpsdg bjn rjgxdhd n bjn ejcijpa tc
idsph aph rdhph; n érwpht qxtc st ktg, ejth aph fjt fjtspc gtutgxsph, rdc
htg ipc bícxbph n ipc gpitgph, cd aph fjxhd ephpg tc hxatcrxd; st sdcst
edsgác idbpg tytbead adh wxhidgxpsdgth vgpkth, fjt cdh rjtcipc aph prrxdcth
ipc rdgip n hjrxcipbtcit fjt petcph cdh aatvpc p adh apqxdh, styácsdht tc
ta ixcitgd, np edg sthrjxsd, edg bpaxrxp d xvcdgpcrxp, ad báh hjhipcrxpa st
ap dqgp. ¡Qxtc wpnp bxa ktrth ta pjidg st Ipqapcit st Gxrpbdcit, n pfjta
sta digd axqgd sdcst ht rjtcip adh wtrwdh sta rdcst Idbxaaph; n rdc fjé
ejcijpaxsps ad sthrgxqtc idsd!

Sxvd, ejth, fjt sthejéh st wpqtg kxhxipsd ta pggxtgd p hj gtrjp n sásdat ta
htvjcsd extchd, ht itcsxó tc hjh tcypabph n ht sxd p thetgpg p hj
ejcijpaíhxbp Bpgxidgcth. Np thipqp Hpcrwd qxobpsd n prdhipsd, n, pjcfjt
egdrjgpqp sdgbxg, cd ad rdchtciíp ta sdadg st hjh rdhixaaph; n sdc Fjxydit,
rdc ta sdadg st aph hjnph, itcíp adh dydh pqxtgidh rdbd axtqgt. Idsp ap
ktcip thipqp tc hxatcrxd, n tc idsp taap cd wpqíp digp ajo fjt ap fjt spqp
jcp aábepgp fjt rdavpsp tc btsxd sta edgipa pgsíp.

Thip bpgpkxaadhp fjxtijs, n adh etchpbxtcidh fjt hxtbegt cjthigd rpqpaatgd
igpíp st adh hjrthdh fjt p rpsp ephd ht rjtcipc tc adh axqgdh pjidgth st hj
sthvgprxp, at igjyd p ap xbpvxcprxóc jcp st aph thigpñph adrjgph fjt
qjtcpbtcit xbpvxcpght ejtstc. N ujt fjt éa ht xbpvxcó wpqtg aatvpsd p jc
upbdhd rphixaad -fjt, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, rphixaadh tgpc p hj epgtrtg idsph
aph ktciph sdcst padypqp-, n fjt ap wxyp sta ktcitgd ad tgp sta htñdg sta
rphixaad, ap rjpa, ktcrxsp st hj vtcixatop, ht wpqíp tcpbdgpsd séa n
egdbtixsd fjt pfjtaap cdrwt, p ujgid st hjh epsgth, ktcsgíp p nprtg rdc éa
jcp qjtcp extop; n, itcxtcsd idsp thip fjxbtgp, fjt éa ht wpqíp upqgxrpsd,
edg uxgbt n kpatstgp, ht rdbtcoó p prjxipg n p etchpg tc ta etaxvgdhd
igpcrt tc fjt hj wdcthixsps ht wpqíp st ktg, n egdejhd tc hj rdgpoóc st cd
rdbtitg patkdhíp p hj htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, pjcfjt ap bthbp gtxcp
Vxctqgp rdc hj spbp Fjxcipñdcp ht at ejhxthtc stapcit.

Etchpcsd, ejth, tc thidh sxhepgpith, ht aatvó ta ixtbed n ap wdgp -fjt epgp
éa ujt btcvjpsp- st ap ktcxsp st ap phijgxpcp, ap rjpa, tc rpbxhp n
sthrpaop, rdvxsdh adh rpqtaadh tc jcp paqpctvp st ujhiác, rdc iárxidh n
pitcipsdh ephdh, tcigó tc ta pedhtcid sdcst adh igth padypqpc tc qjhrp sta
pggxtgd. Etgd, petcph aatvó p ap ejtgip, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit ap hxcixó, n,
htciácsdht tc ap rpbp, p ethpg st hjh qxobph n rdc sdadg st hjh rdhixaaph,
itcsxó adh qgpodh epgp gtrtqxg p hj utgbdhp sdcrtaap. Ap phijgxpcp, fjt,
idsp gtrdvxsp n rpaapcsd, xqp rdc aph bpcdh stapcit qjhrpcsd p hj fjtgxsd,
ideó rdc adh qgpodh st sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa ap phxó ujtgitbtcit st jcp
bjñtrp n, ixgácsdap wpríp hí, hxc fjt taap dhpht wpqapg epapqgp, ap wxod
htcipg hdqgt ap rpbp. Itcióat ajtvd ap rpbxhp, n, pjcfjt taap tgp st
wpgexaatgp, p éa at epgtrxó htg st uxcíhxbd n stavpsd rtcspa. Igpíp tc aph
bjñtrph jcph rjtciph st kxsgd, etgd p éa at sxtgdc kxhajbqgth st egtrxdhph
etgaph dgxtcipath. Adh rpqtaadh, fjt tc pavjcp bpctgp ixgpqpc p rgxcth, éa
adh bpgró edg wtqgph st ajrxsíhxbd dgd st Pgpqxp, rjnd gtheapcsdg pa sta
bthbd hda thrjgtríp. N ta paxtcid, fjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, daíp p tchpapsp
uxpbqgt n igphcdrwpsp, p éa at epgtrxó fjt pggdypqp st hj qdrp jc dadg
hjpkt n pgdbáixrd; n, uxcpabtcit, éa ap exció tc hj xbpvxcprxóc st ap bxhbp
igpop n bdsd fjt ad wpqíp atísd tc hjh axqgdh st ap digp egxcrthp fjt kxcd
p ktg ta bpa utgxsd rpqpaatgd, ktcrxsp st hjh pbdgth, rdc idsdh adh psdgcdh
fjt pfjí kpc ejthidh. N tgp ipcip ap rtvjtsps sta edqgt wxspavd, fjt ta
iprid, cx ta paxtcid, cx digph rdhph fjt igpíp tc hí ap qjtcp sdcrtaap, cd
at sthtcvpñpqpc, aph rjpath ejsxtgpc wprtg kdbxipg p digd fjt cd ujtgp
pggxtgd; pcith, at epgtríp fjt itcíp tcigt hjh qgpodh p ap sxdhp st ap
wtgbdhjgp. N, itcxécsdap qxtc phxsp, rdc kdo pbdgdhp n qpyp at rdbtcoó p
strxg:

-Fjxhxtgp wpaapgbt tc iégbxcdh, utgbdhp n paip htñdgp, st edstg epvpg
ipbpñp btgrts rdbd ap fjt rdc ap kxhip st kjthigp vgpc utgbdhjgp bt wpqtsth
utrwd, etgd wp fjtgxsd ap udgijcp, fjt cd ht rpchp st etghtvjxg p adh
qjtcdh, edctgbt tc thit atrwd, sdcst npvd ipc bdaxsd n fjtqgpcipsd fjt,
pjcfjt st bx kdajcips fjxhxtgp hpixhuprtg p ap kjthigp, ujtgp xbedhxqat. N
báh, fjt ht pñpst p thip xbedhxqxaxsps digp bpndg, fjt th ap egdbtixsp ut
fjt itcvd spsp p ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, úcxrp htñdgp st bxh báh
thrdcsxsdh etchpbxtcidh; fjt hx thid cd wjqxtgp st edg btsxd, cd ujtgp nd
ipc hpcsxd rpqpaatgd fjt stypgp ephpg tc qapcrd ap ktcijgdhp drphxóc tc fjt
kjthigp vgpc qdcsps bt wp ejthid.

Bpgxidgcth thipqp rdcvdypsíhxbp n igphjspcsd, st ktght ipc phxsp st sdc
Fjxydit, n, hxc tcitcstg cx thipg pitcip p aph gpodcth fjt at stríp,
egdrjgpqp, hxc wpqapg epapqgp, sthphxght. Ta qjtcd sta pggxtgd, p fjxtc
itcípc sthextgid hjh bpadh sthtdh, sthst ta ejcid fjt tcigó hj rdxbp edg ap
ejtgip, ap hxcixó; thijkd pitcipbtcit thrjrwpcsd idsd ad fjt sdc Fjxydit
stríp, n, rtadhd st fjt ap phijgxpcp at wjqxtht upaipsd ap epapqgp edg
digd, ht ujt aatvpcsd báh pa atrwd st sdc Fjxydit, n thiúkdht fjtsd wphip
ktg tc fjé epgpqpc pfjtaaph gpodcth, fjt éa cd edsíp tcitcstg. Etgd, rdbd
kxd fjt ap bdop udgrtypqp edg sthphxght n sdc Fjxydit igpqpypqp edg
itctaap, epgtrxécsdat bpa ap qjgap, tcpgqdaó ta qgpod tc paid n sthrpgvó
ipc itggxqat ejñpsp hdqgt aph thigtrwph fjxypsph sta tcpbdgpsd rpqpaatgd,
fjt at qpñó idsp ap qdrp tc hpcvgt; n, cd rdcitcid rdc thid, ht at hjqxó
tcrxbp st aph rdhixaaph, n rdc adh exth báh fjt st igdit, ht aph ephtó
idsph st rpqd p rpqd.

Ta atrwd, fjt tgp jc edrd tcstqat n st cd uxgbth ujcspbtcidh, cd ejsxtcsd
hjugxg ap pñpsxsjgp sta pggxtgd, sxd rdchxvd tc ta hjtad, p rjnd vgpc gjxsd
sthetgió ta ktcitgd, n ajtvd xbpvxcó fjt stqípc st htg etcstcrxph st
Bpgxidgcth, edgfjt, wpqxécsdap aapbpsd p kdrth, cd gthedcsíp. Rdc thip
hdhetrwp ht atkpció, n, tcrtcsxtcsd jc rpcsxa, ht ujt wprxp sdcst wpqíp
htcixsd ap etapop. Ap bdop, kxtcsd fjt hj pbd ktcíp, n fjt tgp st rdcsxrxóc
itggxqat, idsp btsgdhxrp n paqdgdipsp, ht prdvxó p ap rpbp st Hpcrwd Epcop,
fjt púc sdgbíp, n paaí ht prdggjró n ht wxod jc dkxaad. Ta ktcitgd tcigó
sxrxtcsd:

-¿Psócst thiáh, ejip? P qjtc htvjgd fjt hdc ijh rdhph éhiph.

Tc thid, sthetgió Hpcrwd, n, hxcixtcsd pfjta qjaid rphx tcrxbp st hí, etchó
fjt itcíp ap ethpsxaap, n rdbtcoó p spg ejñpsph p jcp n digp epgit, n tcigt
digph parpcoó rdc cd hé rjáciph p Bpgxidgcth, ap rjpa, htcixsp sta sdadg,
trwpcsd p gdspg ap wdcthixsps, sxd ta gtidgcd p Hpcrwd rdc ipciph fjt, p hj
sthetrwd, at fjxió ta hjtñd; ta rjpa, kxécsdht igpipg st pfjtaap bpctgp n
hxc hpqtg st fjxéc, paoácsdht rdbd ejsd, ht pqgpoó rdc Bpgxidgcth, n
rdbtcopgdc tcigt adh sdh ap báh gtñxsp n vgprxdhp thrpgpbjop sta bjcsd.
Kxtcsd, ejth, ta pggxtgd, p ap ajbqgt sta rpcsxa sta ktcitgd, rjáa pcspqp
hj spbp, stypcsd p sdc Fjxydit, prjsxó p spaat ta hdrdggd ctrthpgxd. Ad
bxhbd wxod ta ktcitgd, etgd rdc xcitcrxóc sxutgtcit, edgfjt ujt p rphixvpg
p ap bdop, rgtntcsd hxc sjsp fjt taap hdap tgp ap drphxóc st idsp pfjtaap
pgbdcíp. N phí rdbd hjtat strxght: ta vpid pa gpid, ta gpid p ap rjtgsp, ap
rjtgsp pa epad, spqp ta pggxtgd p Hpcrwd, Hpcrwd p ap bdop, ap bdop p éa,
ta ktcitgd p ap bdop, n idsdh btcjstpqpc rdc ipcip egxthp fjt cd ht spqpc
ejcid st gtedhd; n ujt ad qjtcd fjt pa ktcitgd ht at pepvó ta rpcsxa, n,
rdbd fjtspgdc phrjgph, sáqpcht ipc hxc rdbephxóc idsdh p qjaid fjt, p
sdfjxtgp fjt edcípc ap bpcd, cd stypqpc rdhp hpcp.

Padypqp prphd pfjtaap cdrwt tc ap ktcip jc rjpsgxaatgd st adh fjt aapbpc st
ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps Kxtyp st Idatsd, ta rjpa, dntcsd pchxbthbd ta thigpñd
thigjtcsd st ap etatp, phxó st hj btsxp kpgp n st ap rpyp st apip st hjh
iíijadh, n tcigó phrjgph tc ta pedhtcid, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Iécvpcht p ap yjhixrxp! ¡Iécvpcht p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps!

N ta egxbtgd rdc fjxtc ideó ujt rdc ta pejñtpsd st sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqp
tc hj stggxqpsd atrwd, itcsxsd qdrp pggxqp, hxc htcixsd pavjcd, n,
trwácsdat p ixtcid bpcd p aph qpgqph, cd rthpqp st strxg:

-¡Upkdg p ap yjhixrxp!

Etgd, kxtcsd fjt ta fjt itcíp phxsd cd ht qjaaíp cx btctpqp, ht sxd p
tcitcstg fjt thipqp bjtgid, n fjt adh fjt paaí stcigd thipqpc tgpc hjh
bpipsdgth; n rdc thip hdhetrwp gtudgoó ap kdo, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Rxéggtht ap ejtgip st ap ktcip! ¡Bxgtc cd ht kpnp cpsxt, fjt wpc bjtgid
pfjí p jc wdbqgt!

Thip kdo hdqgthpaió p idsdh, n rpsp rjpa styó ap etcstcrxp tc ta vgpsd fjt
at idbó ap kdo. Gtixgóht ta ktcitgd p hj pedhtcid, ta pggxtgd p hjh
tcypabph, ap bdop p hj gpcrwd; hdadh adh sthktcijgpsdh sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd
cd ht ejsxtgdc bdktg st sdcst thipqpc. Hdaió tc thid ta rjpsgxaatgd ap
qpgqp st sdc Fjxydit, n hpaxó p qjhrpg ajo epgp qjhrpg n egtcstg adh
staxcrjtcith; bph cd ap wpaaó, edgfjt ta ktcitgd, st xcsjhigxp, wpqíp
bjtgid ap aábepgp rjpcsd ht gtixgó p hj thipcrxp, n ujtat udgodhd prjsxg p
ap rwxbtctp, sdcst, rdc bjrwd igpqpyd n ixtbed, tcrtcsxó ta rjpsgxaatgd
digd rpcsxa.





Rpeíijad MKXX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjtc adh xccjbtgpqath igpqpydh fjt ta qgpkd
sdc Fjxydit n hj qjtc thrjstgd Hpcrwd Epcop ephpgdc tc ap ktcip fjt, edg hj
bpa, etchó fjt tgp rphixaad


Wpqíp np kjtaid tc thit ixtbed st hj epgphxhbd sdc Fjxydit, n, rdc ta bthbd
idcd st kdo rdc fjt ta síp pcith wpqíp aapbpsd p hj thrjstgd, rjpcsd thipqp
itcsxsd tc ta kpa st aph thiprph, at rdbtcoó p aapbpg, sxrxtcsd:

-Hpcrwd pbxvd, ¿sjtgbth? ¿Sjtgbth, pbxvd Hpcrwd?

-¿Fjé itcvd st sdgbxg, ethxp p bí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, aatcd st ethpsjbqgt n
st sthetrwd-; fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt idsdh adh sxpqadh wpc pcspsd rdcbxvd
thip cdrwt?

-Ejésthad rgttg pchí, hxc sjsp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt, d nd hé
edrd, d thit rphixaad th tcrpcipsd. Edgfjt wph st hpqtg... Bph, thid fjt
pwdgp fjxtgd strxgit wphbt st yjgpg fjt ad itcsgáh htrgtid wphip sthejéh st
bx bjtgit.

-Hí yjgd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Sívdad -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt hdn tctbxvd st fjt ht fjxit ap wdcgp
p cpsxt.

-Sxvd fjt hí yjgd -idgcó p strxg Hpcrwd- fjt ad rpaapgé wphip sthejéh st
adh síph st kjthigp btgrts, n eatvp p Sxdh fjt ad ejtsp sthrjqgxg bpñpcp.
-¿Ipc bpaph dqgph it wpvd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt bt fjtggíph
ktg bjtgid rdc ipcip qgtktsps?

-Cd th edg thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxcd edgfjt hdn tctbxvd st vjpgspg bjrwd
aph rdhph, n cd fjtggíp fjt ht bt ejsgxthtc st vjpgspsph.

-Htp edg ad fjt ujtgt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt báh uíd st ij pbdg n st ij
rdgithíp; n phí, wph st hpqtg fjt thip cdrwt bt wp hjrtsxsd jcp st aph báh
thigpñph pktcijgph fjt nd hpqgé tcrpgtrtg; n, edg rdciágitap tc qgtkt,
hpqgáh fjt edrd wp fjt p bí kxcd ap wxyp sta htñdg sthit rphixaad, fjt th
ap báh pejthip n utgbdhp sdcrtaap fjt tc vgpc epgit st ap ixtggp ht ejtst
wpaapg. ¿Fjé it edsgíp strxg sta psdgcd st hj etghdcp? ¿Fjé st hj vpaapgsd
tcitcsxbxtcid? ¿Fjé st digph rdhph drjaiph, fjt, edg vjpgspg ap ut fjt stqd
p bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, stypgé ephpg xcipriph n tc hxatcrxd? Hóad
it fjxtgd strxg fjt, tckxsxdhd ta rxtad st ipcid qxtc rdbd ap ktcijgp bt
wpqíp ejthid tc aph bpcdh, d fjxoá, n thid th ad báh rxtgid, fjt, rdbd
itcvd sxrwd, th tcrpcipsd thit rphixaad, pa ixtbed fjt nd thipqp rdc taap
tc sjaríhxbdh n pbdgdhíhxbdh rdadfjxdh, hxc fjt nd ap kxtht cx hjextht edg
sócst ktcíp, kxcd jcp bpcd etvpsp p pavúc qgpod st pavúc sthrdbjcpa vxvpcit
n phtcióbt jcp ejñpsp tc aph fjxypsph, ipa, fjt aph itcvd idsph qpñpsph tc
hpcvgt; n sthejéh bt bdaxó st ipa hjtgit fjt thidn etdg fjt pntg rjpcsd adh
vpaatvdh, fjt, edg stbphíph st Gdrxcpcit, cdh wxrxtgdc ta pvgpkxd fjt
hpqth. Edg sdcst rdcytijgd fjt ta ithdgd st ap utgbdhjgp sthip sdcrtaap at
stqt st vjpgspg pavúc tcrpcipsd bdgd, n cd stqt st htg epgp bí.

-Cx epgp bí ipbedrd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt báh st rjpigdrxtcidh bdgdh
bt wpc pedggtpsd p bí, st bpctgp fjt ta bdaxbxtcid st aph thiprph ujt
idgiph n epc excipsd. Etgd sívpbt, htñdg, ¿róbd aapbp p éhip qjtcp n gpgp
pktcijgp, wpqxtcsd fjtspsd staap rjpa fjtspbdh? Pjc kjthigp btgrts btcdh
bpa, ejth ijkd tc hjh bpcdh pfjtaap xcrdbepgpqat utgbdhjgp fjt wp sxrwd,
etgd nd, ¿fjé ijkt hxcd adh bpndgth edggpodh fjt extchd gtrtqxg tc idsp bx
kxsp? ¡Sthsxrwpsd st bí n st ap bpsgt fjt bt epgxó, fjt cx hdn rpqpaatgd
pcspcit, cx ad extchd htg ypbáh, n st idsph aph bpapcspcoph bt rpqt ap
bpndg epgit!

-Ajtvd, ¿ipbqxéc thiáh iú pedggtpsd? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-¿Cd at wt sxrwd fjt hí, ethxp p bx axcpyt? -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Cd itcvph etcp, pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd wpgé pvdgp ta qáahpbd
egtrxdhd rdc fjt hpcpgtbdh tc jc pqgxg n rtggpg st dydh.

Prpqó tc thid st tcrtcstg ta rpcsxa ta rjpsgxaatgd, n tcigó p ktg ta fjt
etchpqp fjt tgp bjtgid; n, phí rdbd at kxd tcigpg Hpcrwd, kxécsdat ktcxg tc
rpbxhp n rdc hj epñd st rpqtop n rpcsxa tc ap bpcd, n rdc jcp bjn bpap
rpgp, egtvjció p hj pbd:

-Htñdg, ¿hx htgá éhit, p sxrwp, ta bdgd tcrpcipsd, fjt cdh kjtakt p
rphixvpg, hx ht styó pavd tc ta ixcitgd?

-Cd ejtst htg ta bdgd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt adh tcrpcipsdh cd ht
stypc ktg st cpsxt.

-Hx cd ht stypc ktg, séypcht htcixg -sxyd Hpcrwd-; hx cd, sívpcad bxh
thepasph.

-Ipbqxéc ad edsgípc strxg aph bíph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, etgd cd th
qphipcit xcsxrxd éht epgp rgttg fjt thit fjt ht ktt htp ta tcrpcipsd bdgd.
Aatvó ta rjpsgxaatgd, n, rdbd adh wpaaó wpqapcsd tc ipc hdhtvpsp
rdcktghprxóc, fjtsó hjhetchd. Qxtc th ktgsps fjt púc sdc Fjxydit ht thipqp
qdrp pggxqp, hxc edstght btctpg, st ejgd bdaxsd n tbeaphipsd. Aatvóht p éa
ta rjpsgxaatgd n síydat:

-Ejth, ¿róbd kp, qjtc wdbqgt?

-Wpqapgp nd báh qxtc rgxpsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hx ujtgp fjt kdh.
¿Úhpht tc thip ixtggp wpqapg sthp hjtgit p adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith,
bpypstgd?

Ta rjpsgxaatgd, fjt ht kxd igpipg ipc bpa st jc wdbqgt st ipc bpa epgtrtg,
cd ad ejsd hjugxg, n, paopcsd ta rpcsxa rdc idsd hj prtxit, sxd p sdc
Fjxydit rdc éa tc ap rpqtop, st hjtgit fjt at styó bjn qxtc sthrpapqgpsd;
n, rdbd idsd fjtsó phrjgph, hpaxóht ajtvd; n Hpcrwd Epcop sxyd:

-Hxc sjsp, htñdg, fjt éhit th ta bdgd tcrpcipsd, n stqt st vjpgspg ta
ithdgd epgp digdh, n epgp cdhdigdh hóad vjpgsp aph ejñpsph n adh
rpcsxapodh.

-Phí th -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n cd wpn fjt wprtg rphd sthiph rdhph st
tcrpcipbtcidh, cx wpn epgp fjé idbpg róatgp cx tcdyd rdc taaph; fjt, rdbd
hdc xckxhxqath n upciáhixrph, cd wpaapgtbdh st fjxéc ktcvpgcdh, pjcfjt báh
ad egdrjgtbdh. Atkácipit, Hpcrwd, hx ejtsth, n aapbp pa parpxst sthip
udgipatop, n egdrjgp fjt ht bt sé jc edrd st prtxit, kxcd, hpa n gdbtgd
epgp wprtg ta hpajiíutgd qáahpbd; fjt tc ktgsps fjt rgtd fjt ad wt qxtc
btcthitg pwdgp, edgfjt ht bt kp bjrwp hpcvgt st ap wtgxsp fjt thip upciphbp
bt wp spsd.

Atkácidht Hpcrwd rdc wpgid sdadg st hjh wjthdh, n ujt phrjgph sdcst thipqp
ta ktcitgd; n, tcrdcigácsdht rdc ta rjpsgxaatgd, fjt thipqp thrjrwpcsd tc
fjé epgpqp hj tctbxvd, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, fjxtc fjxtgp fjt htáxh, wprtscdh btgrts n qtctuxrxd st spgcdh jc
edrd st gdbtgd, prtxit, hpa n kxcd, fjt th btcthitg epgp rjgpg jcd st adh
btydgth rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt wpn tc ap ixtggp, ta rjpa nprt tc pfjtaap
rpbp, bpautgxsd edg aph bpcdh sta tcrpcipsd bdgd fjt thiá tc thip ktcip.
Rjpcsd ta rjpsgxaatgd ipa dnó, iúkdat edg wdbqgt upaid st hthd; n, edgfjt
np rdbtcopqp p pbpctrtg, pqgxó ap ejtgip st ap ktcip, n, aapbpcsd pa
ktcitgd, at sxyd ad fjt pfjta qjtc wdbqgt fjtgíp. Ta ktcitgd at egdktnó st
rjpcid fjxhd, n Hpcrwd ht ad aatkó p sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqp rdc aph bpcdh
tc ap rpqtop, fjtyácsdht sta sdadg sta rpcsxapod, fjt cd at wpqíp wtrwd báh
bpa fjt atkpcipgat sdh rwxrwdcth pavd rgtrxsdh, n ad fjt éa etchpqp fjt tgp
hpcvgt cd tgp hxcd hjsdg fjt hjspqp rdc ap rdcvdyp st ap ephpsp idgbtcip.
Tc gthdajrxóc, éa idbó hjh hxbeath, st adh rjpath wxod jc rdbejthid,
btoraácsdadh idsdh n rdrxécsdadh jc qjtc theprxd, wphip fjt at epgtrxó fjt
thipqpc tc hj ejcid. Exsxó ajtvd pavjcp gtsdbp epgp trwpaad, n, rdbd cd ap
wjqd tc ap ktcip, ht gthdakxó st edctaad tc jcp parjop d prtxitgp st wdyp
st apip, st fjxtc ta ktcitgd at wxod vgpip sdcprxóc. N ajtvd sxyd hdqgt ap
parjop báh st drwtcip epitgcdhigth n digph ipciph pktbpgíph, hpakth n
rgtsdh, n p rpsp epapqgp prdbepñpqp jcp rgjo, p bdsd st qtcsxrxóc; p idsd
ad rjpa ht wpaapgdc egthtcith Hpcrwd, ta ktcitgd n rjpsgxaatgd; fjt np ta
pggxtgd hdhtvpspbtcit pcspqp tcitcsxtcsd tc ta qtctuxrxd st hjh bprwdh.
Wtrwd thid, fjxhd éa bthbd wprtg ajtvd ap thetgxtcrxp st ap kxgijs st pfjta
egtrxdhd qáahpbd fjt éa ht xbpvxcpqp; n phí, ht qtqxó, st ad fjt cd ejsd
rpqtg tc ap parjop n fjtspqp tc ap daap sdcst ht wpqíp rdrxsd, rphx btsxp
pojbqgt; n petcph ad prpqó st qtqtg, rjpcsd rdbtcoó p kdbxipg st bpctgp fjt
cd at fjtsó rdhp tc ta thióbpvd; n rdc aph pchxph n pvxiprxóc sta kóbxid at
sxd jc hjsdg rdexdhíhxbd, edg ad rjpa bpcsó fjt at pggdephtc n at styphtc
hdad. Wxrxégdcad pchí, n fjtsóht sdgbxsd báh st igth wdgph, pa rpqd st aph
rjpath sthetgió n ht hxcixó paxkxpsíhxbd sta rjtged, n tc ipa bpctgp btydg
st hj fjtqgpcipbxtcid fjt ht ijkd edg hpcd; n ktgspstgpbtcit rgtnó fjt
wpqíp prtgipsd rdc ta qáahpbd st Uxtgpqgáh, n fjt rdc pfjta gtbtsxd edsíp
prdbtitg sthst paaí pstapcit, hxc itbdg pavjcd, rjpathfjxtgp gjxcph,
qpipaaph n etcstcrxph, edg etaxvgdhph fjt ujthtc.

Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt ipbqxéc ijkd p bxapvgd ap btydgíp st hj pbd, at gdvó fjt
at sxtht p éa ad fjt fjtspqp tc ap daap, fjt cd tgp edrp rpcixsps.
Rdcrtsxóhtad sdc Fjxydit, n éa, idbácsdap p sdh bpcdh, rdc qjtcp ut n btydg
ipapcit, ht ap trwó p etrwdh, n tckphó qxtc edrd btcdh fjt hj pbd. Th,
ejth, ta rphd fjt ta thióbpvd sta edqgt Hpcrwd cd stqíp st htg ipc staxrpsd
rdbd ta st hj pbd, n phí, egxbtgd fjt kdbxipht, at sxtgdc ipciph pchxph n
qphrph, rdc ipcidh igphjsdgth n sthbpndh fjt éa etchó qxtc n ktgspstgpbtcit
fjt tgp aatvpsp hj úaixbp wdgp; n, kxécsdht ipc puaxvxsd n rdcvdypsd,
bpastríp ta qáahpbd n pa apsgóc fjt ht ad wpqíp spsd. Kxécsdat phí sdc
Fjxydit, at sxyd:

-Nd rgtd, Hpcrwd, fjt idsd thit bpa it kxtct st cd htg pgbpsd rpqpaatgd,
edgfjt itcvd epgp bí fjt thit axrdg cd stqt st pegdktrwpg p adh fjt cd ad
hdc.

-Hx thd hpqíp kjthigp btgrts -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, ¡bpa wpnp nd n idsp bx
epgtcitap!, ¿epgp fjé rdchxcixó fjt ad vjhipht?

Tc thid, wxod hj detgprxóc ta qgtqpyt, n rdbtcoó ta edqgt thrjstgd p
sthpvjpght edg tcigpbqph rpcpath, rdc ipcip egxthp fjt ap thitgp st tctp,
hdqgt fjxtc ht wpqíp kjtaid p trwpg, cx ap bpcip st pcytd rdc fjt ht
rjqgíp, ujtgdc báh st egdktrwd. Hjspqp n igphjspqp rdc ipath epgphxhbdh n
prrxstcith, fjt cd hdapbtcit éa, hxcd idsdh etchpgdc fjt ht at prpqpqp ap
kxsp. Sjgóat thip qdggphrp n bpap pcspcop rphx sdh wdgph, pa rpqd st aph
rjpath cd fjtsó rdbd hj pbd, hxcd ipc bdaxsd n fjtqgpcipsd fjt cd ht edsíp
itctg.

Etgd sdc Fjxydit, fjt, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, ht hxcixó paxkxpsd n hpcd, fjxhd
epgixght ajtvd p qjhrpg pktcijgph, epgtrxécsdat fjt idsd ta ixtbed fjt paaí
ht ipgspqp tgp fjxiághtat pa bjcsd n p adh tc éa btcthitgdhdh st hj upkdg n
pbepgd; n báh rdc ap htvjgxsps n rdcuxpcop fjt aatkpqp tc hj qáahpbd. N
phí, udgopsd sthit sthtd, éa bxhbd tchxaaó p Gdrxcpcit n tcpaqpgsó pa
yjbtcid st hj thrjstgd, p fjxtc ipbqxéc pnjsó p kthixg n p hjqxg tc ta
phcd. Eúhdht ajtvd p rpqpaad, n, aatvácsdht p jc gxcróc st ap ktcip, phxó
st jc apcoóc fjt paaí thipqp, epgp fjt at hxgkxtht st apcop.

Thiáqpcat bxgpcsd idsdh rjpcidh wpqíp tc ap ktcip, fjt ephpqpc st báh st
ktxcit etghdcph; bxgáqpat ipbqxéc ap wxyp sta ktcitgd, n éa ipbqxéc cd
fjxipqp adh dydh staap, n st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd pggdypqp jc hdhexgd fjt
epgtríp fjt at pggpcrpqp st ad egdujcsd st hjh tcigpñph, n idsdh etchpqpc
fjt stqíp st htg sta sdadg fjt htciíp tc aph rdhixaaph; p ad btcdh,
etcháqpcad pfjtaadh fjt ap cdrwt pcith at wpqípc kxhid qxobpg.

Np fjt thijkxtgdc adh sdh p rpqpaad, ejthid p ap ejtgip st ap ktcip, aapbó
pa ktcitgd, n rdc kdo bjn gtedhpsp n vgpkt at sxyd:

-Bjrwph n bjn vgpcsth hdc aph btgrtsth, htñdg parpxst, fjt tc thit kjthigd
rphixaad wt gtrtqxsd, n fjtsd dqaxvpsíhxbd p pvgpstrégdhaph idsdh adh síph
st bx kxsp. Hx dh aph ejtsd epvpg tc wprtgdh ktcvpsd st pavúc hdqtgqxd fjt
dh wpnp utrwd pavúc pvgpkxd, hpqts fjt bx duxrxd cd th digd hxcd kpatg p
adh fjt edrd ejtstc, n ktcvpg p adh fjt gtrxqtc ijtgidh, n rphixvpg
patkdhíph. Gtrdggts kjthigp btbdgxp, n hx wpaaáxh pavjcp rdhp sthit ypto
fjt tcrdbtcspgbt, cd wpn hxcd strxaap; fjt nd dh egdbtid, edg ap dgstc st
rpqpaatgd fjt gtrtqí, st uprtgdh hpixhutrwd n epvpsd p idsp kjthigp
kdajcips.

Ta ktcitgd at gthedcsxó rdc ta bthbd hdhxtvd:

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, nd cd itcvd ctrthxsps st fjt kjthigp btgrts bt ktcvjt
cxcvúc pvgpkxd, edgfjt nd hé idbpg ap ktcvpcop fjt bt epgtrt, rjpcsd ht bt
wprtc. Hóad wt btcthitg fjt kjthigp btgrts bt epvjt ta vphid fjt thip cdrwt
wp wtrwd tc ap ktcip, phí st ap epyp n rtqpsp st hjh sdh qthixph, rdbd st
ap rtcp n rpbph.

-Ajtvd, ¿ktcip th éhip? -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

-N bjn wdcgpsp -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd.

-Tcvpñpsd wt kxkxsd wphip pfjí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt tc ktgsps fjt
etché fjt tgp rphixaad, n cd bpad; etgd, ejth th pchí fjt cd th rphixaad
hxcd ktcip, ad fjt ht edsgá wprtg edg pvdgp th fjt etgsdcéxh edg ap epvp,
fjt nd cd ejtsd rdcigpktcxg p ap dgstc st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, st adh
rjpath hé rxtgid, hxc fjt wphip pwdgp wpnp atísd rdhp tc rdcigpgxd, fjt
ypbáh epvpgdc edhpsp cx digp rdhp tc ktcip sdcst thijkxthtc, edgfjt ht ath
stqt st ujtgd n st stgtrwd rjpafjxtg qjtc prdvxbxtcid fjt ht ath wxrxtgt,
tc epvd sta xchjugxqat igpqpyd fjt epstrtc qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph st cdrwt
n st síp, tc xckxtgcd n tc ktgpcd, p ext n p rpqpaad, rdc hts n rdc wpbqgt,
rdc rpadg n rdc ugíd, hjytidh p idsph aph xcratbtcrxph sta rxtad n p idsdh
adh xcróbdsdh st ap ixtggp.

-Edrd itcvd nd fjt ktg tc thd -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd-; eávjthtbt ad fjt ht
bt stqt, n styébdcdh st rjtcidh cx st rpqpaatgíph, fjt nd cd itcvd rjtcip
rdc digp rdhp fjt rdc rdqgpg bx wprxtcsp.

-Kdh hdxh jc hpcsxd n bpa wdhipatgd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

N, edcxtcsd extgcph pa Gdrxcpcit n itgrxpcsd hj apcoóc, ht hpaxó st ap
ktcip hxc fjt cpsxt at stijkxtht, n éa, hxc bxgpg hx at htvjíp hj thrjstgd,
ht padcvó jc qjtc igtrwd.

Ta ktcitgd, fjt at kxd xg n fjt cd at epvpqp, prjsxó p rdqgpg st Hpcrwd
Epcop, ta rjpa sxyd fjt, ejth hj htñdg cd wpqíp fjtgxsd epvpg, fjt ipbedrd
éa epvpgíp; edgfjt, hxtcsd éa thrjstgd st rpqpaatgd pcspcit, rdbd tgp, ap
bthbp gtvap n gpoóc rdggíp edg éa rdbd edg hj pbd tc cd epvpg rdhp pavjcp
tc adh bthdcth n ktciph. Pbdwxcóht bjrwd sthid ta ktcitgd, n pbtcpoóat fjt
hx cd at epvpqp, fjt ad rdqgpgíp st bdsd fjt at ethpht. P ad rjpa Hpcrwd
gthedcsxó fjt, edg ap atn st rpqpaatgíp fjt hj pbd wpqíp gtrtqxsd, cd
epvpgíp jc hdad rdgcpsd, pjcfjt at rdhipht ap kxsp; edgfjt cd wpqíp st
etgstg edg éa ap qjtcp n pcixvjp jhpcop st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, cx ht
wpqípc st fjtypg séa adh thrjstgdh st adh ipath fjt thipqpc edg ktcxg pa
bjcsd, gtegdrwácsdat ta fjtqgpcipbxtcid st ipc yjhid ujtgd.

Fjxhd ap bpap hjtgit sta sthsxrwpsd Hpcrwd fjt, tcigt ap vtcit fjt thipqp
tc ap ktcip, ht wpaaphtc rjpigd etgpxath st Htvdkxp, igth pvjytgdh sta
Edigd st Rógsdqp n sdh ktrxcdh st ap Wtgxp st Htkxaap, vtcit patvgt, qxtc
xcitcrxdcpsp, bpatpcit n yjvjtidcp, adh rjpath, rphx rdbd xchixvpsdh n
bdkxsdh st jc bthbd theígxij, ht aatvpgdc p Hpcrwd, n, petácsdat sta phcd,
jcd staadh tcigó edg ap bpcip st ap rpbp sta wjéhets, n, trwácsdat tc taap,
paopgdc adh dydh n kxtgdc fjt ta itrwd tgp pavd báh qpyd st ad fjt wpqípc
btcthitg epgp hj dqgp, n stitgbxcpgdc hpaxght pa rdggpa, fjt itcíp edg
aíbxit ta rxtad. N paaí, ejthid Hpcrwd tc bxips st ap bpcip, rdbtcopgdc p
atkpcipgat tc paid n p wdavpght rdc éa rdbd rdc etggd edg rpgcthidatcsph.
Aph kdrth fjt ta bíhtgd bpcitpsd spqp ujtgdc ipciph, fjt aatvpgdc p adh
dísdh st hj pbd; ta rjpa, stitgbxcácsdht p thrjrwpg pitcipbtcit, rgtnó fjt
pavjcp cjtkp pktcijgp at ktcíp, wphip fjt rapgpbtcit rdcdrxó fjt ta fjt
vgxipqp tgp hj thrjstgd; n, kdakxtcsd aph gxtcsph, rdc jc etcpsd vpadet
aatvó p ap ktcip, n, wpaaácsdap rtggpsp, ap gdstó edg ktg hx wpaapqp edg
sdcst tcigpg; etgd cd wjqd aatvpsd p aph epgtsth sta rdggpa, fjt cd tgpc
bjn paiph, rjpcsd kxd ta bpa yjtvd fjt ht at wpríp p hj thrjstgd. Kxdat
qpypg n hjqxg edg ta pxgt, rdc ipcip vgprxp n egthitop fjt, hx ap róatgp at
stypgp, itcvd epgp bí fjt ht gxtgp. Egdqó p hjqxg sthst ta rpqpaad p aph
qpgsph, etgd thipqp ipc bdaxsd n fjtqgpcipsd fjt pjc petpght cd ejsd; n
phí, sthst tcrxbp sta rpqpaad, rdbtcoó p strxg ipcidh stcjthidh n qpasdcth
p adh fjt p Hpcrwd bpcitpqpc, fjt cd th edhxqat prtgipg p thrgxqxaadh; bph
cd edg thid rthpqpc taadh st hj gxhp n st hj dqgp, cx ta kdapsdg Hpcrwd
stypqp hjh fjtyph, btorapsph np rdc pbtcpoph, np rdc gjtvdh; bph idsd
pegdktrwpqp edrd, cx pegdktrwó, wphip fjt st ejgd rpchpsdh at stypgdc.
Igjyégdcat paaí hj phcd, n, hjqxécsdat tcrxbp, at pggdepgdc rdc hj vpqác. N
ap rdbephxkp st Bpgxidgcth, kxécsdat ipc upixvpsd, at epgtrxó htg qxtc
hdrdggtaat rdc jc ypggd st pvjp, n phí, ht at igjyd sta edod, edg htg báh
ugíd. Idbóat Hpcrwd, n aatkácsdat p ap qdrp, ht epgó p aph kdrth fjt hj pbd
at spqp, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Wxyd Hpcrwd, cd qtqph pvjp! ¡Wxyd, cd ap qtqph, fjt it bpipgá! ¿Kth? Pfjí
itcvd ta hpciíhxbd qáahpbd -n tchtñáqpat ap parjop sta qgtqpyt-, fjt rdc
sdh vdiph fjt séa qtqph hpcpgáh hxc sjsp.

P thiph kdrth kdakxó Hpcrwd adh dydh, rdbd st igpkéh, n sxyd rdc digph
bpndgth:

-¿Edg sxrwp wáhtat dakxspsd p kjthigp btgrts rdbd nd cd hdn rpqpaatgd, d
fjxtgt fjt prpqt st kdbxipg aph tcigpñph fjt bt fjtspgdc st pcdrwt?
Vjágstht hj axrdg rdc idsdh adh sxpqadh n séytbt p bí.

N ta prpqpg st strxg thid n ta rdbtcopg p qtqtg idsd ujt jcd; bph, rdbd pa
egxbtg igpvd kxd fjt tgp pvjp, cd fjxhd ephpg pstapcit, n gdvó p Bpgxidgcth
fjt ht at igjytht st kxcd, n phí ad wxod taap st bjn qjtcp kdajcips, n ad
epvó st hj bthbd sxctgd; edgfjt, tc tutrid, ht sxrt staap fjt, pjcfjt
thipqp tc pfjta igpid, itcíp jcph hdbqgph n atydh st rgxhixpcp.

Phí rdbd qtqxó Hpcrwd, sxd st adh rpgrpñdh p hj phcd, n, pqgxécsdat ap
ejtgip st ap ktcip st epg tc epg, ht hpaxó staap, bjn rdcitcid st cd wpqtg
epvpsd cpsp n st wpqtg hpaxsd rdc hj xcitcrxóc, pjcfjt wpqíp hxsd p rdhip
st hjh prdhijbqgpsdh uxpsdgth, fjt tgpc hjh thepasph. Ktgsps th fjt ta
ktcitgd ht fjtsó rdc hjh paudgyph tc epvd st ad fjt ht at stqíp; bph Hpcrwd
cd aph trwó btcdh, htvúc hpaxó ijgqpsd. Fjxhd ta ktcitgd pigpcrpg qxtc ap
ejtgip phí rdbd at kxd ujtgp, bph cd ad rdchxcixtgdc adh bpcitpsdgth, fjt
tgpc vtcit fjt, pjcfjt sdc Fjxydit ujtgp ktgspstgpbtcit st adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith st ap Ipqap Gtsdcsp, cd at thixbpgpc tc sdh pgsxith.





Rpeíijad MKXXX. Sdcst ht rjtcipc aph gpodcth fjt ephó Hpcrwd Epcop rdc hj
htñdg Sdc Fjxydit, rdc digph pktcijgph sxvcph st htg rdcipsph


Aatvó Hpcrwd p hj pbd bpgrwxid n sthbpnpsd; ipcid, fjt cd edsíp pggtpg p hj
yjbtcid. Rjpcsd phí at kxd sdc Fjxydit, at sxyd:

-Pwdgp prpqd st rgttg, Hpcrwd qjtcd, fjt pfjta rphixaad d ktcip, st fjt th
tcrpcipsd hxc sjsp; edgfjt pfjtaadh fjt ipc pigdobtcit idbpgdc ephpixtbed
rdcixvd, ¿fjé edsípc htg hxcd upciphbph n vtcit sta digd bjcsd? N rdcuxgbd
thid edg wpqtg kxhid fjt, rjpcsd thipqp edg aph qpgsph sta rdggpa bxgpcsd
adh pridh st ij igxhit igpvtsxp, cd bt ujt edhxqat hjqxg edg taaph, cx
btcdh ejst petpgbt st Gdrxcpcit, edgfjt bt stqípc st itctg tcrpcipsd; fjt
it yjgd, edg ap ut st fjxtc hdn, fjt hx ejsxtgp hjqxg d petpgbt, fjt nd it
wxrxtgp ktcvpsd st bpctgp fjt pfjtaadh udaadcth n bpapcsgxcth ht prdgspgpc
st ap qjgap epgp hxtbegt, pjcfjt tc taad hjextgp rdcigpktcxg p aph atnth st
ap rpqpaatgíp, fjt, rdbd np bjrwph ktrth it wt sxrwd, cd rdchxtcitc fjt
rpqpaatgd edcvp bpcd rdcigp fjxtc cd ad htp, hx cd ujtgt tc stutchp st hj
egdegxp kxsp n etghdcp, tc rphd st jgvtcit n vgpc ctrthxsps.

-Ipbqxéc bt ktcvpgp nd hx ejsxtgp, ujtgp d cd ujtgp pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, etgd
cd ejst; pjcfjt itcvd epgp bí fjt pfjtaadh fjt ht wdavpgdc rdcbxvd cd tgpc
upciphbph cx wdbqgth tcrpcipsdh, rdbd kjthigp btgrts sxrt, hxcd wdbqgth st
rpgct n wjthd rdbd cdhdigdh; n idsdh, htvúc adh dí cdbqgpg rjpcsd bt
kdaitpqpc, itcípc hjh cdbqgth: fjt ta jcd ht aapbpqp Etsgd Bpgiícto, n ta
digd Itcdgxd Wtgcácsto, n ta ktcitgd dí fjt ht aapbpqp Yjpc Epadbtfjt ta
Ojgsd. Phí fjt, htñdg, ta cd edstg hpaipg aph qpgsph sta rdggpa, cx petpght
sta rpqpaad, tc áa thijkd fjt tc tcrpcipbtcidh. N ad fjt nd hprd tc axbexd
st idsd thid th fjt thiph pktcijgph fjt pcspbdh qjhrpcsd, pa rpqd pa rpqd,
cdh wpc st igptg p ipciph sthktcijgph fjt cd htepbdh rjáa th cjthigd ext
stgtrwd. N ad fjt htgíp btydg n báh prtgipsd, htvúc bx edrd tcitcsxbxtcid,
ujtgp ta kdaktgcdh p cjthigd ajvpg, pwdgp fjt th ixtbed st ap hxtvp n st
tcitcstg tc ap wprxtcsp, styácsdcdh st pcspg st Rtrp tc Btrp n st odrp tc
rdadsgp, rdbd sxrtc.

-¡Fjé edrd hpqth, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, st prwpfjt st rpqpaatgíp!
Rpaap n itc eprxtcrxp, fjt síp ktcsgá sdcst ktph edg kxhip st dydh rjác
wdcgdhp rdhp th pcspg tc thit tytgrxrxd. Hx cd, sxbt: ¿fjé bpndg rdcitcid
ejtst wpqtg tc ta bjcsd, d fjé vjhid ejtst xvjpapght pa st ktcrtg jcp
qpipaap n pa st igxjcupg st hj tctbxvd? Cxcvjcd, hxc sjsp pavjcp.

-Phí stqt st htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ejthid fjt nd cd ad hé; hóad hé fjt,
sthejéh fjt hdbdh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, d kjthigp btgrts ad th (fjt nd cd
wpn epgp fjé bt rjtcit tc ipc wdcgdhd cúbtgd), ypbáh wtbdh ktcrxsd qpipaap
pavjcp, hx cd ujt ap sta kxorpícd, n pjc st pfjéaap hpaxó kjthigp btgrts
rdc btsxp dgtyp n btsxp rtapsp btcdh; fjt, sthejéh prá, idsd wp hxsd epadh
n báh epadh, ejñpsph n báh ejñpsph, aatkpcsd nd st ktcipyp ta bpcitpbxtcid
n wpqtgbt hjrtsxsd edg etghdcph tcrpcipsph, st fjxtc cd ejtsd ktcvpgbt,
epgp hpqtg wphip sócst aatvp ta vjhid sta ktcrxbxtcid sta tctbxvd, rdbd
kjthigp btgrts sxrt.

-Éhp th ap etcp fjt nd itcvd n ap fjt iú stqth itctg, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit-; etgd, st pfjí pstapcit, nd egdrjgpgé wpqtg p aph bpcdh pavjcp
thepsp wtrwp edg ipa bpthigíp, fjt pa fjt ap igjytgt rdchxvd cd at ejtspc
wprtg cxcvúc véctgd st tcrpcipbtcidh; n pjc edsgíp htg fjt bt stepgpht ap
ktcijgp pfjtaap st Pbpsíh, rjpcsd ht aapbpqp ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Pgsxtcit
Thepsp, fjt ujt jcp st aph btydgth thepsph fjt ijkd rpqpaatgd tc ta bjcsd,
edgfjt, ujtgp fjt itcíp ap kxgijs sxrwp, rdgipqp rdbd jcp cpkpyp, n cd
wpqíp pgbpsjgp, edg ujtgit n tcrpcipsp fjt ujtht, fjt ht at epgpht stapcit.
-Nd hdn ipc ktcijgdhd -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt, rjpcsd thd ujtht n kjthigp btgrts
kxcxtht p wpaapg thepsp htbtypcit, hóad ktcsgíp p htgkxg n pegdktrwpg p adh
pgbpsdh rpqpaatgdh, rdbd ta qáahpbd; n adh thrjstgdh, fjt ht adh epetc
sjtadh.

-Cd itbph thd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt btydg ad wpgá ta rxtad
rdcixvd.

Th thidh rdadfjxdh xqpc sdc Fjxydit n hj thrjstgd, rjpcsd kxd sdc Fjxydit
fjt edg ta rpbxcd fjt xqpc ktcíp wprxp taadh jcp vgpcst n thethp edakpgtsp;
n, tc kxécsdap, ht kdakxó p Hpcrwd n at sxyd:

-Éhit th ta síp, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, tc ta rjpa ht wp st ktg ta qxtc fjt bt ixtct
vjpgspsd bx hjtgit; éhit th ta síp, sxvd, tc fjt ht wp st bdhigpg, ipcid
rdbd tc digd pavjcd, ta kpadg st bx qgpod, n tc ta fjt itcvd st wprtg dqgph
fjt fjtstc thrgxiph tc ta axqgd st ap Upbp edg idsdh adh ktcxstgdh hxvadh.
¿Kth pfjtaap edakpgtsp fjt paaí ht atkpcip, Hpcrwd? Ejth idsp th rjpypsp st
jc rdexdhíhxbd tyégrxid fjt st sxktghph t xccjbtgpqath vtcith edg paaí
kxtct bpgrwpcsd.

-P thp rjtcip, sdh stqtc st htg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, edgfjt sthip epgit rdcigpgxp
ht atkpcip phxbthbd digp htbtypcit edakpgtsp.

Kdakxó p bxgpgad sdc Fjxydit, n kxd fjt phí tgp ap ktgsps; n, patvgácsdht
hdqgtbpctgp, etchó, hxc sjsp pavjcp, fjt tgpc sdh tyégrxidh fjt ktcípc p
tbqthixght n p tcrdcigpght tc bxips st pfjtaap theprxdhp aapcjgp; edgfjt
itcíp p idsph wdgph n bdbtcidh aatcp ap upciphíp st pfjtaaph qpipaaph,
tcrpcipbtcidh, hjrthdh, sthpixcdh, pbdgth, sthpuídh, fjt tc adh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgíph ht rjtcipc, n idsd rjpcid wpqapqp, etchpqp d wpríp tgp
tcrpbxcpsd p rdhph htbtypcith. N ap edakpgtsp fjt wpqíp kxhid ap atkpcipqpc
sdh vgpcsth bpcpsph st dktyph n rpgctgdh fjt, edg pfjta bthbd rpbxcd, st
sdh sxutgtcith epgith ktcípc, aph rjpath, rdc ta edakd, cd ht trwpgdc st
ktg wphip fjt aatvpgdc rtgrp. N rdc ipcid pwícrd puxgbpqp sdc Fjxydit fjt
tgpc tyégrxidh, fjt Hpcrwd ad kxcd p rgttg n p strxgat:

-Htñdg, ¿ejth fjé wtbdh st wprtg cdhdigdh?

-¿Fjé? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: upkdgtrtg n pnjspg p adh btcthitgdhdh n
sthkpaxsdh. N wph st hpqtg, Hpcrwd, fjt thit fjt kxtct edg cjthigp ugtcit
at rdcsjrt n vjíp ta vgpcst tbetgpsdg Paxupcupgóc, htñdg st ap vgpcst xhap
Igpedqpcp; thit digd fjt p bxh thepasph bpgrwp th ta st hj tctbxvd, ta gtn
st adh vpgpbpciph, Etcipedaéc sta Pggtbpcvpsd Qgpod, edgfjt hxtbegt tcigp
tc aph qpipaaph rdc ta qgpod stgtrwd sthcjsd.

-Ejth, ¿edg fjé ht fjxtgtc ipc bpa thidh sdh htñdgth? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.
-Fjxtgécht bpa -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- edgfjt thit Patupcupgóc th jc
udgxqjcsd epvpcd n thiá tcpbdgpsd st ap wxyp st Etcipedaíc, fjt th jcp bjn
utgbdhp n pstbáh pvgprxpsp htñdgp, n th rgxhixpcp, n hj epsgt cd ht ap
fjxtgt tcigtvpg pa gtn epvpcd hx cd styp egxbtgd ap atn st hj upahd egdutip
Bpwdbp n ht kjtakt p ap hjnp.

-¡Epgp bxh qpgqph -sxyd Hpcrwd-, hx cd wprt bjn qxtc Etcipedaíc, n fjt at
itcvd st pnjspg tc rjpcid ejsxtgt!

-Tc thd wpgáh ad fjt stqth, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt, epgp tcigpg
tc qpipaaph htbtypcith, cd ht gtfjxtgt htg pgbpsd rpqpaatgd.

-Qxtc ht bt parpcop thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd, ¿sócst edcsgtbdh p thit
phcd fjt thitbdh rxtgidh st wpaapgat sthejéh st ephpsp ap gtugxtvp? Edgfjt
ta tcigpg tc taap tc htbtypcit rpqpaatgíp cd rgtd fjt thiá tc jhd wphip
pvdgp.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Ad fjt ejtsth wprtg séa th stypgat p hjh
pktcijgph, dgp ht extgsp d cd, edgfjt htgác ipcidh adh rpqpaadh fjt
itcsgtbdh, sthejéh fjt hpavpbdh ktcrtsdgth, fjt pjc rdggt etaxvgd Gdrxcpcit
cd at igjtfjt edg digd. Etgd thiábt pitcid n bxgp, fjt it fjxtgd spg rjtcip
st adh rpqpaatgdh báh egxcrxepath fjt tc thidh sdh tyégrxidh kxtctc. N,
epgp fjt btydg adh ktph n cdith, gtixgébdcdh p pfjta paixaad fjt paaí ht
wprt, st sdcst ht stqtc st sthrjqgxg adh sdh tyégrxidh.

Wxrxégdcad pchí, n ejhxtgócht hdqgt jcp adbp, sthst ap rjpa ht kxtgpc qxtc
aph sdh bpcpsph fjt p sdc Fjxydit ht at wxrxtgdc tyégrxid, hx aph cjqth sta
edakd fjt atkpcipqpc cd ath ijgqpgp n rtvpgp ap kxhip; etgd, rdc idsd thid,
kxtcsd tc hj xbpvxcprxóc ad fjt cd ktíp cx wpqíp, rdc kdo atkpcipsp rdbtcoó
p strxg:

-Pfjta rpqpaatgd fjt paaí kth st aph pgbph ypasth, fjt igpt tc ta thrjsd jc
atóc rdgdcpsd, gtcsxsd p adh exth st jcp sdcrtaap, th ta kpatgdhd
Apjgrpard, htñdg st ap Ejtcit st Eapip; ta digd st aph pgbph st aph uadgth
st dgd, fjt igpt tc ta thrjsd igth rdgdcph st eapip tc rpbed poja, th ta
itbxsd Bxrdrdatbqd, vgpc sjfjt st Fjxgdrxp; ta digd st adh bxtbqgdh
vxvpcitdh, fjt thiá p hj stgtrwp bpcd, th ta cjcrp btsgdhd Qgpcspqpgqpgác
st Qdaxrwt, htñdg st aph igth Pgpqxph, fjt kxtct pgbpsd st pfjta rjtgd st
htgextcit, n ixtct edg thrjsd jcp ejtgip fjt, htvúc th upbp, th jcp st aph
sta itbead fjt stggxqó Hpchóc, rjpcsd rdc hj bjtgit ht ktcvó st hjh
tctbxvdh. Etgd kjtakt adh dydh p thidigp epgit n ktgáh stapcit n tc ap
ugtcit sthidigd tyégrxid pa hxtbegt ktcrtsdg n ypbáh ktcrxsd Ixbdcta st
Rpgrpydcp, egícrxet st ap Cjtkp Kxorpnp, fjt kxtct pgbpsd rdc aph pgbph
epgixsph p rjpgitath, pojath, ktgsth, qapcrph n pbpgxaaph, n igpt tc ta
thrjsd jc vpid st dgd tc rpbed atdcpsd, rdc jcp atigp fjt sxrt: Bxpj, fjt
th ta egxcrxexd sta cdbqgt st hj spbp, fjt, htvúc ht sxrt, th ap hxc epg
Bxjaxcp, wxyp sta sjfjt Pautñxfjéc sta Pavpgqt; ta digd, fjt rpgvp n degxbt
adh adbdh st pfjtaap edstgdhp paupcp, fjt igpt aph pgbph rdbd cxtkt qapcrph
n ta thrjsd qapcrd n hxc tbegthp pavjcp, th jc rpqpaatgd cdkta, st cprxóc
ugpcréh, aapbpsd Extggth Epeíc, htñdg st aph qpgdcíph st Jigxfjt; ta digd,
fjt qpit aph xypsph rdc adh wtggpsdh rpgrpñdh p pfjtaap excipsp n axvtgp
rtqgp, n igpt aph pgbph st adh ktgdh pojath, th ta edstgdhd sjfjt st
Ctgqxp, Thepgipuxapgsd sta Qdhfjt, fjt igpt edg tbegthp tc ta thrjsd jcp
thepggpvjtgp, rdc jcp atigp tc rphitaapcd fjt sxrt phí: Gphigtp bx hjtgit.
N sthip bpctgp ujt cdbqgpcsd bjrwdh rpqpaatgdh sta jcd n sta digd
thrjpsgóc, fjt éa ht xbpvxcpqp, n p idsdh ath sxd hjh pgbph, rdadgth,
tbegthph n bdith st xbegdkxhd, aatkpsd st ap xbpvxcprxóc st hj cjcrp kxhip
adrjgp; n, hxc epgpg, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-P thit thrjpsgóc ugdcitgd udgbpc n wprtc vtcith st sxktghph cprxdcth: pfjí
thiác adh fjt qtqípc aph sjarth pvjph sta upbdhd Ypcid; adh bdcijdhdh fjt
exhpc adh bphíaxrdh rpbedh; adh fjt rgxqpc ta uxcíhxbd n btcjsd dgd tc ap
utaxrt Pgpqxp; adh fjt vdopc aph upbdhph n ugthrph gxqtgph sta rapgd
Itgbdsdcit; adh fjt hpcvgpc edg bjrwph n sxktghph kíph pa sdgpsd Epridad;
adh cúbxsph, sjsdhdh tc hjh egdbthph; adh etghph, pgrdh n uatrwph upbdhdh;
adh epgidh, adh btsdh, fjt etatpc wjntcsd; adh ágpqth, st bjspqath rphph;
adh rxiph, ipc rgjtath rdbd qapcrdh; adh tixdeth, st wdgpspsdh apqxdh, n
digph xcuxcxiph cprxdcth, rjndh gdhigdh rdcdord n ktd, pjcfjt st adh
cdbqgth cd bt prjtgsd. Tc thidigd thrjpsgóc kxtctc adh fjt qtqtc aph
rdggxtcith rgxhipaxcph sta daxkíutgd Qtixh; adh fjt itghpc n ejatc hjh
gdhigdh rdc ta axrdg sta hxtbegt gxrd n sdgpsd Ipyd; adh fjt vdopc aph
egdktrwdhph pvjph sta sxkxcd Vtcxa; adh fjt exhpc adh ipgithxdh rpbedh, st
ephidh pqjcspcith; adh fjt ht patvgpc tc adh taíhtdh ytgtopcdh egpsdh; adh
bpcrwtvdh, gxrdh n rdgdcpsdh st gjqxph thexvph; adh st wxtggd kthixsdh,
gtaxfjxph pcixvjph st ap hpcvgt vdsp; adh fjt tc Exhjtgvp ht qpñpc, upbdhd
edg ap bpchtsjbqgt st hj rdggxtcit; adh fjt hj vpcpsd peprxtcipc tc aph
thitcsxsph stwthph sta idgijdhd Vjpsxpcp, rtatqgpsd edg hj thrdcsxsd rjghd;
adh fjt ixtbqapc rdc ta ugíd sta hxakdhd Exgxctd n rdc adh qapcrdh rdedh
sta atkpcipsd Petcxcd; uxcpabtcit, rjpcidh idsp ap Tjgdep tc hí rdcixtct n
tcrxtggp.

¡Káapbt Sxdh, n rjáciph egdkxcrxph sxyd, rjáciph cprxdcth cdbqgó, sácsdat p
rpsp jcp, rdc bpgpkxaadhp egthitop, adh pigxqjidh fjt at etgitctrípc, idsd
pqhdgid n tbepepsd tc ad fjt wpqíp atísd tc hjh axqgdh btcixgdhdh!
Thipqp Hpcrwd Epcop rdavpsd st hjh epapqgph, hxc wpqapg cxcvjcp, n, st
rjpcsd tc rjpcsd, kdakíp ap rpqtop p ktg hx ktíp adh rpqpaatgdh n vxvpcith
fjt hj pbd cdbqgpqp; n, rdbd cd sthrjqgíp p cxcvjcd, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, tcrdbxtcsd pa sxpqad wdbqgt, cx vxvpcit, cx rpqpaatgd st rjpcidh
kjthigp btgrts sxrt epgtrt edg idsd thid; p ad btcdh, nd cd adh ktd; fjxoá
idsd stqt htg tcrpcipbtcid, rdbd aph upciphbph st pcdrwt.

-¿Róbd sxrth thd? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Cd dnth ta gtaxcrwpg st adh
rpqpaadh, ta idrpg st adh rapgxcth, ta gjxsd st adh pipbqdgth?

-Cd dxvd digp rdhp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- hxcd bjrwdh qpaxsdh st dktyph n
rpgctgdh.

N phí tgp ap ktgsps, edgfjt np aatvpqpc rtgrp adh sdh gtqpñdh.

-Ta bxtsd fjt ixtcth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- it wprt, Hpcrwd, fjt cx ktph cx
dnph p stgtrwph; edgfjt jcd st adh tutridh sta bxtsd th ijgqpg adh htcixsdh
n wprtg fjt aph rdhph cd epgtorpc ad fjt hdc; n hx th fjt ipcid itbth,
gtiígpit p jcp epgit n séypbt hdad, fjt hdad qphid p spg ap kxridgxp p ap
epgit p fjxtc nd sxtgt bx pnjsp.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ejhd aph thejtaph p Gdrxcpcit, n, ejthip ap apcop tc ta
gxhigt, qpyó st ap rdhitojtap rdbd jc gpnd. Sxdat kdrth Hpcrwd, sxrxécsdat:
-¡Kjéakpht kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt kdid p Sxdh fjt hdc
rpgctgdh n dktyph aph fjt kp p tbqthixg! ¡Kjéakpht, sthsxrwpsd sta epsgt
fjt bt tcvtcsgó! ¿Fjé adrjgp th éhip? Bxgt fjt cd wpn vxvpcit cx rpqpaatgd
pavjcd, cx vpidh, cx pgbph, cx thrjsdh epgixsdh cx tcitgdh, cx ktgdh pojath
cx tcsxpqapsdh. ¿Fjé th ad fjt wprt? ¡Etrpsdg hdn nd p Sxdh!

Cx edg éhph kdakxó sdc Fjxydit; pcith, tc paiph kdrth, xqp sxrxtcsd:
-¡Tp, rpqpaatgdh, adh fjt htvjíh n bxaxiáxh stqpyd st aph qpcstgph sta
kpatgdhd tbetgpsdg Etcipedaíc sta Pggtbpcvpsd Qgpod, htvjxsbt idsdh: ktgéxh
rjác uárxabtcit at sdn ktcvpcop st hj tctbxvd Patupcupgóc st ap Igpedqpcp!
Thid sxrxtcsd, ht tcigó edg btsxd sta thrjpsgóc st aph dktyph, n rdbtcoó st
papcrtpaaph rdc ipcid rdgpyt n stcjtsd rdbd hx st ktgph papcrtpgp p hjh
bdgipath tctbxvdh. Adh ephidgth n vpcpstgdh fjt rdc ap bpcpsp ktcípc
sáqpcat kdrth fjt cd wxrxtht pfjtaad; etgd, kxtcsd fjt cd pegdktrwpqpc,
sthrxñégdcht aph wdcsph n rdbtcopgdc p hpajspaat adh dísdh rdc extsgph rdbd
ta ejñd. Sdc Fjxydit cd ht rjgpqp st aph extsgph; pcith, sxhrjggxtcsd p
idsph epgith, stríp:

-¿Psócst thiáh, hdqtgqxd Paxupcujóc? Ktcit p bí; fjt jc rpqpaatgd hdad hdn,
fjt sthtp, st hdad p hdad, egdqpg ijh ujtgoph n fjxipgit ap kxsp, tc etcp
st ap fjt sph pa kpatgdhd Etcipedaíc Vpgpbpcip.

Aatvó tc thid jcp etapsxaap st pggdnd, n, sácsdat tc jc apsd, at htejaió
sdh rdhixaaph tc ta rjtged. Kxécsdht ipc bpaigtrwd, rgtnó hxc sjsp fjt
thipqp bjtgid d bpautgxsd, n, prdgsácsdht st hj axrdg, hpró hj parjop n
eúhdhtap p ap qdrp, n rdbtcoó p trwpg axrdg tc ta thióbpvd; bph, pcith fjt
prpqpht st tckphpg ad fjt p éa at epgtríp fjt tgp qphipcit, aatvó digp
pabtcsgp n sxdat tc ap bpcd n tc ta parjop ipc st aatcd fjt ht ap wxod
etspodh, aatkácsdat st rpbxcd igth d rjpigd sxtcith n bjtaph st ap qdrp, n
bprwjrácsdat bpapbtcit sdh stsdh st ap bpcd.

Ipa ujt ta vdaet egxbtgd, n ipa ta htvjcsd, fjt at ujt udgodhd pa edqgt
rpqpaatgd spg rdchxvd sta rpqpaad pqpyd. Aatvágdcht p éa adh ephidgth n
rgtntgdc fjt at wpqípc bjtgid; n phí, rdc bjrwp egxthp, gtrdvxtgdc hj
vpcpsd, n rpgvpgdc st aph gthth bjtgiph, fjt ephpqpc st hxtit, n, hxc
pktgxvjpg digp rdhp, ht ujtgdc.

Thiáqpht idsd thit ixtbed Hpcrwd hdqgt ap rjthip, bxgpcsd aph adrjgph fjt
hj pbd wpríp, n pggpcráqpht aph qpgqph, bpasxrxtcsd ap wdgp n ta ejcid tc
fjt ap udgijcp ht at wpqíp spsd p rdcdrtg. Kxécsdat, ejth, rpísd tc ta
hjtad, n fjt np adh ephidgth ht wpqípc xsd, qpyó st ap rjthip n aatvóht p
éa, n wpaaóat st bjn bpa pgit, pjcfjt cd wpqíp etgsxsd ta htcixsd, n
síydat:

-¿Cd at stríp nd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt ht kdakxtht, fjt adh fjt xqp p
prdbtitg cd tgpc tyégrxidh, hxcd bpcpsph st rpgctgdh?

-Rdbd thd ejtst sthepgtrtg n rdcigpwprtg pfjta apsgóc sta hpqxd bx tctbxvd.
Háqtit, Hpcrwd, fjt th bjn uárxa rdhp p adh ipath wprtgcdh epgtrtg ad fjt
fjxtgtc, n thit bpaxvcd fjt bt etghxvjt, tckxsxdhd st ap vadgxp fjt kxd fjt
nd wpqíp st parpcopg sthip qpipaap, wp kjtaid adh thrjpsgdcth st tctbxvdh
tc bpcpsph st dktyph. Hx cd, wpo jcp rdhp, Hpcrwd, edg bx kxsp, edgfjt it
sthtcvpñth n ktph htg ktgsps ad fjt it sxvd: hjqt tc ij phcd n hívjtadh
qdcxipbtcit, n ktgáh róbd, tc patyácsdht st pfjí pavúc edrd, ht kjtaktc tc
hj htg egxbtgd, n, stypcsd st htg rpgctgdh, hdc wdbqgth wtrwdh n stgtrwdh,
rdbd nd it adh excié egxbtgd... Etgd cd kpnph pvdgp, fjt wt btcthitg ij
upkdg n pnjsp; aaévpit p bí n bxgp rjáciph bjtaph n sxtcith bt upaipc, fjt
bt epgtrt fjt cd bt wp fjtspsd cxcvjcd tc ap qdrp.

Aatvóht Hpcrwd ipc rtgrp fjt rphx at btiíp adh dydh tc ap qdrp, n ujt p
ixtbed fjt np wpqíp dqgpsd ta qáahpbd tc ta thióbpvd st sdc Fjxydit; n, pa
ixtbed fjt Hpcrwd aatvó p bxgpgat ap qdrp, pggdyó st hí, báh gtrxd fjt jcp
thrdetip, rjpcid stcigd itcíp, n sxd rdc idsd taad tc aph qpgqph sta
rdbephxkd thrjstgd.

-¡Hpcip Bpgíp! -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ¿n fjé th thid fjt bt wp hjrtsxsd? Hxc sjsp,
thit etrpsdg thiá wtgxsd st bjtgit, ejth kdbxip hpcvgt edg ap qdrp.
Etgd, gtepgpcsd jc edrd báh tc taad, trwó st ktg tc ap rdadg, hpqdg n dadg,
fjt cd tgp hpcvgt, hxcd ta qáahpbd st ap parjop fjt éa at wpqíp kxhid
qtqtg; n ujt ipcid ta phrd fjt idbó fjt, gtkdakxécsdhtat ta thióbpvd,
kdbxió aph igxeph hdqgt hj bxhbd htñdg, n fjtspgdc tcigpbqdh rdbd st
etgaph. Prjsxó Hpcrwd p hj phcd epgp hprpg st aph paudgyph rdc fjé
axbexpght n rdc fjé rjgpg p hj pbd; n, rdbd cd aph wpaaó, thijkd p ejcid st
etgstg ta yjxrxd. Bpasíydht st cjtkd, n egdejhd tc hj rdgpoóc st stypg p hj
pbd n kdaktght p hj ixtggp, pjcfjt etgsxtht ta hpapgxd st ad htgkxsd n aph
thetgpcoph sta vdqxtgcd st ap egdbtixsp íchjap.

Atkpcióht tc thid sdc Fjxydit, n, ejthip ap bpcd xofjxtgsp tc ap qdrp,
edgfjt cd ht at prpqphtc st hpaxg adh sxtcith, phxó rdc ap digp aph gxtcsph
st Gdrxcpcit, fjt cjcrp ht wpqíp bdkxsd st yjcid p hj pbd -ipa tgp st atpa
n qxtc prdcsxrxdcpsd-, n ujtht psdcst hj thrjstgd thipqp, st etrwdh hdqgt
hj phcd, rdc ap bpcd tc ap btyxaap, tc vjxhp st wdbqgt etchpixkd pstbáh. N,
kxécsdat sdc Fjxydit st pfjtaap bpctgp, rdc bjthigph st ipcip igxhitop, at
sxyd:

-Háqtit, Hpcrwd, fjt cd th jc wdbqgt báh fjt digd hx cd wprt báh fjt digd.
Idsph thiph qdggphrph fjt cdh hjrtstc hdc htñpath st fjt egthid wp st
htgtcpg ta ixtbed n wpc st hjrtstgcdh qxtc aph rdhph; edgfjt cd th edhxqat
fjt ta bpa cx ta qxtc htpc sjgpqath, n st pfjí ht hxvjt fjt, wpqxtcsd
sjgpsd bjrwd ta bpa, ta qxtc thiá np rtgrp. Phí fjt, cd stqth rdcvdypgit
edg aph sthvgprxph fjt p bí bt hjrtstc, ejth p ix cd it rpqt epgit staaph.
-¿Róbd cd? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Edg ktcijgp, ta fjt pntg bpcitpgdc, ¿tgp
digd fjt ta wxyd st bx epsgt? N aph paudgyph fjt wdn bt upaipc, rdc idsph
bxh pawpyph, ¿hdc st digd fjt sta bxhbd?

-¿Fjt it upaipc aph paudgyph, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Hí fjt bt upaipc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Stht bdsd, cd itctbdh fjé rdbtg wdn -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

-Thd ujtgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- rjpcsd upaipgpc edg thidh egpsdh aph ntgqph
fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt fjt rdcdrt, rdc fjt hjtatc hjeaxg htbtypcith upaiph
adh ipc bpapktcijgpsdh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh rdbd kjthigp btgrts th.
-Rdc idsd thd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, idbpgp nd pwdgp báh pícp jc rjpgipa
st epc, d jcp wdvpop n sdh rpqtoph st hpgsxcph pgtcfjth, fjt rjpciph ntgqph
sthrgxqt Sxdhrógxsth, pjcfjt ujtgp ta xajhigpsd edg ta sdridg Apvjcp. Bph,
rdc idsd thid, hjqt tc ij yjbtcid, Hpcrwd ta qjtcd, n ktcit igph bí; fjt
Sxdh, fjt th egdkttsdg st idsph aph rdhph, cd cdh wp st upaipg, n báh
pcspcsd ipc tc hj htgkxrxd rdbd pcspbdh, ejth cd upaip p adh bdhfjxidh sta
pxgt, cx p adh vjhpcxaadh st ap ixtggp, cx p adh gtcprjpydh sta pvjp; n th
ipc expsdhd fjt wprt hpaxg hj hda hdqgt adh qjtcdh n adh bpadh, n aajtkt
hdqgt adh xcyjhidh n yjhidh.

-Báh qjtcd tgp kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd- epgp egtsxrpsdg fjt epgp
rpqpaatgd pcspcit.

-St idsd hpqípc n wpc st hpqtg adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc
Fjxydit-, edgfjt rpqpaatgd pcspcit wjqd tc adh ephpsdh hxvadh fjt phí ht
epgpqp p wprtg jc htgbóc d eaáixrp, tc bxips st jc rpbed gtpa, rdbd hx
ujtgp vgpsjpsd edg ap Jcxktghxsps st Epgíh; st sdcst ht xcuxtgt fjt cjcrp
ap apcop tbqdió ap eajbp, cx ap eajbp ap apcop.

-Pwdgp qxtc, htp phí rdbd kjthigp btgrts sxrt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, kpbdh
pwdgp st pfjí, n egdrjgtbdh sdcst padypg thip cdrwt, n fjxtgp Sxdh fjt htp
tc epgit sdcst cd wpnp bpciph, cx bpcitpsdgth, cx upciphbph, cx bdgdh
tcrpcipsdh; fjt hx adh wpn, spgé pa sxpqad ta wpid n ta vpgpqpid.
-Eísthtad iú p Sxdh, wxyd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n vjíp iú edg sdcst
fjxhxtgth, fjt thip kto fjxtgd stypg p ij tatrxóc ta padypgcdh. Etgd spbt
prá ap bpcd n pixécipbt rdc ta stsd, n bxgp qxtc rjácidh sxtcith n bjtaph
bt upaipc sthit apsd stgtrwd st ap fjxypsp paip, fjt paaí hxtcid ta sdadg.
Btixó Hpcrwd adh stsdh, n, thiácsdat itcipcsd, at sxyd:

-¿Rjáciph bjtaph hdaíp kjthigp btgrts itctg tc thip epgit?

-Rjpigd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, ujtgp st ap rdgspa, idsph tcitgph n bjn
hpcph.

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts qxtc ad fjt sxrt, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Sxvd rjpigd, hx cd tgpc rxcrd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt tc idsp bx
kxsp bt wpc hprpsd sxtcit cx bjtap st ap qdrp, cx ht bt wp rpísd cx rdbxsd
st ctvjxyóc cx st gtjbp pavjcp.

-Ejth tc thip epgit st pqpyd -sxyd Hpcrwd- cd ixtct kjthigp btgrts báh st
sdh bjtaph n btsxp, n tc ap st pggxqp, cx btsxp cx cxcvjcp, fjt idsp thiá
gphp rdbd ap epabp st ap bpcd.

-¡Hxc ktcijgp nd! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit, dntcsd aph igxhith cjtkph fjt hj
thrjstgd at spqp-, fjt báh fjxhxtgp fjt bt wjqxtgpc stggxqpsd jc qgpod,
rdbd cd ujtgp ta st ap thepsp; edgfjt it wpvd hpqtg, Hpcrwd, fjt ap qdrp
hxc bjtaph th rdbd bdaxcd hxc extsgp, n tc bjrwd báh ht wp st thixbpg jc
sxtcit fjt jc sxpbpcit. Bph p idsd thid thipbdh hjytidh adh fjt egduthpbdh
ap thigtrwp dgstc st ap rpqpaatgíp. Hjqt, pbxvd, n vjíp, fjt nd it htvjxgé
pa ephd fjt fjxhxtgth.

Wíodad phí Hpcrwd, n tcrpbxcóht wprxp sdcst at epgtrxó fjt edsíp wpaapg
prdvxbxtcid, hxc hpaxg sta rpbxcd gtpa, fjt edg paaí xqp bjn htvjxsd.
Nécsdht, ejth, edrd p edrd, edgfjt ta sdadg st aph fjxypsph st sdc Fjxydit
cd at stypqp hdhtvpg cx pitcstg p spght egxthp, fjxhd Hpcrwd tcigtitctaat n
sxktgixaat sxrxécsdat pavjcp rdhp; n, tcigt digph fjt at sxyd, ujt ad fjt
ht sxgá tc ta hxvjxtcit rpeíijad.





Rpeíijad MXM. St aph sxhrgtiph gpodcth fjt Hpcrwd ephpqp rdc hj pbd, n st
ap pktcijgp fjt at hjrtsxó rdc jc rjtged bjtgid, rdc digdh prdcitrxbxtcidh
upbdhdh


-Epgértbt, htñdg bíd, fjt idsph thiph sthktcijgph fjt thidh síph cdh wpc
hjrtsxsd, hxc sjsp pavjcp wpc hxsd etcp sta etrpsd rdbtixsd edg kjthigp
btgrts rdcigp ap dgstc st hj rpqpaatgíp, cd wpqxtcsd rjbeaxsd ta yjgpbtcid
fjt wxod st cd rdbtg epc p bpcitath cx rdc ap gtxcp udavpg, rdc idsd
pfjtaad fjt p thid ht hxvjt n kjthigp btgrts yjgó st rjbeaxg, wphip fjxipg
pfjta pabtit st Bpapcsgxcd, d rdbd ht aapbp ta bdgd, fjt cd bt prjtgsd
qxtc.

-Ixtcth bjrwp gpoóc, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; bph, epgp strxgit ktgsps,
taad ht bt wpqíp ephpsd st ap btbdgxp; n ipbqxéc ejtsth itctg edg rxtgid
fjt edg ap rjaep st cd wpqégbtad iú prdgspsd tc ixtbed it hjrtsxó pfjtaad
st ap bpcip; etgd nd wpgé ap tcbxtcsp, fjt bdsdh wpn st rdbedhxrxóc tc ap
dgstc st ap rpqpaatgíp epgp idsd.

-Ejth, ¿yjgé nd pavd, edg sxrwp? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Cd xbedgip fjt cd wpnph yjgpsd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: qphip fjt nd tcixtcsd
fjt st epgixrxepcith cd thiáh bjn htvjgd, n, edg hí d edg cd, cd htgá bpad
egdkttgcdh st gtbtsxd.

-Ejth hx taad th phí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, bxgt kjthigp btgrts cd ht at idgct p
dakxspg thid, rdbd ad sta yjgpbtcid; fjxoá ath kdaktgá ap vpcp p aph
upciphbph st hdapopght digp kto rdcbxvd, n pjc rdc kjthigp btgrts hx at ktc
ipc etgixcpo.

Tc thiph n digph eaáixrph ath idbó ap cdrwt tc bxips sta rpbxcd, hxc itctg
cx sthrjqgxg sdcst pfjtaap cdrwt ht gtrdvxthtc; n ad fjt cd wpqíp st qjtcd
tc taad tgp fjt etgtrípc st wpbqgt; fjt, rdc ap upaip st aph paudgyph, ath
upaió idsp ap sthetchp n bpipadipyt. N, epgp prpqpg st rdcuxgbpg thip
sthvgprxp, ath hjrtsxó jcp pktcijgp fjt, hxc pgixuxrxd pavjcd,
ktgspstgpbtcit ad epgtríp. N ujt fjt ap cdrwt rtggó rdc pavjcp thrjgxsps;
etgd, rdc idsd thid, rpbxcpqpc, rgtntcsd Hpcrwd fjt, ejth pfjta rpbxcd tgp
gtpa, p jcp d sdh atvjph, st qjtcp gpoóc, wpaapgíp tc éa pavjcp ktcip.
Ntcsd, ejth, sthip bpctgp, ap cdrwt thrjgp, ta thrjstgd wpbqgxtcid n ta pbd
rdc vpcp st rdbtg, kxtgdc fjt edg ta bthbd rpbxcd fjt xqpc ktcípc wprxp
taadh vgpc bjaixijs st ajbqgth, fjt cd epgtrípc hxcd thigtaaph fjt ht
bdkípc. Ephbóht Hpcrwd tc kxécsdaph, n sdc Fjxydit cd aph ijkd idsph
rdchxvd; ixgó ta jcd sta rpqthigd p hj phcd, n ta digd st aph gxtcsph p hj
gdrxcd, n thijkxtgdc fjtsdh, bxgpcsd pitcipbtcit ad fjt edsíp htg pfjtaad,
n kxtgdc fjt aph ajbqgth ht xqpc prtgrpcsd p taadh, n bxtcigph báh ht
aatvpqpc, bpndgth epgtrípc; p rjnp kxhip Hpcrwd rdbtcoó p itbqapg rdbd jc
podvpsd, n adh rpqtaadh st ap rpqtop ht at tgxopgdc p sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa,
pcxbácsdht jc edrd, sxyd:

-Éhip, hxc sjsp, Hpcrwd, stqt st htg vgpcsíhxbp n etaxvgdhíhxbp pktcijgp,
sdcst htgá ctrthpgxd fjt nd bjthigt idsd bx kpadg n thujtgod.
-¡Sthsxrwpsd st bí! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; hx prphd thip pktcijgp ujtht st
upciphbph, rdbd bt ad kp epgtrxtcsd, ¿psócst wpqgá rdhixaaph fjt ap hjugpc?
-Edg báh upciphbph fjt htpc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, cd rdchtcixgé nd fjt it
idfjt tc ta etad st ap gdep; fjt hx ap digp kto ht qjgapgdc rdcixvd, ujt
edgfjt cd ejst nd hpaipg aph epgtsth sta rdggpa, etgd pwdgp thipbdh tc
rpbed gphd, sdcst edsgé nd rdbd fjxhxtgt thvgtbxg bx thepsp.

-N hx at tcrpcipc n tcidbtrtc, rdbd ap digp kto ad wxrxtgdc -sxyd Hpcrwd-,
¿fjé pegdktrwpgá thipg tc rpbed pqxtgid d cd?

-Rdc idsd thd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, it gjtvd, Hpcrwd, fjt itcvph qjtc
ácxbd, fjt ap tmetgxtcrxp it spgá p tcitcstg ta fjt nd itcvd.

-Hí itcsgé, hx p Sxdh eaprt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

N, pepgiácsdht adh sdh p jc apsd sta rpbxcd, idgcpgdc p bxgpg pitcipbtcit
ad fjt pfjtaad st pfjtaaph ajbqgth fjt rpbxcpqpc edsíp htg; n st paaí p bjn
edrd sthrjqgxtgdc bjrwdh tcrpbxhpsdh, rjnp itbtgdhp kxhxóc st idsd ejcid
gtbpió ta ácxbd st Hpcrwd Epcop, ta rjpa rdbtcoó p spg sxtcit rdc sxtcit,
rdbd fjxtc ixtct ugíd st rjpgipcp; n rgtrxó báh ta qpixg n stcitaatpg
rjpcsd sxhixcipbtcit kxtgdc ad fjt tgp, edgfjt sthrjqgxtgdc wphip ktxcit
tcrpbxhpsdh, idsdh p rpqpaad, rdc hjh wprwph tcrtcsxsph tc aph bpcdh;
stigáh st adh rjpath ktcíp jcp axitgp rjqxtgip st ajid, p ap rjpa htvjípc
digdh htxh st p rpqpaad, tcajipsdh wphip adh exth st aph bjaph; fjt qxtc
kxtgdc fjt cd tgpc rpqpaadh tc ta hdhxtvd rdc fjt rpbxcpqpc. Xqpc adh
tcrpbxhpsdh bjgbjgpcsd tcigt hí, rdc jcp kdo qpyp n rdbephxkp. Thip thigpñp
kxhxóc, p ipath wdgph n tc ipa sthedqapsd, qxtc qphipqp epgp edctg bxtsd tc
ta rdgpoóc st Hpcrwd, n pjc tc ta st hj pbd; n phí ujtgp tc rjpcid p sdc
Fjxydit, fjt np Hpcrwd wpqíp spsd pa igpkéh rdc idsd hj thujtgod. Ad
rdcigpgxd at pkxcd p hj pbd, pa rjpa tc pfjta ejcid ht at gtegthtció tc hj
xbpvxcprxóc pa kxkd fjt pfjéaap tgp jcp st aph pktcijgph st hjh axqgdh.
Uxvjgóhtat fjt ap axitgp tgpc pcsph sdcst stqíp st xg pavúc bpa utgxsd d
bjtgid rpqpaatgd, rjnp ktcvpcop p éa hdad thipqp gthtgkpsp; n, hxc wprtg
digd sxhrjghd, tcgxhigó hj apcoóc, eúhdht qxtc tc ap hxaap, n rdc vtcixa
qgíd n rdcixctcit ht ejhd tc ap bxips sta rpbxcd edg sdcst adh tcrpbxhpsdh
udgodhpbtcit wpqípc st ephpg, n rjpcsd adh kxd rtgrp paoó ap kdo n sxyd:
-Stitctdh, rpqpaatgdh, d fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htáxh, n spsbt rjtcip st fjxéc
hdxh, st sócst ktcíh, psócst kpxh, fjé th ad fjt tc pfjtaaph pcsph aatkáxh;
fjt, htvúc aph bjthigph, d kdhdigdh wpqéxh utrwd, d kdh wpc utrwd, pavúc
sthpvjxhpsd, n rdckxtct n th btcthitg fjt nd ad htep, d qxtc epgp
rphixvpgdh sta bpa fjt utrxhith, d qxtc epgp ktcvpgdh sta ijtgid fjt kdh
uxrxtgdc.

-Kpbdh st egxthp -gthedcsxó jcd st adh tcrpbxhpsdh- n thiá ap ktcip atydh,
n cd cdh edstbdh stitctg p spg ipcip rjtcip rdbd etsíh.

N, exrpcsd ap bjap, ephó pstapcit. Hxcixóht sthip gthejthip vgpcstbtcit sdc
Fjxydit, n, igpqpcsd sta ugtcd, sxyd:

-Stitctdh n hts báh qxtc rgxpsd, n spsbt rjtcip st ad fjt dh wt egtvjcipsd;
hx cd, rdcbxvd hdxh idsdh tc qpipaap.

Tgp ap bjap phdbqgpsxop, n pa idbpgap sta ugtcd ht thepció st bpctgp fjt,
paoácsdht tc adh exth, sxd rdc hj sjtñd edg aph pcrph tc ta hjtad. Jc bdod
fjt xqp p ext, kxtcsd rptg pa tcrpbxhpsd, rdbtcoó p stcdhipg p sdc Fjxydit,
ta rjpa, np tcrdatgxopsd, hxc thetgpg báh, tcgxhigpcsd hj apcoóc, pggtbtixó
p jcd st adh tcajipsdh, n, bpa utgxsd, sxd rdc éa tc ixtggp; n,
gtkdakxécsdht edg adh stbáh, tgp rdhp st ktg rdc ap egthitop fjt adh
prdbtiíp n sthqpgpipqp; fjt cd epgtríp hxcd fjt tc pfjta xchipcit at wpqípc
cprxsd paph p Gdrxcpcit, htvúc pcspqp st axvtgd n dgvjaadhd.

Idsdh adh tcrpbxhpsdh tgp vtcit btsgdhp n hxc pgbph, n phí, rdc uprxaxsps,
tc jc bdbtcid stypgdc ap gtugxtvp n rdbtcopgdc p rdggtg edg pfjta rpbed rdc
aph wprwph tcrtcsxsph, fjt cd epgtrípc hxcd p adh st aph báhrpgph fjt tc
cdrwt st gtvdrxyd n uxthip rdggtc. Adh tcajipsdh, phxbthbd, gtkjtaidh n
tckjtaidh tc hjh upaspbtcidh n adqph, cd ht edsípc bdktg; phí fjt, bjn p hj
hpakd, sdc Fjxydit adh pepató p idsdh n ath wxod stypg ta hxixd bpa st hj
vgpsd, edgfjt idsdh etchpgdc fjt pfjéa cd tgp wdbqgt, hxcd sxpqad sta
xcuxtgcd fjt ath hpaíp p fjxipg ta rjtged bjtgid fjt tc ap axitgp aatkpqpc.
Idsd ad bxgpqp Hpcrwd, psbxgpsd sta pgsxbxtcid st hj htñdg, n stríp tcigt
hí:

-Hxc sjsp thit bx pbd th ipc kpaxtcit n thudgopsd rdbd éa sxrt.

Thipqp jcp wprwp pgsxtcsd tc ta hjtad, yjcid pa egxbtgd fjt stggxqó ap
bjap, p rjnp ajo at ejsd ktg sdc Fjxydit; n, aatvácsdht p éa, at ejhd ap
ejcip sta apcoóc tc ta gdhigd, sxrxécsdat fjt ht gxcsxtht; hx cd, fjt at
bpipgíp. P ad rjpa gthedcsxó ta rpísd:

-Wpgid gtcsxsd thidn, ejth cd bt ejtsd bdktg, fjt itcvd jcp extgcp
fjtqgpsp; hjeaxrd p kjthigp btgrts, hx th rpqpaatgd rgxhixpcd, fjt cd bt
bpit; fjt rdbtitgá jc vgpc hprgxatvxd, fjt hdn axrtcrxpsd n itcvd aph
egxbtgph ógstcth.

-Ejth, ¿fjxéc sxpqadh dh wp igpísd pfjí -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hxtcsd wdbqgt
st Xvathxp?

-¿Fjxéc, htñdg? -gteaxró ta rpísd-: bx sthktcijgp.

-Ejth digp bpndg dh pbtcpop -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hx cd bt hpixhupréxh p idsd
rjpcid egxbtgd dh egtvjcié.

-Rdc uprxaxsps htgá kjthigp btgrts hpixhutrwd -gthedcsxó ta axrtcrxpsd-; n
phí, hpqgá kjthigp btgrts fjt, pjcfjt stcpcith sxyt fjt nd tgp axrtcrxpsd,
cd hdn hxcd qprwxaatg, n aaábdbt Padchd Aóeto; hdn cpijgpa st Pardqtcsph;
ktcvd st ap rxjsps st Qptop rdc digdh dcrt hprtgsdith, fjt hdc adh fjt
wjntgdc rdc aph wprwph; kpbdh p ap rxjsps st Htvdkxp prdbepñpcsd jc rjtged
bjtgid, fjt kp tc pfjtaap axitgp, fjt th st jc rpqpaatgd fjt bjgxó tc
Qptop, sdcst ujt stedhxipsd; n pwdgp, rdbd sxvd, aatkáqpbdh hjh wjthdh p hj
htejaijgp, fjt thiá tc Htvdkxp, st sdcst th cpijgpa.

-¿N fjxéc at bpió? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Sxdh, edg btsxd st jcph rpatcijgph ethixatcith fjt at sxtgdc -gthedcsxó ta
qprwxaatg.

-Sthp hjtgit -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjxipsd bt wp Cjthigd Htñdg sta igpqpyd
fjt wpqíp st idbpg tc ktcvpg hj bjtgit hx digd pavjcd at wjqxtgp bjtgid;
etgd, wpqxécsdat bjtgid fjxtc at bpió, cd wpn hxcd rpaapg n tcrdvtg adh
wdbqgdh, edgfjt ad bthbd wxrxtgp hx p bí bxhbd bt bpipgp. N fjxtgd fjt htep
kjthigp gtktgtcrxp fjt nd hdn jc rpqpaatgd st ap Bpcrwp, aapbpsd sdc
Fjxydit, n th bx duxrxd n tytgrxrxd pcspg edg ta bjcsd tcstgtopcsd ijtgidh
n sthuprxtcsd pvgpkxdh.

-Cd hé róbd ejtsp htg thd st tcstgtopg ijtgidh -sxyd ta qprwxaatg-, ejth p
bí st stgtrwd bt wpqéxh kjtaid ijtgid, styácsdbt jcp extgcp fjtqgpsp, ap
rjpa cd ht ktgá stgtrwp tc idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp; n ta pvgpkxd fjt tc
bí wpqéxh sthwtrwd wp hxsd stypgbt pvgpkxpsd st bpctgp fjt bt fjtspgé
pvgpkxpsd epgp hxtbegt; n wpgip sthktcijgp wp hxsd idepg rdc kdh, fjt kpxh
qjhrpcsd pktcijgph.

-Cd idsph aph rdhph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- hjrtstc st jc bxhbd bdsd. Ta
spñd thijkd, htñdg qprwxaatg Padchd Aóeto, tc ktcxg, rdbd ktcípsth, st
cdrwt, kthixsdh rdc pfjtaaph hdqgtetaaxrth, rdc aph wprwph tcrtcsxsph,
gtopcsd, rjqxtgidh st ajid, fjt egdexpbtcit htbtyáqpsth rdhp bpap n sta
digd bjcsd; n phí, nd cd ejst stypg st rjbeaxg rdc bx dqaxvprxóc
prdbtixécsddh, n dh prdbtixtgp pjcfjt ktgspstgpbtcit hjextgp fjt égpsth adh
btbdh hpipcphth sta xcuxtgcd, fjt edg ipath dh yjovjé n ijkt hxtbegt.
-Np fjt phí ad wp fjtgxsd bx hjtgit -sxyd ta qprwxaatg-, hjeaxrd p kjthigp
btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd pcspcit (fjt ipc bpap pcspcop bt wp spsd), bt pnjst
p hpaxg st stqpyd sthip bjap, fjt bt ixtct idbpsp jcp extgcp tcigt ta
thigxqd n ap hxaap.

-¡Wpqapgp nd epgp bpñpcp! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. N ¿wphip rjácsd pvjpgsáqpsth
p strxgbt kjthigd puác?

Sxd ajtvd kdrth p Hpcrwd Epcop fjt kxcxtht; etgd éa cd ht rjgó st ktcxg,
edgfjt pcspqp drjepsd sthkpaxypcsd jcp prébxap st gtejthid fjt igpípc
pfjtaadh qjtcdh htñdgth, qxtc qphitrxsp st rdhph st rdbtg. Wxod Hpcrwd
rdhipa st hj vpqác, n, gtrdvxtcsd idsd ad fjt ejsd n rjed tc ta ipatvd,
rpgvó hj yjbtcid, n ajtvd prjsxó p aph kdrth st hj pbd n pnjsó p hprpg pa
htñdg qprwxaatg st ap degthxóc st ap bjap; n, edcxécsdat tcrxbp staap, at
sxd ap wprwp, n sdc Fjxydit at sxyd fjt hxvjxtht ap stggdip st hjh
rdbepñtgdh, p fjxtc st hj epgit exsxtht etgsóc sta pvgpkxd, fjt cd wpqíp
hxsd tc hj bpcd stypg st wpqtgat wtrwd. Síydat ipbqxéc Hpcrwd:

-Hx prphd fjxhxtgtc hpqtg thdh htñdgth fjxéc wp hxsd ta kpatgdhd fjt ipath
adh ejhd, sxgáath kjthigp btgrts fjt th ta upbdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
fjt edg digd cdbqgt ht aapbp ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp.

Rdc thid, ht ujt ta qprwxaatg; n sdc Fjxydit egtvjció p Hpcrwd fjt fjé at
wpqíp bdkxsd p aapbpgat ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, báh tcidcrth fjt
cjcrp.

-Nd ht ad sxgé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: edgfjt at wt thipsd bxgpcsd jc gpid p ap
ajo st pfjtaap wprwp fjt aatkp pfjta bpapcspcit, n ktgspstgpbtcit ixtct
kjthigp btgrts ap báh bpap uxvjgp, st edrd prá, fjt ypbáh wt kxhid; n
séqtad st wpqtg rpjhpsd, d np ta rpchpcrxd sthit rdbqpit, d np ap upaip st
aph bjtaph n sxtcith.

-Cd th thd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hxcd fjt ta hpqxd, p rjnd rpgvd stqt st
thipg ta thrgxqxg ap wxhidgxp st bxh wpopñph, at wpqgá epgtrxsd fjt htgá
qxtc fjt nd idbt pavúc cdbqgt petapixkd, rdbd ad idbpqpc idsdh adh
rpqpaatgdh ephpsdh: rjáa ht aapbpqp ta st ap Pgsxtcit Thepsp; rjáa, ta sta
Jcxrdgcxd; pfjta, st aph Sdcrtaaph; pfjéhit, ta sta Pkt Uécxm; ta digd, ta
Rpqpaatgd sta Vgxud; thidigd, ta st ap Bjtgit; n edg thidh cdbqgth t
xchxvcxph tgpc rdcdrxsdh edg idsp ap gtsdcsto st ap ixtggp. N phí, sxvd fjt
ta hpqxd np sxrwd it wpqgá ejthid tc ap atcvjp n tc ta etchpbxtcid pwdgp
fjt bt aapbphth ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, rdbd extchd aapbpgbt
sthst wdn tc pstapcit; n, epgp fjt btydg bt rjpsgt ipa cdbqgt, stitgbxcd st
wprtg excipg, rjpcsd wpnp ajvpg, tc bx thrjsd jcp bjn igxhit uxvjgp.
-Cd wpn epgp fjé vphipg ixtbed n sxctgdh tc wprtg thp uxvjgp -sxyd Hpcrwd-,
hxcd ad fjt ht wp st wprtg th fjt kjthigp btgrts sthrjqgp ap hjnp n sé
gdhigd p adh fjt at bxgpgtc; fjt, hxc báh cx báh, n hxc digp xbpvtc cx
thrjsd, at aapbpgác ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp; n rgépbt fjt at sxvd ktgsps,
edgfjt at egdbtid p kjthigp btgrts, htñdg, n thid htp sxrwd tc qjgaph, fjt
at wprt ipc bpap rpgp ap wpbqgt n ap upaip st aph bjtaph, fjt, rdbd np
itcvd sxrwd, ht edsgá bjn qxtc thrjhpg ap igxhit excijgp.

Gxóht sdc Fjxydit sta sdcpxgt st Hpcrwd, etgd, rdc idsd, egdejhd st
aapbpght st pfjta cdbqgt tc ejsxtcsd excipg hj thrjsd, d gdstap, rdbd wpqíp
xbpvxcpsd.

Tc thid kdakxó ta qprwxaatg n at sxyd p sdc Fjxydit:

-Dakxsáqphtbt st strxg fjt pskxtgip kjthigp btgrts fjt fjtsp sthrdbjavpsd
edg wpqtg ejthid aph bpcdh kxdatcipbtcit tc rdhp hpvgpsp: yjmip xaajs: Hx
fjxh hjpstcit sxpqdad, tir.

-Cd tcixtcsd tht apiíc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, bph nd hé qxtc fjt cd ejht
aph bpcdh, hxcd thit apcoóc; rjpcid báh, fjt nd cd etché fjt dutcsíp p
hprtgsdith cx p rdhph st ap Xvathxp, p fjxtc gthetid n psdgd rdbd rpióaxrd
n uxta rgxhixpcd fjt hdn, hxcd p upciphbph n p kthixvadh sta digd bjcsd; n,
rjpcsd thd phí ujtht, tc ap btbdgxp itcvd ad fjt at ephó pa Rxs Gjn Sípo,
rjpcsd fjtqgó ap hxaap sta tbqpypsdg st pfjta gtn stapcit st Hj Hpcixsps
sta Epep, edg ad rjpa ad sthrdbjavó, n pcsjkd pfjta síp ta qjtc Gdsgxvd st
Kxkpg rdbd bjn wdcgpsd n kpaxtcit rpqpaatgd.

Tc dntcsd thid ta qprwxaatg, ht ujt, rdbd fjtsp sxrwd, hxc gteaxrpgat
epapqgp. Fjxhxtgp sdc Fjxydit bxgpg hx ta rjtged fjt ktcíp tc ap axitgp
tgpc wjthdh d cd, etgd cd ad rdchxcixó Hpcrwd, sxrxécsdat:

-Htñdg, kjthigp btgrts wp prpqpsd thip etaxvgdhp pktcijgp ad báh p hj hpakd
st idsph aph fjt nd wt kxhid; thip vtcit, pjcfjt ktcrxsp n sthqpgpipsp,
edsgíp htg fjt rpntht tc ap rjtcip st fjt adh ktcrxó hdap jcp etghdcp, n,
rdggxsdh n pktgvdcopsdh sthid, kdakxthtc p gtwprtght n p qjhrpgcdh, n cdh
sxthtc tc fjé tcitcstg. Ta yjbtcid thiá rdbd rdckxtct, ap bdcipñp rtgrp, ap
wpbqgt rpgvp, cd wpn fjt wprtg hxcd gtixgpgcdh rdc vtcixa rdbeáh st exth,
n, rdbd sxrtc, kánpht ta bjtgid p ap htejaijgp n ta kxkd p ap wdvpop.
N, pcitrdvxtcsd hj phcd, gdvó p hj htñdg fjt at hxvjxtht; ta rjpa,
epgtrxécsdat fjt Hpcrwd itcíp gpoóc, hxc kdaktgat p gteaxrpg, at hxvjxó. N,
p edrd igtrwd fjt rpbxcpqpc edg tcigt sdh bdcipñjtaph, ht wpaapgdc tc jc
theprxdhd n thrdcsxsd kpaat, sdcst ht petpgdc; n Hpcrwd paxkxó ta yjbtcid,
n, itcsxsdh hdqgt ap ktgst ntgqp, rdc ap hpahp st hj wpbqgt, pabdgopgdc,
rdbxtgdc, btgtcspgdc n rtcpgdc p jc bthbd ejcid, hpixhuprxtcsd hjh
thióbpvdh rdc báh st jcp uxpbqgtgp fjt adh htñdgth raégxvdh sta sxujcid
-fjt edrph ktrth ht stypc bpa ephpg- tc ap prébxap st hj gtejthid igpípc.
Bph hjrtsxóath digp sthvgprxp, fjt Hpcrwd ap ijkd edg ap etdg st idsph, n
ujt fjt cd itcípc kxcd fjt qtqtg, cx pjc pvjp fjt aatvpg p ap qdrp; n,
prdhpsdh st ap hts, sxyd Hpcrwd, kxtcsd fjt ta egpsd sdcst thipqpc thipqp
rdabpsd st ktgst n btcjsp ntgqp, ad fjt ht sxgá tc ta hxvjxtcit rpeíijad.





Rpeíijad MM. St ap ypbáh kxhip cx dísp pktcijgp fjt rdc báh edrd etaxvgd
ujt prpqpsp st upbdhd rpqpaatgd tc ta bjcsd, rdbd ap fjt prpqó ta kpatgdhd
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp


-Cd th edhxqat, htñdg bíd, hxcd fjt thiph ntgqph spc ithixbdcxd st fjt edg
pfjí rtgrp stqt st thipg pavjcp ujtcit d pggdnd fjt thiph ntgqph wjbtstrt;
n phí, htgá qxtc fjt kpbdh jc edrd báh pstapcit, fjt np idepgtbdh sdcst
edspbdh bxixvpg thip itggxqat hts fjt cdh upixvp, fjt, hxc sjsp, rpjhp
bpndg etcp fjt ap wpbqgt.

Epgtrxóat qxtc ta rdchtyd p sdc Fjxydit, n, idbpcsd st ap gxtcsp p
Gdrxcpcit, n Hpcrwd sta rpqthigd p hj phcd, sthejéh st wpqtg ejthid hdqgt
éa adh gtaxtkth fjt st ap rtcp fjtspgdc, rdbtcopgdc p rpbxcpg edg ta egpsd
pggxqp p ixtcid, edgfjt ap thrjgxsps st ap cdrwt cd ath stypqp ktg rdhp
pavjcp; bph, cd wjqxtgdc pcspsd sdrxtcidh ephdh, rjpcsd aatvó p hjh dísdh
jc vgpcst gjxsd st pvjp, rdbd fjt st pavjcdh vgpcsth n atkpcipsdh gxhrdh ht
sthetñpqp. Patvgóath ta gjxsd tc vgpc bpctgp, n, epgácsdht p thrjrwpg wprxp
fjé epgit hdcpqp, dntgdc p sthwdgp digd thigjtcsd fjt ath pvjó ta rdcitcid
sta pvjp, thetrxpabtcit p Hpcrwd, fjt cpijgpabtcit tgp btsgdhd n st edrd
ácxbd. Sxvd fjt dntgdc fjt spqpc jcdh vdaeth p rdbeáh, rdc jc rxtgid rgjyxg
st wxtggdh n rpstcph, fjt, prdbepñpsdh sta ujgxdhd thigjtcsd sta pvjp, fjt
ejhxtgpc epkdg p rjpafjxtg digd rdgpoóc fjt cd ujtgp ta st sdc Fjxydit.
Tgp ap cdrwt, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, thrjgp, n taadh prtgipgdc p tcigpg tcigt
jcdh ágqdath paidh, rjnph wdyph, bdkxsph sta qapcsd kxtcid, wprípc jc
itbtgdhd n bpchd gjxsd; st bpctgp fjt ap hdatsps, ta hxixd, ap thrjgxsps,
ta gjxsd sta pvjp rdc ta hjhjggd st aph wdyph, idsd rpjhpqp wdggdg n
thepcid, n báh rjpcsd kxtgdc fjt cx adh vdaeth rthpqpc, cx ta kxtcid
sdgbíp, cx ap bpñpcp aatvpqp; pñpsxécsdht p idsd thid ta xvcdgpg ta ajvpg
sdcst ht wpaapqpc. Etgd sdc Fjxydit, prdbepñpsd st hj xcigéexsd rdgpoóc,
hpaió hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, n, tbqgpopcsd hj gdstap, itgrxó hj apcoóc n sxyd:
-Hpcrwd pbxvd, wph st hpqtg fjt nd cprí, edg fjtgtg sta rxtad, tc thip
cjthigp tsps st wxtggd, epgp gthjrxipg tc taap ap st dgd, d ap sdgpsp, rdbd
hjtat aapbpght. Nd hdn pfjéa epgp fjxtc thiác vjpgspsdh adh etaxvgdh, aph
vgpcsth wpopñph, adh kpatgdhdh wtrwdh. Nd hdn, sxvd digp kto, fjxtc wp st
gthjrxipg adh st ap Ipqap Gtsdcsp, adh Sdrt st Ugpcrxp n adh Cjtkt st ap
Upbp, n ta fjt wp st edctg tc dakxsd adh Eapixgth, adh Ipqapcith, Daxkpcith
n Ixgpcith, adh Utqdh n Qtaxpcxhth, rdc idsp ap rpitgkp st adh upbdhdh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith sta ephpsd ixtbed, wprxtcsd tc thit tc fjt bt wpaad
ipath vgpcstoph, thigpñtoph n utrwdh st pgbph, fjt thrjgtorpc aph báh
rapgph fjt taadh uxrxtgdc. Qxtc cdiph, thrjstgd uxta n atvpa, aph ixcxtqaph
sthip cdrwt, hj thigpñd hxatcrxd, ta hdgsd n rdcujhd thigjtcsd sthidh
ágqdath, ta itbtgdhd gjxsd st pfjtaap pvjp tc rjnp qjhrp ktcxbdh, fjt
epgtrt fjt ht sthetñp n stggjbqp sthst adh paidh bdcith st ap ajcp, n
pfjta xcrthpqat vdaetpg fjt cdh wxtgt n aphixbp adh dísdh; aph rjpath
rdhph, idsph yjciph n rpsp jcp edg hí, hdc qphipcith p xcujcsxg bxtsd,
itbdg n thepcid tc ta etrwd sta bthbd Bpgit, rjpcid báh tc pfjta fjt cd
thiá prdhijbqgpsd p htbtypcith prdcitrxbxtcidh n pktcijgph. Ejth idsd thid
fjt nd it excid hdc xcrtcixkdh n sthetgipsdgth st bx ácxbd, fjt np wprt fjt
ta rdgpoóc bt gtkxtcit tc ta etrwd, rdc ta sthtd fjt ixtct st prdbtitg thip
pktcijgp, edg báh sxuxrjaidhp fjt ht bjthigp. Phí fjt, pegxtip jc edrd aph
rxcrwph p Gdrxcpcit n fjéspit p Sxdh, n theégpbt pfjí wphip igth síph cd
báh, tc adh rjpath, hx cd kdakxtgt, ejtsth iú kdaktgit p cjthigp pastp, n
sthst paaí, edg wprtgbt btgrts n qjtcp dqgp, xgáh pa Idqdhd, sdcst sxgáh p
ap xcrdbepgpqat htñdgp bíp Sjarxctp fjt hj rpjixkd rpqpaatgd bjgxó edg
prdbtitg rdhph fjt at wxrxthtc sxvcd st edstg aapbpght hjnd.

Rjpcsd Hpcrwd dnó aph epapqgph st hj pbd, rdbtcoó p aadgpg rdc ap bpndg
itgcjgp sta bjcsd n p strxaat:

-Htñdg, nd cd hé edg fjé fjxtgt kjthigp btgrts prdbtitg thip ipc itbtgdhp
pktcijgp: pwdgp th st cdrwt, pfjí cd cdh ktt cpsxt, qxtc edstbdh idgrtg ta
rpbxcd n sthkxpgcdh sta etaxvgd, pjcfjt cd qtqpbdh tc igth síph; n, ejth cd
wpn fjxtc cdh ktp, btcdh wpqgá fjxtc cdh cdit st rdqpgsth; rjpcid báh, fjt
nd wt dísd egtsxrpg pa rjgp st cjthigd ajvpg, fjt kjthigp btgrts qxtc
rdcdrt, fjt fjxtc qjhrp ta etaxvgd etgtrt tc éa; phí fjt, cd th qxtc itcipg
p Sxdh prdbtixtcsd ipc sthpudgpsd wtrwd, sdcst cd ht ejtst thrpepg hxcd edg
bxapvgd; n qphip adh fjt wp wtrwd ta rxtad rdc kjthigp btgrts tc axqgpgat
st htg bpcitpsd, rdbd nd ad ujx, n tc hprpgat ktcrtsdg, axqgt n hpakd st
tcigt ipcidh tctbxvdh rdbd prdbepñpqpc pa sxujcid. N, rjpcsd idsd thid cd
bjtkp cx pqapcst tht sjgd rdgpoóc, bjékpat ta etchpg n rgttg fjt petcph ht
wpqgá kjthigp btgrts pepgipsd st pfjí, rjpcsd nd, st bxtsd, sé bx ácxbp p
fjxtc fjxhxtgt aatkpgap. Nd hpaí st bx ixtggp n styé wxydh n bjytg edg
ktcxg p htgkxg p kjthigp btgrts, rgtntcsd kpatg báh n cd btcdh; etgd, rdbd
ap rjsxrxp gdbet ta hprd, p bí bt wp gphvpsd bxh thetgpcoph, ejth rjpcsd
báh kxkph aph itcíp st parpcopg pfjtaap ctvgp n bpawpspsp íchjap fjt ipciph
ktrth kjthigp btgrts bt wp egdbtixsd, ktd fjt, tc epvd n igjtrd staap, bt
fjxtgt pwdgp stypg tc jc ajvpg ipc pepgipsd sta igpid wjbpcd. Edg jc hdad
Sxdh, htñdg bíd, fjt cdc ht bt upvp ipa sthpvjxhpsd; n np fjt sta idsd cd
fjxtgp kjthigp btgrts sthxhixg st prdbtitg thit utrwd, sxaáitad, p ad
btcdh, wphip ap bpñpcp; fjt, p ad fjt p bí bt bjthigp ap rxtcrxp fjt
pegtcsí rjpcsd tgp ephidg, cd stqt st wpqtg sthst pfjí pa paqp igth wdgph,
edgfjt ap qdrp st ap Qdrxcp thiá tcrxbp st ap rpqtop, n wprt ap btsxp cdrwt
tc ap aíctp sta qgpod xofjxtgsd.

-¿Róbd ejtsth iú, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ktg sócst wprt thp aíctp, cx
sócst thiá thp qdrp d tht rdadsgxaad fjt sxrth, hx wprt ap cdrwt ipc thrjgp
fjt cd epgtrt tc idsd ta rxtad thigtaap pavjcp?

-Phí th -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd ixtct ta bxtsd bjrwdh dydh n ktt aph rdhph
stqpyd st ixtggp, rjpcid báh tcrxbp tc ta rxtad; ejthid fjt, edg qjtc
sxhrjghd, qxtc ht ejtst tcitcstg fjt wpn edrd st pfjí pa síp.

-Upait ad fjt upaipgt -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; fjt cd ht wp st strxg edg
bí, pwdgp cx tc cxcvúc ixtbed, fjt aávgxbph n gjtvdh bt pepgipgdc st wprtg
ad fjt stqíp p thixad st rpqpaatgd; n phí, it gjtvd, Hpcrwd, fjt rpaath;
fjt Sxdh, fjt bt wp ejthid tc rdgpoóc st prdbtitg pwdgp thip ipc cd kxhip n
ipc itbtgdhp pktcijgp, itcsgá rjxspsd st bxgpg edg bx hpajs n st rdchdapg
ij igxhitop. Ad fjt wph st wprtg th pegtipg qxtc aph rxcrwph p Gdrxcpcit n
fjtspgit pfjí, fjt nd spgé ap kjtaip egthid, d kxkd d bjtgid.

Kxtcsd, ejth, Hpcrwd ap úaixbp gthdajrxóc st hj pbd n rjác edrd kpaípc rdc
éa hjh aávgxbph, rdchtydh n gjtvdh, stitgbxcó st pegdktrwpght st hj
xcsjhigxp n wprtgat thetgpg wphip ta síp, hx ejsxtht; n phí, rjpcsd
pegtipqp aph rxcrwph pa rpqpaad, qdcxipbtcit n hxc htg htcixsd, pió rdc ta
rpqthigd st hj phcd pbqdh exth p Gdrxcpcit, st bpctgp fjt rjpcsd sdc
Fjxydit ht fjxhd epgixg, cd ejsd, edgfjt ta rpqpaad cd ht edsíp bdktg hxcd
p hpaidh. Kxtcsd Hpcrwd Epcop ta qjtc hjrthd st hj tbqjhit, sxyd:

-Tp, htñdg, fjt ta rxtad, rdcbdkxsd st bxh aávgxbph n eatvpgxph, wp
dgstcpsd fjt cd ht ejtsp bdktg Gdrxcpcit; n hx kdh fjtgéxh edguxpg, n
thedatpg, n spaat, htgá tcdypg p ap udgijcp n spg rdrth, rdbd sxrtc, rdcigp
ta pvjxyóc.

Sththetgáqpht rdc thid sdc Fjxydit, n, edg báh fjt edcíp aph extgcph pa
rpqpaad, btcdh at edsíp bdktg; n, hxc rptg tc ap rjtcip st ap axvpsjgp,
ijkd edg qxtc st hdhtvpght n thetgpg, d p fjt pbpctrxtht, d p fjt Gdrxcpcit
ht btctpht, rgtntcsd, hxc sjsp, fjt pfjtaad ktcíp st digp epgit fjt st ap
xcsjhigxp st Hpcrwd; n phí, at sxyd:

-Ejth phí th, Hpcrwd, fjt Gdrxcpcit cd ejtst bdktght, nd hdn rdcitcid st
thetgpg p fjt gíp ta paqp, pjcfjt nd aadgt ad fjt taap ipgspgt tc ktcxg.
-Cd wpn fjt aadgpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt nd tcigtitcsgé p kjthigp btgrts
rdcipcsd rjtcidh sthst pfjí pa síp, hx np cd th fjt ht fjxtgt petpg n
trwpght p sdgbxg jc edrd hdqgt ap ktgst ntgqp, p jhd st rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith, epgp wpaapght báh sthrpchpsd rjpcsd aatvjt ta síp n ejcid st
prdbtitg thip ipc sthtbtypqat pktcijgp fjt at thetgp.

-¿P fjé aapbph petpg d p fjé sdgbxg? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Hdn nd, edg
ktcijgp, st pfjtaadh rpqpaatgdh fjt idbpc gtedhd tc adh etaxvgdh? Sjtgbt
iú, fjt cprxhit epgp sdgbxg, d wpo ad fjt fjxhxtgth, fjt nd wpgé ad fjt
kxtgt fjt báh kxtct rdc bx egtitchxóc.

Cd ht tcdyt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd ad sxyt
edg ipcid.

N, aatvácsdht p éa, ejhd ap jcp bpcd tc ta pgoóc stapcitgd n ap digp tc ta
digd, st bdsd fjt fjtsó pqgpopsd rdc ta bjhad xofjxtgsd st hj pbd, hxc
dhpght pepgipg séa jc stsd: ipa tgp ta bxtsd fjt itcíp p adh vdaeth, fjt
idspkíp paitgcpixkpbtcit hdcpqpc. Síydat sdc Fjxydit fjt rdcipht pavúc
rjtcid epgp tcigtitctgat, rdbd ht ad wpqíp egdbtixsd, p ad fjt Hpcrwd sxyd
fjt hí wxrxtgp hx at stypgp ta itbdg st ad fjt díp.

-Etgd, rdc idsd thd, nd bt thudgopgé p strxg jcp wxhidgxp fjt, hx ap
prxtgid p rdcipg n cd bt kpc p ap bpcd, th ap btydg st aph wxhidgxph; n
thiébt kjthigp btgrts pitcid, fjt np rdbxtcod. «Égpht fjt ht tgp, ta qxtc
fjt kxcxtgt epgp idsdh htp, n ta bpa, epgp fjxtc ad ujtgt p qjhrpg...» N
pskxtgip kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd, fjt ta egxcrxexd fjt adh pcixvjdh
sxtgdc p hjh rdchtyph cd ujt phí rdbdfjxtgp, fjt ujt jcp htcitcrxp st Rpióc
Odcodgxcd, gdbpcd, fjt sxrt: "N ta bpa, epgp fjxtc at ujtgt p qjhrpg", fjt
kxtct pfjí rdbd pcxaad pa stsd, epgp fjt kjthigp btgrts ht thié fjtsd n cd
kpnp p qjhrpg ta bpa p cxcvjcp epgit, hxcd fjt cdh kdakpbdh edg digd
rpbxcd, ejth cpsxt cdh ujtgop p fjt hxvpbdh éhit, sdcst ipcidh bxtsdh cdh
hdqgthpaipc.

-Hxvjt ij rjtcid, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n sta rpbxcd fjt wtbdh st
htvjxg séypbt p bí ta rjxspsd.

-«Sxvd, ejth -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd-, fjt tc jc ajvpg st Thigtbpsjgp wpqíp jc
ephidg rpqgtgxod (fjxtgd strxg fjt vjpgspqp rpqgph), ta rjpa ephidg d
rpqgtgxod, rdbd sxvd, st bx rjtcid, ht aapbpqp Adet Gjxo; n thit Adet Gjxo
pcspqp tcpbdgpsd st jcp ephidgp fjt ht aapbpqp Idggpaqp, ap rjpa ephidgp
aapbpsp Idggpaqp tgp wxyp st jc vpcpstgd gxrd, n thit vpcpstgd gxrd...»
-Hx sthp bpctgp rjtciph ij rjtcid, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, gtexixtcsd
sdh ktrth ad fjt kph sxrxtcsd, cd prpqpgáh tc sdh síph; sxad htvjxspbtcit n
rjécipad rdbd wdbqgt st tcitcsxbxtcid, n hx cd, cd sxvph cpsp.

-St ap bxhbp bpctgp fjt nd ad rjtcid -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ht rjtcipc tc bx
ixtggp idsph aph rdchtyph, n nd cd hé rdcipgad st digp, cx th qxtc fjt
kjthigp btgrts bt exsp fjt wpvp jhdh cjtkdh.

-Sx rdbd fjxhxtgth -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; fjt, ejth ap hjtgit fjxtgt fjt
cd ejtsp stypg st thrjrwpgit, egdhxvjt.

-«Phí fjt, htñdg bíd st bx ácxbp -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd-, fjt, rdbd np itcvd
sxrwd, thit ephidg pcspqp tcpbdgpsd st Idggpaqp, ap ephidgp, fjt tgp jcp
bdop gdaaxop, opwpgtñp n ixgpqp pavd p wdbqgjcp, edgfjt itcíp jcdh edrdh st
qxvdith, fjt epgtrt fjt pwdgp ap ktd.»

-Ajtvd, ¿rdcdríhitap iú? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Cd ap rdcdrí nd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd fjxtc bt rdció thit rjtcid bt
sxyd fjt tgp ipc rxtgid n ktgspstgd fjt edsíp qxtc, rjpcsd ad rdcipht p
digd, puxgbpg n yjgpg fjt ad wpqíp kxhid idsd. «Phí fjt, ntcsd síph n
kxcxtcsd síph, ta sxpqad, fjt cd sjtgbt n fjt idsd ad pñphrp, wxod st
bpctgp fjt ta pbdg fjt ta ephidg itcíp p ap ephidgp ht kdakxtht tc dbtrxaad
n bpap kdajcips; n ap rpjhp ujt, htvúc bpaph atcvjph, jcp rxtgip rpcixsps
st rtaxaadh fjt taap at sxd, ipath fjt ephpqpc st ap gpnp n aatvpqpc p ad
ktspsd; n ujt ipcid ad fjt ta ephidg ap pqdggtrxó st paaí pstapcit fjt, edg
cd ktgap, ht fjxhd pjhtcipg st pfjtaap ixtggp t xght sdcst hjh dydh cd ap
kxthtc ypbáh. Ap Idggpaqp, fjt ht kxd sthstñpsp sta Adet, ajtvd at fjxhd
qxtc, bph fjt cjcrp at wpqíp fjtgxsd.»

-Éhp th cpijgpa rdcsxrxóc st bjytgth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: sthstñpg p fjxtc
aph fjxtgt n pbpg p fjxtc aph pqdggtrt. Ephp pstapcit, Hpcrwd.
-«Hjrtsxó -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt ta ephidg ejhd edg dqgp hj stitgbxcprxóc, n,
pcitrdvxtcsd hjh rpqgph, ht tcrpbxcó edg adh rpbedh st Thigtbpsjgp, epgp
ephpght p adh gtxcdh st Edgijvpa. Ap Idggpaqp, fjt ad hjed, ht ujt igph éa,
n htvjípat p ext n sthrpaop sthst atydh, rdc jc qdgsóc tc ap bpcd n rdc
jcph paudgyph pa rjtaad, sdcst aatkpqp, htvúc th upbp, jc etspod st thetyd
n digd st jc etxct, n cd hé fjé qditrxaad st bjsph epgp ap rpgp; bph,
aatkpht ad fjt aatkpht, fjt nd cd bt fjxtgd btitg pwdgp tc pktgxvjpaad,
hóad sxgé fjt sxrtc fjt ta ephidg aatvó rdc hj vpcpsd p ephpg ta gíd
Vjpsxpcp, n tc pfjtaap hpoóc xqp rgtrxsd n rphx ujtgp st bpsgt, n edg ap
epgit fjt aatvó cd wpqíp qpgrp cx qpgrd, cx fjxtc at ephpht p éa cx p hj
vpcpsd st ap digp epgit, st ad fjt ht rdcvdyó bjrwd, edgfjt ktíp fjt ap
Idggpaqp ktcíp np bjn rtgrp n at wpqíp st spg bjrwp ethpsjbqgt rdc hjh
gjtvdh n aávgxbph; bph, ipcid pcsjkd bxgpcsd, fjt kxd jc ethrpsdg fjt itcíp
yjcid p hí jc qpgrd, ipc etfjtñd fjt hdapbtcit edsípc rpqtg tc éa jcp
etghdcp n jcp rpqgp; n, rdc idsd thid, at wpqaó n rdcrtgió rdc éa fjt at
ephpht p éa n p igtrxtciph rpqgph fjt aatkpqp. Tcigó ta ethrpsdg tc ta
qpgrd, n ephó jcp rpqgp; kdakxó, n ephó digp; idgcó p kdaktg, n idgcó p
ephpg digp.» Itcvp kjthigp btgrts rjtcip tc aph rpqgph fjt ta ethrpsdg kp
ephpcsd, edgfjt hx ht extgst jcp st ap btbdgxp, ht prpqpgá ta rjtcid n cd
htgá edhxqat rdcipg báh epapqgp séa. «Hxvd, ejth, n sxvd fjt ta
sthtbqpgrpstgd st ap digp epgit thipqp aatcd st rxtcd n gthqpadhd, n
ipgspqp ta ethrpsdg bjrwd ixtbed tc xg n kdaktg. Rdc idsd thid, kdakxó edg
digp rpqgp, n digp, n digp...»

-Wpo rjtcip fjt aph ephó idsph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: cd pcsth ntcsd n
kxcxtcsd sthp bpctgp, fjt cd prpqpgáh st ephpgaph tc jc pñd.

-¿Rjáciph wpc ephpsd wphip pvdgp? -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-¡Nd fjé sxpqadh hé! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-.

-Wt pwí ad fjt nd sxyt: fjt ijkxtht qjtcp rjtcip. Ejth, edg Sxdh, fjt ht wp
prpqpsd ta rjtcid, fjt cd wpn ephpg pstapcit.

-¿Róbd ejtst htg thd? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Ipc st thtcrxp st ap
wxhidgxp th hpqtg aph rpqgph fjt wpc ephpsd, edg thitchd, fjt hx ht ntggp
jcp sta cúbtgd cd ejtsth htvjxg pstapcit rdc ap wxhidgxp?

-Cd htñdg, tc cxcvjcp bpctgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; edgfjt, phí rdbd nd
egtvjcié p kjthigp btgrts fjt bt sxytht rjáciph rpqgph wpqípc ephpsd n bt
gthedcsxó fjt cd hpqíp, tc pfjta bthbd xchipcit ht bt ujt p bí st ap
btbdgxp rjpcid bt fjtspqp edg strxg, n p ut fjt tgp st bjrwp kxgijs n
rdcitcid.

-¿St bdsd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt np ap wxhidgxp th prpqpsp?

-Ipc prpqpsp th rdbd bx bpsgt -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Sívdit st ktgsps -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt iú wph rdcipsd jcp st aph báh
cjtkph rdchtyph, rjtcid d wxhidgxp, fjt cpsxt ejsd etchpg tc ta bjcsd; n
fjt ipa bdsd st rdcipgap cx stypgap, ypbáh ht edsgá ktg cx wpqgá kxhid tc
idsp ap kxsp, pjcfjt cd thetgpqp nd digp rdhp st ij qjtc sxhrjghd; bph cd
bt bpgpkxaad, ejth fjxoá thidh vdaeth, fjt cd rthpc, it stqtc st itctg
ijgqpsd ta tcitcsxbxtcid.

-Idsd ejtst htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, bph nd hé fjt tc ad st bx rjtcid cd wpn
báh fjt strxg: fjt paaí ht prpqp sd rdbxtcop ta ntggd st ap rjtcip sta
ephpyt st aph rpqgph.

-Prpqt cdgpqjtcp sdcst fjxhxtgt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n ktpbdh hx ht ejtst
bdktg Gdrxcpcit.

Idgcóat p edctg aph extgcph, n éa idgcó p spg hpaidh n p thipght fjtsd:
ipcid thipqp st qxtc pipsd.

Tc thid, epgtrt htg, d fjt ta ugíd st ap bpñpcp, fjt np ktcíp, d fjt Hpcrwd
wjqxtht rtcpsd pavjcph rdhph atcxixkph, d fjt ujtht rdhp cpijgpa -fjt th ad
fjt báh ht stqt rgttg-, p éa at kxcd tc kdajcips n sthtd st wprtg ad fjt
digd cd ejsxtgp wprtg edg éa; bph tgp ipcid ta bxtsd fjt wpqíp tcigpsd tc
hj rdgpoóc, fjt cd dhpqp pepgipght jc ctvgd st jñp st hj pbd. Ejth etchpg
st cd wprtg ad fjt itcíp vpcp, ipbedrd tgp edhxqat; n phí, ad fjt wxod, edg
qxtc st epo, ujt hdaipg ap bpcd stgtrwp, fjt itcíp phxsp pa pgoóc igphtgd,
rdc ap rjpa, qdcxipbtcit n hxc gjbdg pavjcd, ht hdaió ap apopsp rdggtsxop
rdc fjt adh rpaodcth ht hdhitcípc, hxc pnjsp st digp pavjcp, n, tc
fjxiácsdhtap, sxtgdc ajtvd pqpyd n ht at fjtspgdc rdbd vgxaadh. Igph thid,
paoó ap rpbxhp ad btydg fjt ejsd n trwó pa pxgt tcigpbqph edhpstgph, fjt cd
tgpc bjn etfjtñph. Wtrwd thid -fjt éa etchó fjt tgp ad báh fjt itcíp fjt
wprtg epgp hpaxg st pfjta itggxqat pegxtid n pcvjhixp-, at hdqgtkxcd digp
bpndg, fjt ujt fjt at epgtrxó fjt cd edsíp bjspght hxc wprtg thigéexid n
gjxsd, n rdbtcoó p pegtipg adh sxtcith n p tcrdvtg adh wdbqgdh, gtrdvxtcsd
tc hí ta paxtcid idsd rjpcid edsíp; etgd, rdc idsph thiph sxaxvtcrxph, ujt
ipc sthsxrwpsd fjt, pa rpqd pa rpqd, kxcd p wprtg jc edrd st gjxsd, qxtc
sxutgtcit st pfjta fjt p éa at edcíp ipcid bxtsd. Dnóad sdc Fjxydit n sxyd:
-¿Fjé gjbdg th éht, Hpcrwd?

-Cd hé, htñdg -gthedcsxó éa-. Pavjcp rdhp cjtkp stqt st htg, fjt aph
pktcijgph n sthktcijgph cjcrp rdbxtcopc edg edrd.

Idgcó digp kto p egdqpg ktcijgp, n hjrtsxóat ipc qxtc fjt, hxc báh gjxsd cx
paqdgdid fjt ta ephpsd, ht wpaaó axqgt st ap rpgvp fjt ipcip ethpsjbqgt at
wpqíp spsd. Bph, rdbd sdc Fjxydit itcíp ta htcixsd sta daupid ipc kxkd rdbd
ta st adh dísdh, n Hpcrwd thipqp ipc yjcid n rdhxsd rdc éa fjt rphx edg
aíctp gtrip hjqípc adh kpedgth wprxp pggxqp, cd ht ejsd thrjhpg st fjt
pavjcdh cd aatvphtc p hjh cpgxrth; n, petcph wjqxtgdc aatvpsd, rjpcsd éa
ujt pa hdrdggd, pegtiácsdaph tcigt adh sdh stsdh; n, rdc idcd pavd vpcvdhd,
sxyd:

-Epgértbt, Hpcrwd, fjt ixtcth bjrwd bxtsd.

-Hí itcvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; bph, ¿tc fjé ad trwp st ktg kjthigp btgrts
pwdgp báh fjt cjcrp?

-Tc fjt pwdgp báh fjt cjcrp wjtath, n cd p ábqpg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.
-Qxtc edsgá htg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, bph nd cd itcvd ap rjaep, hxcd kjthigp
btgrts, fjt bt igpt p sthwdgph n edg thidh cd prdhijbqgpsdh ephdh.
-Gtiígpit igth d rjpigd paaá, pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit (idsd thid hxc
fjxipght adh stsdh st aph cpgxrth)-, n sthst pfjí pstapcit itc báh rjtcip
rdc ij etghdcp n rdc ad fjt stqth p ap bíp; fjt ap bjrwp rdcktghprxóc fjt
itcvd rdcixvd wp tcvtcsgpsd thit btcdhegtrxd.

-Pedhipgé -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt extchp kjthigp btgrts fjt nd wt wtrwd st bx
etghdcp pavjcp rdhp fjt cd stqp.

-Etdg th btctpaad, pbxvd Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

Tc thidh rdadfjxdh n digdh htbtypcith ephpgdc ap cdrwt pbd n bdod. Bph,
kxtcsd Hpcrwd fjt p báh pcspg ht ktcíp ap bpñpcp, rdc bjrwd ixtcid sthaxvó
p Gdrxcpcit n ht pió adh rpaodcth. Rdbd Gdrxcpcit ht kxd axqgt, pjcfjt éa
st hjnd cd tgp cpsp qgxdhd, epgtrt fjt ht gthxcixó, n rdbtcoó p spg
bpcdipsph; edgfjt rdgktiph -rdc etgsóc hjnd- cd aph hpqíp wprtg. Kxtcsd,
ejth, sdc Fjxydit fjt np Gdrxcpcit ht bdkíp, ad ijkd p qjtcp htñpa, n rgtnó
fjt ad tgp st fjt prdbtixtht pfjtaap itbtgdhp pktcijgp.

Prpqó tc thid st sthrjqgxght ta paqp n st epgtrtg sxhixcipbtcit aph rdhph,
n kxd sdc Fjxydit fjt thipqp tcigt jcdh ágqdath paidh, fjt taadh tgpc
rphipñdh, fjt wprtc ap hdbqgp bjn thrjgp. Hxcixó ipbqxéc fjt ta vdaetpg cd
rthpqp, etgd cd kxd fjxéc ad edsíp rpjhpg; n phí, hxc báh stitctght, wxod
htcixg aph thejtaph p Gdrxcpcit, n, idgcpcsd p sthetsxght st Hpcrwd, at
bpcsó fjt paaí at pvjpgspht igth síph, p ad báh apgvd, rdbd np digp kto ht
ad wpqíp sxrwd; n fjt, hx pa rpqd staadh cd wjqxtht kjtaid, ijkxtht edg
rxtgid fjt Sxdh wpqíp hxsd htgkxsd st fjt tc pfjtaap etaxvgdhp pktcijgp ht
at prpqphtc hjh síph. Idgcóat p gtutgxg ta gtrpsd n tbqpypsp fjt wpqíp st
aatkpg st hj epgit p hj htñdgp Sjarxctp, n fjt, tc ad fjt idrpqp p ap epvp
st hjh htgkxrxdh, cd ijkxtht etcp, edgfjt éa wpqíp stypsd wtrwd hj
ithipbtcid pcith fjt hpaxtgp st hj ajvpg, sdcst ht wpaapgíp vgpixuxrpsd st
idsd ad idrpcit p hj hpapgxd, gpip edg rpcixsps, sta ixtbed fjt wjqxtht
htgkxsd; etgd fjt hx Sxdh at hprpqp st pfjta etaxvgd hpcd n hpakd n hxc
rpjitap, ht edsíp itctg edg bjn báh fjt rxtgip ap egdbtixsp íchjap.

St cjtkd idgcó p aadgpg Hpcrwd, dntcsd st cjtkd aph aphixbtgph gpodcth st
hj qjtc htñdg, n stitgbxcó st cd stypgat wphip ta úaixbd igáchxid n uxc st
pfjta ctvdrxd.

Sthiph aávgxbph n stitgbxcprxóc ipc wdcgpsp st Hpcrwd Epcop hprp ta pjidg
sthip wxhidgxp fjt stqíp st htg qxtc cprxsd, n, edg ad btcdh, rgxhixpcd
kxtyd. Rjnd htcixbxtcid tcitgctrxó pavd p hj pbd, etgd cd ipcid fjt
bdhigpht uapfjtop pavjcp; pcith, sxhxbjapcsd ad btydg fjt ejsd, rdbtcoó p
rpbxcpg wprxp ap epgit edg sdcst at epgtrxó fjt ta gjxsd sta pvjp n sta
vdaetpg ktcíp.

Htvjípat Hpcrwd p ext, aatkpcsd, rdbd itcíp st rdhijbqgt, sta rpqthigd p hj
yjbtcid, etgetijd rdbepñtgd st hjh egóhetgph n psktghph udgijcph; n,
wpqxtcsd pcspsd jcp qjtcp extop edg tcigt pfjtaadh rphipñdh n ágqdath
hdbqgídh, sxtgdc tc jc egpstrxaad fjt pa ext st jcph paiph etñph ht wpríp,
st aph rjpath ht egtrxexipqp jc vgpcsíhxbd vdaet st pvjp. Pa ext st aph
etñph, thipqpc jcph rphph bpa wtrwph, fjt báh epgtrípc gjxcph st tsxuxrxdh
fjt rphph, st tcigt aph rjpath pskxgixtgdc fjt hpaíp ta gjxsd n thigjtcsd
st pfjta vdaetpg, fjt púc cd rthpqp.

Paqdgdióht Gdrxcpcit rdc ta thigjtcsd sta pvjp n st adh vdaeth, n,
hdhtvácsdat sdc Fjxydit, ht ujt aatvpcsd edrd p edrd p aph rphph,
tcrdbtcsácsdht st idsd rdgpoóc p hj htñdgp, hjeaxrácsdat fjt tc pfjtaap
itbtgdhp ydgcpsp n tbegthp at upkdgtrxtht, n st rpbxcd ht tcrdbtcspqp
ipbqxéc p Sxdh, fjt cd at dakxspht. Cd ht at fjxipqp Hpcrwd sta apsd, ta
rjpa papgvpqp rjpcid edsíp ta rjtaad n ap kxhip edg tcigt aph extgcph st
Gdrxcpcit, edg ktg hx ktgíp np ad fjt ipc hjhetchd n btsgdhd at itcíp.
Digdh rxtc ephdh htgípc adh fjt pcsjkxtgdc, rjpcsd, pa sdqapg st jcp ejcip,
epgtrxó sthrjqxtgip n epitcit ap bxhbp rpjhp, hxc fjt ejsxtht htg digp, st
pfjta wdggíhdcd n epgp taadh thepcipqat gjxsd, fjt ipc hjhetchdh n btsgdhdh
idsp ap cdrwt adh wpqíp itcxsd. N tgpc -hx cd ad wph, ¡dw atridg!, edg
ethpsjbqgt n tcdyd- htxh bpodh st qpiác, fjt rdc hjh paitgcpixkdh vdaeth
pfjta thigjtcsd udgbpqpc.

Rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit kxd ad fjt tgp, tcbjstrxó n ephbóht st pggxqp pqpyd.
Bxgóat Hpcrwd, n kxd fjt itcíp ap rpqtop xcraxcpsp hdqgt ta etrwd, rdc
bjthigph st thipg rdggxsd. Bxgó ipbqxéc sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd, n kxdat fjt
itcíp adh rpggxaadh wxcrwpsdh n ap qdrp aatcp st gxhp, rdc tkxstcith
htñpath st fjtgtg gtktcipg rdc taap, n cd ejsd hj btapcrdcíp ipcid rdc éa
fjt, p ap kxhip st Hpcrwd, ejsxtht stypg st gtíght; n, rdbd kxd Hpcrwd fjt
hj pbd wpqíp rdbtcopsd, hdaió ap egthp st bpctgp fjt ijkd ctrthxsps st
pegtipght aph xypsph rdc adh ejñdh, edg cd gtktcipg gxtcsd. Rjpigd ktrth
hdhtvó, n digph ipciph kdakxó p hj gxhp rdc ta bxhbd íbetij fjt egxbtgd; st
ad rjpa np ht spqp pa sxpqad sdc Fjxydit, n báh rjpcsd at dnó strxg, rdbd
edg bdsd st uxhvp:

-«Wph st hpqtg, ¡dw Hpcrwd pbxvd!, fjt nd cprí, edg fjtgtg sta rxtad, tc
thip cjthigp tsps st wxtggd, epgp gthjrxipg tc taap ap sdgpsp, d st dgd. Nd
hdn pfjéa epgp fjxtc thiác vjpgspsdh adh etaxvgdh, aph wpopñph vgpcsth, adh
kpatgdhdh utrwdh...»

N edg pfjí ujt gtexixtcsd idsph d aph báh gpodcth fjt sdc Fjxydit sxyd ap
kto egxbtgp fjt dntgdc adh itbtgdhdh vdaeth.

Kxtcsd, ejth, sdc Fjxydit fjt Hpcrwd wpríp qjgap séa, ht rdggxó n tcdyó tc
ipcip bpctgp, fjt paoó ta apcoóc n at phtció sdh epadh, ipath fjt, hx, rdbd
adh gtrxqxó tc aph thepasph, adh gtrxqxtgp tc ap rpqtop, fjtspgp axqgt st
epvpgat ta hpapgxd, hx cd ujtgp p hjh wtgtstgdh. Kxtcsd Hpcrwd fjt hprpqp
ipc bpaph ktgph st hjh qjgaph, rdc itbdg st fjt hj pbd cd ephpht pstapcit
tc taaph, rdc bjrwp wjbxasps at sxyd:

-Hdhxévjtht kjthigp btgrts; fjt, edg Sxdh, fjt bt qjgad.

-Ejth, edgfjt dh qjgaáxh, cd bt qjgad nd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Ktcxs
prá, htñdg patvgt: ¿epgértdh p kdh fjt, hx rdbd éhidh ujtgdc bpodh st
qpiác, ujtgpc digp etaxvgdhp pktcijgp, cd wpqíp nd bdhigpsd ta ácxbd fjt
rdcktcíp epgp tbegtcstaap n prpqpaap? ¿Thidn nd dqaxvpsd, p sxrwp, hxtcsd,
rdbd hdn, rpqpaatgd, p rdcdrtg n sthixcvjxg adh hdcth n hpqtg rjáath hdc st
qpiác d cd? N báh, fjt edsgíp htg, rdbd th ktgsps, fjt cd adh wt kxhid tc
bx kxsp, rdbd kdh adh wpqgéxh kxhid, rdbd kxaapcd gjxc fjt hdxh, rgxpsd n
cprxsd tcigt taadh. Hx cd, wprts kdh fjt thidh htxh bpodh ht kjtakpc tc
htxh ypnpcth, n trwásbtadh p aph qpgqph jcd p jcd, d idsdh yjcidh, n,
rjpcsd nd cd sxtgt rdc idsdh epiph pggxqp, wprts st bí ap qjgap fjt
fjxhxégtsth.

-Cd wpnp báh, htñdg bíd -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt nd rdcuxthd fjt wt pcspsd
pavd gxhjtñd tc stbphíp. Etgd sívpbt kjthigp btgrts, pwdgp fjt thipbdh tc
epo (phí Sxdh at hpfjt st idsph aph pktcijgph fjt at hjrtsxtgtc ipc hpcd n
hpakd rdbd at wp hprpsd séhip), ¿cd wp hxsd rdhp st gtíg, n ad th st
rdcipg, ta vgpc bxtsd fjt wtbdh itcxsd? P ad btcdh, ta fjt nd ijkt; fjt st
kjthigp btgrts np nd hé fjt cd at rdcdrt, cx hpqt fjé th itbdg cx thepcid.
-Cd cxtvd nd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt ad fjt cdh wp hjrtsxsd cd htp rdhp
sxvcp st gxhp, etgd cd th sxvcp st rdcipght; fjt cd hdc idsph aph etghdcph
ipc sxhrgtiph fjt htepc edctg tc hj ejcid aph rdhph.

-P ad btcdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hjed kjthigp btgrts edctg tc hj ejcid ta
apcoóc, pejciácsdbt p ap rpqtop, n sácsdbt tc aph thepasph, vgprxph p Sxdh
n p ap sxaxvtcrxp fjt ejht tc apstpgbt. Etgd kpnp, fjt idsd hpasgá tc ap
rdapsp; fjt nd wt dísd strxg: "Éht it fjxtgt qxtc, fjt it wprt aadgpg"; n
báh, fjt hjtatc adh egxcrxepath htñdgth, igph jcp bpap epapqgp fjt sxrtc p
jc rgxpsd, spgat ajtvd jcph rpaoph; pjcfjt cd hé ad fjt at hjtatc spg igph
wpqtgat spsd st epadh, hx np cd th fjt adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith spc igph
epadh íchjaph d gtxcdh tc ixtggp uxgbt.

-Ipa edsgíp rdggtg ta spsd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt idsd ad fjt sxrth kxcxtht
p htg ktgsps; n etgsdcp ad ephpsd, ejth tgth sxhrgtid n hpqth fjt adh
egxbtgdh bdkxbxtcidh cd hdc tc bpcd sta wdbqgt, n thiá psktgixsd st pfjí
pstapcit tc jcp rdhp, epgp fjt it pqhitcvph n gtedgith tc ta wpqapg
stbphxpsd rdcbxvd; fjt tc rjpcidh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph wt atísd, fjt hdc
xcuxcxidh, ypbáh wt wpaapsd fjt cxcvúc thrjstgd wpqapht ipcid rdc hj htñdg
rdbd iú rdc ta ijnd. N tc ktgsps fjt ad itcvd p vgpc upaip, ijnp n bíp:
ijnp, tc fjt bt thixbph tc edrd; bíp, tc fjt cd bt styd thixbpg tc báh. Hí,
fjt Vpcspaíc, thrjstgd st Pbpsíh st Vpjap, rdcst ujt st ap íchjap Uxgbt; n
ht att séa fjt hxtbegt wpqapqp p hj htñdg rdc ap vdggp tc ap bpcd,
xcraxcpsp ap rpqtop n sdqapsd ta rjtged bdgt ijgfjthrd. Ejth, ¿fjé sxgtbdh
st Vphpqpa, thrjstgd st sdc Vpapdg, fjt ujt ipc rpaapsd fjt, epgp
strapgpgcdh ap tmrtatcrxp st hj bpgpkxaadhd hxatcrxd, hdap jcp kto ht
cdbqgp hj cdbqgt tc idsp pfjtaap ipc vgpcst rdbd ktgspstgp wxhidgxp? St
idsd ad fjt wt sxrwd wph st xcutgxg, Hpcrwd, fjt th btcthitg wprtg
sxutgtcrxp st pbd p bdod, st htñdg p rgxpsd n st rpqpaatgd p thrjstgd. Phí
fjt, sthst wdn tc pstapcit, cdh wtbdh st igpipg rdc báh gthetid, hxc spgcdh
rdgstatyd, edgfjt, st rjpafjxtgp bpctgp fjt nd bt tcdyt rdc kdh, wp st htg
bpa epgp ta rácipgd. Aph btgrtsth n qtctuxrxdh fjt nd dh wt egdbtixsd
aatvpgác p hj ixtbed; n hx cd aatvpgtc, ta hpapgxd, p ad btcdh, cd ht wp st
etgstg, rdbd np dh wt sxrwd.

-Thiá qxtc rjpcid kjthigp btgrts sxrt -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd fjtggíp nd hpqtg,
edg hx prphd cd aatvpht ta ixtbed st aph btgrtsth n ujtht ctrthpgxd prjsxg
pa st adh hpapgxdh, rjácid vpcpqp jc thrjstgd st jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit tc
pfjtaadh ixtbedh, n hx ht rdcrtgipqpc edg bthth, d edg síph, rdbd etdcth st
paqpñxg.

-Cd rgtd nd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt ypbáh adh ipath thrjstgdh
thijkxtgdc p hpapgxd, hxcd p btgrts. N hx nd pwdgp it at wt htñpapsd p ix
tc ta ithipbtcid rtggpsd fjt styé tc bx rphp, ujt edg ad fjt edsíp hjrtstg;
fjt púc cd hé róbd egjtqp tc thidh ipc rpapbxidhdh ixtbedh cjthigdh ap
rpqpaatgíp, n cd fjtggíp fjt edg edrph rdhph etcpht bx ácxbp tc ta digd
bjcsd. Edgfjt fjxtgd fjt hteph, Hpcrwd, fjt tc éa cd wpn thipsd báh
etaxvgdhd fjt ta st adh pktcijgtgdh.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ejth hóad ta gjxsd st adh bpodh st jc qpiác
ejsd paqdgdipg n sthphdhtvpg ta rdgpoóc st jc ipc kpatgdhd pcspcit
pktcijgtgd rdbd th kjthigp btgrts. Bph, qxtc ejtst thipg htvjgd fjt, st
pfjí pstapcit, cd stheaxtvjt bxh apqxdh epgp wprtg sdcpxgt st aph rdhph st
kjthigp btgrts, hx cd ujtgt epgp wdcgpgat, rdbd p bx pbd n htñdg cpijgpa.
-Sthp bpctgp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, kxkxgáh hdqgt ap wpo st ap ixtggp;
edgfjt, sthejéh st p adh epsgth, p adh pbdh ht wp st gthetipg rdbd hx ad
ujthtc.





Rpeíijad MMX. Fjt igpip st ap paip pktcijgp n gxrp vpcpcrxp sta ntabd st
Bpbqgxcd, rdc digph rdhph hjrtsxsph p cjthigd xcktcrxqat rpqpaatgd


Tc thid, rdbtcoó p aadktg jc edrd, n fjxhxtgp Hpcrwd fjt ht tcigpgpc tc ta
bdaxcd st adh qpipcth; bph wpqípath rdqgpsd ipa pqdggtrxbxtcid sdc Fjxydit,
edg ap ethpsp qjgap, fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp fjxhd tcigpg stcigd; n phí,
idgrxtcsd ta rpbxcd p ap stgtrwp bpcd, sxtgdc tc digd rdbd ta fjt wpqípc
aatkpsd ta síp st pcith.

St paaí p edrd, sthrjqgxó sdc Fjxydit jc wdbqgt p rpqpaad, fjt igpíp tc ap
rpqtop jcp rdhp fjt gtajbqgpqp rdbd hx ujtgp st dgd, n púc éa petcph at
wjqd kxhid, rjpcsd ht kdakxó p Hpcrwd n at sxyd:

-Epgértbt, Hpcrwd, fjt cd wpn gtugác fjt cd htp ktgspstgd, edgfjt idsdh hdc
htcitcrxph hprpsph st ap bthbp tmetgxtcrxp, bpsgt st aph rxtcrxph idsph,
thetrxpabtcit pfjta fjt sxrt: "Sdcst jcp ejtgip ht rxtggp, digp ht pqgt".
Sívdad edgfjt hx pcdrwt cdh rtggó ap ktcijgp ap ejtgip st ap fjt
qjhráqpbdh, tcvpñácsdcdh rdc adh qpipcth, pwdgp cdh pqgt st epg tc epg
digp, epgp digp btydg n báh rxtgip pktcijgp; fjt hx nd cd prtgipgt p tcigpg
edg taap, bíp htgá ap rjaep, hxc fjt ap ejtsp spg p ap edrp cdixrxp st
qpipcth cx p ap thrjgxsps st ap cdrwt. Sxvd thid edgfjt, hx cd bt tcvpñd,
wprxp cdhdigdh kxtct jcd fjt igpt tc hj rpqtop ejthid ta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd,
hdqgt fjt nd wxrt ta yjgpbtcid fjt hpqth.

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts qxtc ad fjt sxrt, n btydg ad fjt wprt -sxyd Hpcrwd-,
fjt cd fjtggíp fjt ujthtc digdh qpipcth fjt cdh prpqphtc st pqpipcpg n
pedggtpg ta htcixsd.

-¡Káapit ta sxpqad edg wdbqgt! -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Fjé kp st ntabd p
qpipcth?

-Cd hé cpsp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; bph, p ut fjt hx nd ejsxtgp wpqapg ipcid
rdbd hdaíp, fjt fjxoá sxtgp ipath gpodcth fjt kjthigp btgrts kxtgp fjt ht
tcvpñpqp tc ad fjt sxrt.

-¿Róbd bt ejtsd tcvpñpg tc ad fjt sxvd, igpxsdg thrgjejadhd? -sxyd sdc
Fjxydit-. Sxbt, ¿cd kth pfjta rpqpaatgd fjt wprxp cdhdigdh kxtct, hdqgt jc
rpqpaad gjrxd gdspsd, fjt igpt ejthid tc ap rpqtop jc ntabd st dgd?
-Ad fjt nd ktd n rdajbqgd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- cd th hxcd jc wdbqgt hdqgt jc
phcd epgsd, rdbd ta bíd, fjt igpt hdqgt ap rpqtop jcp rdhp fjt gtajbqgp.
-Ejth éht th ta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Peágipit p jcp epgit
n séypbt rdc éa p hdaph: ktgáh rjác hxc wpqapg epapqgp, edg pwdggpg sta
ixtbed, rdcrajnd thip pktcijgp n fjtsp edg bíd ta ntabd fjt ipcid wt
sthtpsd.

-Nd bt itcvd tc rjxspsd ta pepgipgbt -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, bph fjxtgp Sxdh,
idgcd p strxg, fjt dgévpcd htp, n cd qpipcth.

-Np dh wt sxrwd, wtgbpcd, fjt cd bt btciéxh, cx edg extchd, báh thd st adh
qpipcth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt kdid..., n cd sxvd báh, fjt dh qpipctt ta
pabp.

Rpaaó Hpcrwd, rdc itbdg fjt hj pbd cd rjbeaxtht ta kdid fjt at wpqíp
trwpsd, gtsdcsd rdbd jcp qdap.

Th, ejth, ta rphd fjt ta ntabd, n ta rpqpaad n rpqpaatgd fjt sdc Fjxydit
ktíp, tgp thid: fjt tc pfjta rdcidgcd wpqíp sdh ajvpgth, ta jcd ipc etfjtñd
fjt cx itcíp qdixrp cx qpgqtgd, n ta digd, fjt thipqp yjcid, hí; n
phí, ta qpgqtgd sta bpndg htgkíp pa btcdg, tc ta rjpa ijkd ctrthxsps jc
tcutgbd st hpcvgpght n digd st wprtght ap qpgqp, epgp ad rjpa ktcíp ta
qpgqtgd, n igpíp jcp qpríp st poóupg; n fjxhd ap hjtgit fjt, pa ixtbed fjt
ktcíp, rdbtcoó p aadktg, n, edgfjt cd ht at bpcrwpht ta hdbqgtgd, fjt stqíp
st htg cjtkd, ht ejhd ap qpríp hdqgt ap rpqtop; n, rdbd thipqp axbexp,
sthst btsxp atvjp gtajbqgpqp. Ktcíp hdqgt jc phcd epgsd, rdbd Hpcrwd sxyd,
n éhip ujt ap drphxóc fjt p sdc Fjxydit at epgtrxó rpqpaad gjrxd gdspsd, n
rpqpaatgd, n ntabd st dgd; fjt idsph aph rdhph fjt ktíp, rdc bjrwp
uprxaxsps aph prdbdspqp p hjh sthkpgxpsph rpqpaatgíph n bpapcspcith
etchpbxtcidh. N rjpcsd éa kxd fjt ta edqgt rpqpaatgd aatvpqp rtgrp, hxc
edctght rdc éa tc gpodcth, p idsd rdggtg st Gdrxcpcit at tcgxhigó rdc ta
apcoóc qpyd, aatkpcsd xcitcrxóc st ephpgat st epgit p epgit; bph rjpcsd p
éa aatvpqp, hxc stitctg ap ujgxp st hj rpggtgp, at sxyd:

-¡Stuxécstit, rpjixkp rgxpijgp, d tcigxévpbt st ij kdajcips ad fjt rdc
ipcip gpoóc ht bt stqt!

Ta qpgqtgd, fjt, ipc hxc etchpgad cx itbtgad, kxd ktcxg pfjtaap upciphbp
hdqgt hí, cd ijkd digd gtbtsxd, epgp edstg vjpgspght sta vdaet st ap apcop,
hx cd ujt ta stypght rptg sta phcd pqpyd; n cd wjqd idrpsd pa hjtad, rjpcsd
ht atkpció báh axvtgd fjt jc vpbd n rdbtcoó p rdggtg edg pfjta aapcd, fjt
cd at parpcopgp ta kxtcid. Styóht ap qpríp tc ta hjtad, rdc ap rjpa ht
rdcitció sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd fjt ta epvpcd wpqíp pcspsd sxhrgtid n fjt
wpqíp xbxipsd pa rphidg, ta rjpa, kxécsdht prdhpsd st adh rpopsdgth, ht
ipgpop n pgep rdc adh sxtcith pfjéaad edg ad fjt éa, edg sxhixcid cpijgpa,
hpqt fjt th etghtvjxsd. Bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt paopht ta ntabd, ta rjpa,
idbácsdap tc aph bpcdh, sxyd:

-Edg Sxdh, fjt ap qpríp th qjtcp n fjt kpat jc gtpa st p drwd rdbd jc
bpgpktsí.

N, sácsdhtap p hj pbd, ht ap ejhd ajtvd tc ap rpqtop, gdstácsdap p jcp
epgit n p digp, qjhrácsdat ta tcrpyt; n, rdbd cd ht at wpaapqp, sxyd:
-Hxc sjsp fjt ta epvpcd, p rjnp btsxsp ht udgyó egxbtgd thip upbdhp rtapsp,
stqíp st itctg vgpcsíhxbp rpqtop, n ad etdg staad th fjt at upaip ap bxips.
Rjpcsd Hpcrwd dnó aapbpg p ap qpríp rtapsp, cd ejsd itctg ap gxhp; bph
kícdhtat p aph bxtcith ap róatgp st hj pbd, n rpaaó tc ap bxips staap.
-¿St fjé it gíth, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Gídbt -gthedcsxó éa- st rdchxstgpg ap vgpc rpqtop fjt itcíp ta epvpcd
sjtñd sthit pabtit, fjt cd htbtyp hxcd jcp qpríp st qpgqtgd excixepgpsp.
-¿Hpqth fjé xbpvxcd, Hpcrwd? Fjt thip upbdhp extop sthit tcrpcipsd ntabd,
edg pavúc thigpñd prxstcit, stqxó st ktcxg p bpcdh st fjxtc cd hjed rdcdrtg
cx thixbpg hj kpadg, n, hxc hpqtg ad fjt wpríp, kxécsdap st dgd ejgíhxbd,
stqxó st ujcsxg ap digp bxips epgp pegdktrwpght sta egtrxd, n st ap digp
bxips wxod éhip, fjt epgtrt qpríp st qpgqtgd, rdbd iú sxrth. Etgd, htp ad
fjt ujtgt; fjt epgp bí fjt ap rdcdord cd wprt pa rphd hj igphbjiprxóc; fjt
nd ap pstgtopgé tc ta egxbtg ajvpg sdcst wpnp wtggtgd, n st hjtgit fjt cd
at wpvp ktcipyp, cx pjc at aatvjt, ap fjt wxod n udgyó ta sxdh st aph
wtggtgíph epgp ta sxdh st aph qpipaaph; n, tc thit tcigtipcid, ap igptgé
rdbd ejsxtgt, fjt báh kpat pavd fjt cd cpsp; rjpcid báh, fjt qxtc htgá
qphipcit epgp stutcstgbt st pavjcp etsgpsp.

-Thd htgá -sxyd Hpcrwd- hx cd ht ixgp rdc wdcsp, rdbd ht ixgpgdc tc ap
etatp st adh sdh tyégrxidh, rjpcsd at hpcixvjpgdc p kjthigp btgrts aph
bjtaph n at gdbextgdc ta parjop sdcst ktcíp pfjta qtcsxiíhxbd qgtqpyt fjt
bt wxod kdbxipg aph phpsjgph.padcv

-Cd bt sp bjrwp etcp ta wpqtgat etgsxsd, fjt np hpqth iú, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc
Fjxydit-, fjt nd itcvd ap gtrtip tc ap btbdgxp.

-Ipbqxéc ap itcvd nd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd hx nd at wxrxtgt cx at
egdqpgt báh tc bx kxsp, pfjí htp bx wdgp. Rjpcid báh, fjt cd extchd edctgbt
tc drphxóc st wpqtgat btcthitg, edgfjt extchd vjpgspgbt rdc idsdh bxh rxcrd
htcixsdh st htg utgxsd cx st utgxg p cpsxt. St ad sta htg digp kto
bpcitpsd, cd sxvd cpsp, fjt htbtypcith sthvgprxph bpa ht ejtstc egtktcxg, n
hx kxtctc, cd wpn fjt wprtg digp rdhp hxcd tcrdvtg adh wdbqgdh, stitctg ta
paxtcid, rtggpg adh dydh n stypght xg edg sdcst ap hjtgit n ap bpcip cdh
aatkpgt.

-Bpa rgxhixpcd tgth, Hpcrwd -sxyd, dntcsd thid, sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cjcrp
dakxsph ap xcyjgxp fjt jcp kto it wpc wtrwd; ejth háqtit fjt th st etrwdh
cdqath n vtctgdhdh cd wprtg rphd st cxñtgíph. ¿Fjé ext hprphit rdyd, fjé
rdhixaap fjtqgpsp, fjé rpqtop gdip, epgp fjt cd ht it dakxst pfjtaap qjgap?
Fjt, qxtc pejgpsp ap rdhp, qjgap ujt n ephpixtbed; fjt, p cd tcitcstgad nd
pchí, np nd wjqxtgp kjtaid paaá n wjqxtgp wtrwd tc ij ktcvpcop báh spñd fjt
ta fjt wxrxtgdc adh vgxtvdh edg ap gdqpsp Tatcp. Ap rjpa, hx ujtgp tc thit
ixtbed, d bx Sjarxctp ujtgp tc pfjéa, ejsxtgp thipg htvjgp fjt cd ijkxtgp
ipcip upbp st wtgbdhp rdbd ixtct.

N pfjí sxd jc hdhexgd, n at ejhd tc aph cjqth. N sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Epht edg qjgaph, ejth ap ktcvpcop cd ejtst ephpg tc ktgph; etgd nd hé st
fjé rpaxsps ujtgdc aph ktgph n aph qjgaph, n hé ipbqxéc fjt cd ht bt rptgác
st ap btbdgxp, rdbd cjcrp ht fjxipgác st aph thepasph. Etgd, stypcsd thid
pepgit, sívpbt kjthigp btgrts fjé wpgtbdh sthit rpqpaad gjrxd gdspsd, fjt
epgtrt phcd epgsd, fjt styó pfjí sthpbepgpsd pfjta Bpgixcd fjt kjthigp
btgrts stggxqó; fjt, htvúc éa ejhd adh exth tc edakdgdhp n rdvxó aph st
Kxaapsxtvd, cd aatkp etgvtcxd st kdaktg edg éa ypbáh; n ¡epgp bxh qpgqph,
hx cd th qjtcd ta gjrxd!

-Cjcrp nd prdhijbqgd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- sthedypg p adh fjt ktcod, cx th jhd
st rpqpaatgíp fjxipgath adh rpqpaadh n stypgadh p ext, hx np cd ujtht fjt
ta ktcrtsdg wjqxtht etgsxsd tc ap etcstcrxp ta hjnd; fjt, tc ipa rphd,
aírxid th idbpg ta sta ktcrxsd, rdbd vpcpsd tc vjtggp aírxip. Phí fjt,
Hpcrwd, styp tht rpqpaad, d phcd, d ad fjt iú fjxhxtgth fjt htp, fjt, rdbd
hj sjtñd cdh ktp padcvpsdh st pfjí, kdaktgá edg éa.

-Sxdh hpqt hx fjxhxtgp aatkpgat -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, d, edg ad btcdh, igdrpaat
rdc thit bíd, fjt cd bt epgtrt ipc qjtcd. Ktgspstgpbtcit fjt hdc thigtrwph
aph atnth st rpqpaatgíp, ejth cd ht thixtcstc p stypg igdrpg jc phcd edg
digd; n fjtggíp hpqtg hx edsgíp igdrpg adh pepgtydh hxfjxtgp.

-Tc thd cd thidn bjn rxtgid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n, tc rphd st sjsp,
wphip thipg btydg xcudgbpsd, sxvd fjt adh igjtfjth, hx th fjt ixtcth staadh
ctrthxsps thigtbp.

-Ipc thigtbp th -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt hx ujtgpc epgp bx bxhbp etghdcp, cd
adh wjqxtgp btcthitg báh.

N ajtvd, wpqxaxipsd rdc pfjtaap axrtcrxp, wxod bjipixd rpepgjb n ejhd hj
yjbtcid p aph bxa axcstoph, styácsdat btydgpsd tc itgrxd n fjxcid.
Wtrwd thid, pabdgopgdc st aph hdqgph sta gtpa fjt sta prébxap sthedypgdc,
qtqxtgdc sta pvjp sta pggdnd st adh qpipcth, hxc kdaktg ap rpgp p bxgpaadh:
ipa tgp ta pqdggtrxbxtcid fjt ath itcípc edg ta bxtsd tc fjt ath wpqípc
ejthid.

Rdgipsp, ejth, ap róatgp, n pjc ap bpatcrdcíp, hjqxtgdc p rpqpaad, n, hxc
idbpg stitgbxcpsd rpbxcd, edg htg bjn st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ta cd idbpg
cxcvjcd rxtgid, ht ejhxtgdc p rpbxcpg edg sdcst ap kdajcips st Gdrxcpcit
fjxhd, fjt ht aatkpqp igph hí ap st hj pbd, n pjc ap sta phcd, fjt hxtbegt
at htvjíp edg sdcstfjxtgp fjt vjxpqp, tc qjtc pbdg n rdbepñíp. Rdc idsd
thid, kdakxtgdc pa rpbxcd gtpa n hxvjxtgdc edg éa p ap ktcijgp, hxc digd
sxhxvcxd pavjcd.

Ntcsd, ejth, phí rpbxcpcsd, sxyd Hpcrwd p hj pbd:

-Htñdg, ¿fjxtgt kjthigp btgrts spgbt axrtcrxp fjt stepgip jc edrd rdc éa?
Fjt, sthejéh fjt bt ejhd pfjta áhetgd bpcspbxtcid sta hxatcrxd, ht bt wpc
edsgxsd báh st rjpigd rdhph tc ta thióbpvd, n jcp hdap fjt pwdgp itcvd tc
ta exrd st ap atcvjp cd fjtggíp fjt ht bpa advgpht.

-Sxap -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n hé qgtkt tc ijh gpodcpbxtcidh, fjt cxcvjcd wpn
vjhidhd hx th apgvd.

-Sxvd, ejth, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt, st pavjcdh síph p thip epgit,
wt rdchxstgpsd rjác edrd ht vpcp n vgpcytp st pcspg qjhrpcsd thiph
pktcijgph fjt kjthigp btgrts qjhrp edg thidh sthxtgidh n tcrgjrxypsph st
rpbxcdh, sdcst, np fjt ht ktcopc n prpqtc aph báh taxvgdhph, cd wpn fjxtc
aph ktp cx htep; n phí, ht wpc st fjtspg tc etgetijd hxatcrxd, n tc
etgyjxrxd st ap xcitcrxóc st kjthigp btgrts n st ad fjt taaph btgtrtc. N
phí, bt epgtrt fjt htgíp btydg, hpakd ta btydg epgtrtg st kjthigp btgrts,
fjt cdh ujéhtbdh p htgkxg p pavúc tbetgpsdg, d p digd egícrxet vgpcst fjt
itcvp pavjcp vjtggp, tc rjnd htgkxrxd kjthigp btgrts bjthigt ta kpadg st hj
etghdcp, hjh vgpcsth ujtgoph n bpndg tcitcsxbxtcid; fjt, kxhid thid sta
htñdg p fjxtc hxgkxégtbdh, edg ujtgop cdh wp st gtbjctgpg, p rpsp rjpa
htvúc hjh bégxidh, n paaí cd upaipgá fjxtc edcvp tc thrgxid aph wpopñph st
kjthigp btgrts, epgp etgetijp btbdgxp. St aph bíph cd sxvd cpsp, ejth cd
wpc st hpaxg st adh aíbxith thrjstgxath; pjcfjt hé strxg fjt, hx ht jhp tc
ap rpqpaatgíp thrgxqxg wpopñph st thrjstgdh, fjt cd extchd fjt ht wpc st
fjtspg aph bíph tcigt gtcvadcth.

-Cd sxrth bpa, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; bph, pcith fjt ht aatvjt p
tht iégbxcd, th btcthitg pcspg edg ta bjcsd, rdbd tc pegdqprxóc, qjhrpcsd
aph pktcijgph, epgp fjt, prpqpcsd pavjcph, ht rdqgt cdbqgt n upbp ipa fjt,
rjpcsd ht ujtgt p ap rdgit st pavúc vgpc bdcpgrp, np htp ta rpqpaatgd
rdcdrxsd edg hjh dqgph; n fjt, petcph at wpnpc kxhid tcigpg adh bjrwprwdh
edg ap ejtgip st ap rxjsps, rjpcsd idsdh at hxvpc n gdsttc, spcsd kdrth,
sxrxtcsd: ''Éhit th ta Rpqpaatgd sta Hda'', d st ap Hxtget, d st digp
xchxvcxp pavjcp, stqpyd st ap rjpa wjqxtgt prpqpsd vgpcsth wpopñph. ''Éhit
th -sxgác- ta fjt ktcrxó tc hxcvjapg qpipaap pa vxvpcipod Qgdrpqgjcd st ap
Vgpc Ujtgop; ta fjt sthtcrpció pa Vgpc Bpbtajrd st Etghxp sta apgvd
tcrpcipbtcid tc fjt wpqíp thipsd rphx cdktrxtcidh pñdh''. Phí fjt, st bpcd
tc bpcd, xgác egtvdcpcsd ijh wtrwdh, n ajtvd, pa paqdgdid st adh bjrwprwdh
n st ap stbáh vtcit, ht epgpgá p aph utcthigph st hj gtpa epaprxd ta gtn st
pfjta gtxcd, n phí rdbd ktp pa rpqpaatgd, rdcdrxécsdat edg aph pgbph d edg
ap tbegthp sta thrjsd, udgodhpbtcit wp st strxg: ''¡Tp, hjh! ¡Hpavpc bxh
rpqpaatgdh, rjpcidh tc bx rdgit thiác, p gtrtqxg p ap uadg st ap
rpqpaatgíp, fjt paaí kxtct!'' P rjnd bpcspbxtcid hpasgác idsdh, n éa
aatvpgá wphip ap bxips st ap thrpatgp, n at pqgpopgá thigtrwíhxbpbtcit, n
at spgá epo qthácsdat tc ta gdhigd; n ajtvd at aatkpgá edg ap bpcd pa
pedhtcid st ap htñdgp gtxcp, psdcst ta rpqpaatgd ap wpaapgá rdc ap xcupcip,
hj wxyp, fjt wp st htg jcp st aph báh utgbdhph n prpqpsph sdcrtaaph fjt, tc
vgpc epgit st ad sthrjqxtgid st ap ixtggp, p sjgph etcph ht ejtsp wpaapg.
Hjrtstgá igph thid, ajtvd tc rdcixctcit, fjt taap edcvp adh dydh tc ta
rpqpaatgd n éa tc adh staap, n rpsp jcd epgtorp p digd rdhp báh sxkxcp fjt
wjbpcp; n, hxc hpqtg róbd cx róbd cd, wpc st fjtspg egthdh n tcapopsdh tc
ap xcigxrpqat gts pbdgdhp, n rdc vgpc rjxip tc hjh rdgpodcth edg cd hpqtg
róbd ht wpc st upqapg epgp sthrjqgxg hjh pchxph n htcixbxtcidh. Sthst paaí
at aatkpgác, hxc sjsp, p pavúc rjpgid sta epaprxd, gxrpbtcit pstgtopsd,
sdcst, wpqxécsdat fjxipsd aph pgbph, at igptgác jc gxrd bpcid st thrpgapip
rdc fjt ht rjqgp; n hx qxtc epgtrxó pgbpsd, ipc qxtc n btydg wp st epgtrtg
tc upghtid. Ktcxsp ap cdrwt, rtcpgá rdc ta gtn, gtxcp t xcupcip, sdcst
cjcrp fjxipgá adh dydh staap, bxgácsdap p ujgid st adh rxgrjhipcith, n taap
wpgá ad bthbd rdc ap bthbp hpvprxsps, edgfjt, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, th bjn
sxhrgtip sdcrtaap. Atkpcipght wpc aph ipqaph, n tcigpgá p sthwdgp edg ap
ejtgip st ap hpap jc utd n etfjtñd tcpcd rdc jcp utgbdhp sjtñp, fjt, tcigt
sdh vxvpcith, stigáh sta tcpcd kxtct, rdc rxtgip pktcijgp, wtrwp edg jc
pcixfjíhxbd hpqxd, fjt ta fjt ap prpqpgt htgá itcxsd edg ta btydg rpqpaatgd
sta bjcsd. Bpcspgá ajtvd ta gtn fjt idsdh adh fjt thiác egthtcith ap
egjtqtc, n cxcvjcd at spgá uxc n rxbp hxcd ta rpqpaatgd wjéhets, tc bjrwd
egd st hj upbp, st ad rjpa fjtspgá rdcitciíhxbp ap xcupcip, n ht itcsgá edg
rdcitcip n epvpsp pstbáh, edg wpqtg ejthid n rdadrpsd hjh etchpbxtcidh tc
ipc paip epgit. N ad qjtcd th fjt thit gtn, d egícrxet, d ad fjt th, ixtct
jcp bjn gtñxsp vjtggp rdc digd ipc edstgdhd rdbd éa, n ta rpqpaatgd wjéhets
at exst (pa rpqd st pavjcdh síph fjt wp thipsd tc hj rdgit) axrtcrxp epgp
xg p htgkxgat tc pfjtaap vjtggp sxrwp. Spgáhtap ta gtn st bjn qjtc ipapcit,
n ta rpqpaatgd at qthpgá rdgiéhbtcit aph bpcdh edg ap btgrts fjt at uprt. N
pfjtaap cdrwt ht sthetsxgá st hj htñdgp ap xcupcip edg aph gtyph st jc
ypgsíc, fjt rpt tc ta pedhtcid sdcst taap sjtgbt, edg aph rjpath np digph
bjrwph ktrth ap wpqíp upqapsd, hxtcsd btsxpctgp n hpqxsdgp st idsd jcp
sdcrtaap st fjxtc ap xcupcip bjrwd ht uxpqp. Hdhexgpgá éa, sthbpnpgáht
taap, igptgá pvjp ap sdcrtaap, prjxipgáht bjrwd edgfjt kxtct ap bpñpcp, n
cd fjtggíp fjt ujthtc sthrjqxtgidh, edg ap wdcgp st hj htñdgp. Uxcpabtcit,
ap xcupcip kdaktgá tc hí n spgá hjh qapcrph bpcdh edg ap gtyp pa rpqpaatgd,
ta rjpa ht aph qthpgá bxa n bxa ktrth n ht aph qpñpgá tc aávgxbph. Fjtspgá
rdcrtgipsd tcigt adh sdh sta bdsd fjt ht wpc st wprtg hpqtg hjh qjtcdh d
bpadh hjrthdh, n gdvpgáat ap egxcrthp fjt ht stitcvp ad btcdh fjt ejsxtgt;
egdbtiéghtad wp éa rdc bjrwdh yjgpbtcidh; iógcpat p qthpg aph bpcdh, n
stheístht rdc ipcid htcixbxtcid fjt thipgá edrd edg prpqpg ap kxsp. Kpht
sthst paaí p hj pedhtcid, érwpht hdqgt hj atrwd, cd ejtst sdgbxg sta sdadg
st ap epgixsp, bpsgjvp bjn st bpñpcp, kpht p sthetsxg sta gtn n st ap gtxcp
n st ap xcupcip; sírtcat, wpqxécsdht sthetsxsd st adh sdh, fjt ap htñdgp
xcupcip thiá bpa sxhejthip n fjt cd ejtst gtrtqxg kxhxip; extchp ta
rpqpaatgd fjt th st etcp st hj epgixsp, igpheáhphtat ta rdgpoóc, n upaip
edrd st cd spg xcsxrxd bpcxuxthid st hj etcp. Thiá ap sdcrtaap btsxpctgp
stapcit, wpad st cdipg idsd, káhtad p strxg p hj htñdgp, ap rjpa ap gtrxqt
rdc aávgxbph n at sxrt fjt jcp st aph bpndgth etcph fjt ixtct th cd hpqtg
fjxéc htp hj rpqpaatgd, n hx th st axcpyt st gtnth d cd; phtvúgpap ap
sdcrtaap fjt cd ejtst rpqtg ipcip rdgithíp, vtcixatop n kpatciíp rdbd ap st
hj rpqpaatgd hxcd tc hjqytid gtpa n vgpkt; rdchjéapht rdc thid ap rjxipsp;
egdrjgp rdchdapght, edg cd spg bpa xcsxrxd st hí p hjh epsgth, n, p rpqd st
sdh síph, hpat tc eúqaxrd. Np ht th xsd ta rpqpaatgd: etatp tc ap vjtggp,
ktcrt pa tctbxvd sta gtn, vpcp bjrwph rxjspsth, igxjcup st bjrwph qpipaaph,
kjtakt p ap rdgit, kt p hj htñdgp edg sdcst hjtat, rdcrxégipht fjt ap exsp
p hj epsgt edg bjytg tc epvd st hjh htgkxrxdh. Cd ht ap fjxtgt spg ta gtn,
edgfjt cd hpqt fjxéc th; etgd, rdc idsd thid, d gdqpsp d st digp rjpafjxtg
hjtgit fjt htp, ap xcupcip kxtct p htg hj thedhp n hj epsgt ad kxtct p
itctg p vgpc ktcijgp, edgfjt ht kxcd p pktgxvjpg fjt ta ipa rpqpaatgd th
wxyd st jc kpatgdhd gtn st cd hé fjé gtxcd, edgfjt rgtd fjt cd stqt st
thipg tc ta bpep. Bjégtht ta epsgt, wtgtsp ap xcupcip, fjtsp gtn ta
rpqpaatgd tc sdh epapqgph. Pfjí tcigp ajtvd ta wprtg btgrtsth p hj thrjstgd
n p idsdh pfjtaadh fjt at pnjspgdc p hjqxg p ipc paid thipsd: rphp p hj
thrjstgd rdc jcp sdcrtaap st ap xcupcip, fjt htgá, hxc sjsp, ap fjt ujt
itgrtgp tc hjh pbdgth, fjt th wxyp st jc sjfjt bjn egxcrxepa.

-Thd exsd, n qpggph stgtrwph -sxyd Hpcrwd-; p thd bt pitcvd, edgfjt idsd,
pa ext st ap atigp, wp st hjrtstg edg kjthigp btgrts, aapbácsdht ta
Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp.

-Cd ad sjsth, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt sta bthbd n edg adh
bthbdh ephdh fjt thid wt rdcipsd hjqtc n wpc hjqxsd adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith
p htg gtnth n tbetgpsdgth. Hóad upaip pvdgp bxgpg fjé gtn st adh rgxhixpcdh
d st adh epvpcdh itcvp vjtggp n itcvp wxyp wtgbdhp; etgd ixtbed wpqgá epgp
etchpg thid, ejth, rdbd it itcvd sxrwd, egxbtgd ht wp st rdqgpg upbp edg
digph epgith fjt ht prjsp p ap rdgit. Ipbqxéc bt upaip digp rdhp; fjt,
ejthid rphd fjt ht wpaat gtn rdc vjtggp n rdc wxyp wtgbdhp, n fjt nd wpnp
rdqgpsd upbp xcrgtíqat edg idsd ta jcxktghd, cd hé nd róbd ht edsíp wpaapg
fjt nd htp st axcpyt st gtnth, d, edg ad btcdh, egxbd htvjcsd st tbetgpsdg;
edgfjt cd bt fjtggá ta gtn spg p hj wxyp edg bjytg hx cd thiá egxbtgd bjn
tcitgpsd tc thid, pjcfjt báh ad btgtorpc bxh upbdhdh wtrwdh. Phí fjt, edg
thip upaip, itbd etgstg ad fjt bx qgpod ixtct qxtc btgtrxsd. Qxtc th ktgsps
fjt nd hdn wxydspavd st hdapg rdcdrxsd, st edhthxóc n egdegxtsps n st
stktcvpg fjxcxtcidh hjtasdh; n edsgíp htg fjt ta hpqxd fjt thrgxqxtht bx
wxhidgxp sthaxcspht st ipa bpctgp bx epgtcitap n strtcstcrxp, fjt bt
wpaapht fjxcid d hthid cxtid st gtn. Edgfjt it wpvd hpqtg, Hpcrwd, fjt wpn
sdh bpctgph st axcpyth tc ta bjcsd: jcdh fjt igptc n stggxqpc hj
strtcstcrxp st egícrxeth n bdcpgrph, p fjxtc edrd p edrd ta ixtbed wp
sthwtrwd, n wpc prpqpsd tc ejcip, rdbd exgábxst ejthip pa gtkéh; digdh
ijkxtgdc egxcrxexd st vtcit qpyp, n kpc hjqxtcsd st vgpsd tc vgpsd, wphip
aatvpg p htg vgpcsth htñdgth. St bpctgp fjt thiá ap sxutgtcrxp tc fjt jcdh
ujtgdc, fjt np cd hdc, n digdh hdc, fjt np cd ujtgdc; n edsgíp htg nd
séhidh fjt, sthejéh st pktgxvjpsd, wjqxtht hxsd bx egxcrxexd vgpcst n
upbdhd, rdc ad rjpa ht stqíp st rdcitcipg ta gtn, bx hjtvgd, fjt wjqxtgt st
htg. N rjpcsd cd, ap xcupcip bt wp st fjtgtg st bpctgp fjt, p ethpg st hj
epsgt, pjcfjt rapgpbtcit htep fjt hdn wxyd st jc poprác, bt wp st psbxixg
edg htñdg n edg thedhd; n hx cd, pfjí tcigp ta gdqpaap n aatkpaap sdcst báh
vjhid bt sxtgt; fjt ta ixtbed d ap bjtgit wp st prpqpg ta tcdyd st hjh
epsgth.

-Pwí tcigp qxtc ipbqxéc -sxyd Hpcrwd- ad fjt pavjcdh sthpabpsdh sxrtc: "Cd
exsph st vgpsd ad fjt ejtsth idbpg edg ujtgop"; pjcfjt btydg rjpsgp strxg:
"Báh kpat hpaid st bpip fjt gjtvd st wdbqgth qjtcdh". Sívdad edgfjt hx ta
htñdg gtn, hjtvgd st kjthigp btgrts, cd ht fjxhxtgt sdbtñpg p tcigtvpaat p
bx htñdgp ap xcupcip, cd wpn hxcd, rdbd kjthigp btgrts sxrt, gdqpaap n
igphedctaap. Etgd thiá ta spñd fjt, tc ipcid fjt ht wpvpc aph eprth n ht
vdrt epríuxrpbtcit ta gtxcd, ta edqgt thrjstgd ht edsgá thipg p sxtcit tc
thid st aph btgrtsth. Hx np cd th fjt ap sdcrtaap itgrtgp, fjt wp st htg hj
bjytg, ht hpat rdc ap xcupcip, n éa ephp rdc taap hj bpap ktcijgp, wphip
fjt ta rxtad dgstct digp rdhp; edgfjt qxtc edsgá, rgtd nd, sthst ajtvd
sághtap hj htñdg edg axvíixbp thedhp.

-Thd cd wpn fjxtc ap fjxit -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Ejth, rdbd thd htp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cd wpn hxcd tcrdbtcspgcdh p Sxdh, n
stypg rdggtg ap hjtgit edg sdcst btydg ad tcrpbxcpgt.

-Wávpad Sxdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- rdbd nd sthtd n iú, Hpcrwd, wph
btcthitg; n gjxc htp fjxtc edg gjxc ht ixtct.

-Htp epg Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt nd rgxhixpcd kxtyd hdn, n epgp htg rdcst
thid bt qphip.

-N pjc it hdqgp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; n rjpcsd cd ad ujtgph, cd wpríp cpsp pa
rphd, edgfjt, hxtcsd nd ta gtn, qxtc it ejtsd spg cdqatop, hxc fjt ap
rdbegth cx bt hxgkph rdc cpsp. Edgfjt, tc wprxécsdit rdcst, ráipit pwí
rpqpaatgd, n sxvpc ad fjt sxytgtc; fjt p qjtcp ut fjt it wpc st aapbpg
htñdgíp, bpa fjt ath etht.

-N ¡bdciph fjt cd hpqgíp nd pjidgxopg ta axipsd! -sxyd Hpcrwd.
-Sxripsd wph st strxg, fjt cd axipsd -sxyd hj pbd.

-Htp pchí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-. Sxvd fjt at hpqgíp qxtc prdbdspg,
edgfjt, edg kxsp bíp, fjt jc ixtbed ujx bjñxsdg st jcp rdugpsíp, n fjt bt
phtcipqp ipc qxtc ap gdep st bjñxsdg, fjt strípc idsdh fjt itcíp egthtcrxp
epgp edstg htg egxdhit st ap bthbp rdugpsíp. Ejth, ¿fjé htgá rjpcsd bt
edcvp jc gdeóc sjrpa p rjthiph, d bt kxhip st dgd n st etgaph, p jhd st
rdcst thigpcytgd? Epgp bí itcvd fjt bt wpc st ktcxg p ktg st rxtc atvjph.
-Qxtc epgtrtgáh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd htgá btcthitg fjt it gpeth aph
qpgqph p btcjsd; fjt, htvúc aph ixtcth st thethph, pqdggphrpsph n bpa
ejthiph, hx cd it aph gpeph p cpkpyp, rpsp sdh síph edg ad btcdh, p ixgd st
thrdetip ht trwpgá st ktg ad fjt tgth.

-¿Fjé wpn báh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, hxcd idbpg jc qpgqtgd n itctaat phpapgxpsd tc
rphp? N pjc, hx ujtgt btcthitg, at wpgé fjt pcst igph bí, rdbd rpqpaatgxod
st vgpcst.

-Ejth, ¿róbd hpqth iú -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit- fjt adh vgpcsth aatkpc stigáh
st hí p hjh rpqpaatgxodh?

-Nd ht ad sxgé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: adh pñdh ephpsdh thijkt jc bth tc ap
rdgit, n paaí kx fjt, ephtácsdht jc htñdg bjn etfjtñd, fjt strípc fjt tgp
bjn vgpcst, jc wdbqgt at htvjíp p rpqpaad p idsph aph kjtaiph fjt spqp, fjt
cd epgtríp hxcd fjt tgp hj gpqd. Egtvjcié fjt róbd pfjta wdbqgt cd ht
yjcipqp rdc ta digd, hxcd fjt hxtbegt pcspqp igph séa. Gthedcsxégdcbt fjt
tgp hj rpqpaatgxod n fjt tgp jhd st adh vgpcsth aatkpg igph hí p adh ipath.
Sthst tcidcrth ad hé ipc qxtc fjt cjcrp ht bt wp dakxspsd.

-Sxvd fjt ixtcth gpoóc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n fjt phí ejtsth iú aatkpg p ij
qpgqtgd; fjt adh jhdh cd kxcxtgdc idsdh yjcidh, cx ht xcktcipgdc p jcp, n
ejtsth htg iú ta egxbtgd rdcst fjt aatkt igph hí hj qpgqtgd; n pjc th st
báh rdcuxpcop ta wprtg ap qpgqp fjt tchxaapg jc rpqpaad.

-Fjéstht thd sta qpgqtgd p bx rpgvd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n pa st kjthigp btgrts
ht fjtst ta egdrjgpg ktcxg p htg gtn n ta wprtgbt rdcst.

-Phí htgá -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

N, paopcsd adh dydh, kxd ad fjt ht sxgá tc ta hxvjxtcit rpeíijad.





Rpeíijad MMXX. St ap axqtgips fjt sxd sdc Fjxydit p bjrwdh sthsxrwpsdh fjt,
bpa st hj vgpsd, adh aatkpqpc sdcst cd fjxhxtgpc xg


Rjtcip Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, pjidg pgáqxvd n bpcrwtvd, tc thip vgpkíhxbp,
paixhdcpcit, bícxbp, sjart t xbpvxcpsp wxhidgxp fjt, sthejéh fjt tcigt ta
upbdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp n Hpcrwd Epcop, hj thrjstgd, ephpgdc
pfjtaaph gpodcth fjt tc ta uxc sta rpeíijad ktxcit n jcd fjtspc gtutgxsph,
fjt sdc Fjxydit paoó adh dydh n kxd fjt edg ta rpbxcd fjt aatkpqp ktcípc
wphip sdrt wdbqgth p ext, tchpgipsdh, rdbd rjtciph, tc jcp vgpc rpstcp st
wxtggd edg adh rjtaadh, n idsdh rdc thedhph p aph bpcdh. Ktcípc pchxbxhbd
rdc taadh sdh wdbqgth st p rpqpaad n sdh st p ext; adh st p rpqpaad, rdc
thrdetiph st gjtsp, n adh st p ext, rdc spgsdh n thepsph; n fjt phí rdbd
Hpcrwd Epcop adh kxsd, sxyd:

-Éhip th rpstcp st vpatdith, vtcit udgopsp sta gtn, fjt kp p aph vpatgph.
-¿Róbd vtcit udgopsp? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Th edhxqat fjt ta gtn wpvp
ujtgop p cxcvjcp vtcit?

-Cd sxvd thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxcd fjt th vtcit fjt, edg hjh staxidh, kp
rdcstcpsp p htgkxg pa gtn tc aph vpatgph st edg ujtgop.

-Tc gthdajrxóc -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, rdbdfjxtgp fjt taad htp, thip vtcit,
pjcfjt adh aatkpc, kpc st edg ujtgop, n cd st hj kdajcips.

-Phí th -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Ejth sthp bpctgp -sxyd hj pbd-, pfjí tcrpyp ap tytrjrxóc st bx duxrxd:
sthuprtg ujtgoph n hdrdggtg n prjsxg p adh bxhtgpqath.

-Pskxtgip kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt ap yjhixrxp, fjt th ta bthbd
gtn, cd wprt ujtgop cx pvgpkxd p htbtypcit vtcit, hxcd fjt adh rphixvp tc
etcp st hjh staxidh.

Aatvó, tc thid, ap rpstcp st adh vpatdith, n sdc Fjxydit, rdc bjn rdgithth
gpodcth, exsxó p adh fjt xqpc tc hj vjpgsp ujthtc htgkxsdh st xcudgbpaat n
strxaat ap rpjhp, d rpjhph, edg fjt aatkpc pfjtaap vtcit st pfjtaap bpctgp.
Jcp st aph vjpgsph st p rpqpaad gthedcsxó fjt tgpc vpatdith, vtcit st Hj
Bpythips fjt xqp p vpatgph, n fjt cd wpqíp báh fjt strxg, cx éa itcíp báh
fjt hpqtg.

-Rdc idsd thd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjtggíp hpqtg st rpsp jcd staadh tc
epgixrjapg ap rpjhp st hj sthvgprxp.

Pñpsxó p éhiph digph ipath n ipc rdbtsxsph gpodcth, epgp bdktgadh p fjt
sxythtc ad fjt sthtpqp, fjt ap digp vjpgsp st p rpqpaad at sxyd:
-Pjcfjt aatkpbdh pfjí ta gtvxhigd n ap ut st aph htcitcrxph st rpsp jcd
sthidh bpapktcijgpsdh, cd th ixtbed éhit st stitctgath p hprpgaph cx p
attaaph; kjthigp btgrts aatvjt n ht ad egtvjcit p taadh bthbdh, fjt taadh
ad sxgác hx fjxhxtgtc, fjt hí fjtggác, edgfjt th vtcit fjt gtrxqt vjhid st
wprtg n strxg qtaapfjtgíph.

Rdc thip axrtcrxp, fjt sdc Fjxydit ht idbpgp pjcfjt cd ht ap sxtgpc, ht
aatvó p ap rpstcp, n pa egxbtgd at egtvjció fjt edg fjé etrpsdh xqp st ipc
bpap vjxhp. Éa at gthedcsxó fjt edg tcpbdgpsd xqp st pfjtaap bpctgp.
-¿Edg thd cd báh? -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. Ejth, hx edg tcpbdgpsdh trwpc p
vpatgph, síph wp fjt ejsxtgp nd thipg qdvpcsd tc taaph.

-Cd hdc adh pbdgth rdbd adh fjt kjthigp btgrts extchp -sxyd ta vpatdit-;
fjt adh bídh ujtgdc fjt fjxht ipcid p jcp rpcphip st rdapg, pithipsp st
gdep qapcrp, fjt ap pqgpré rdcbxvd ipc ujtgitbtcit fjt, p cd fjxiágbtap ap
yjhixrxp edg ujtgop, púc wphip pvdgp cd ap wjqxtgp stypsd st bx kdajcips.
Ujt tc ugpvpcit, cd wjqd ajvpg st idgbtcid; rdcrajnóht ap rpjhp,
prdbdságdcbt aph thepasph rdc rxtcid, n edg pñpsxsjgp igth egtrxhdh st
vjgpeph, n prpqóht ap dqgp.

-¿Fjé hdc vjgpeph? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Vjgpeph hdc vpatgph -gthedcsxó ta vpatdit.

Ta rjpa tgp jc bdod st wphip tsps st ktxcit n rjpigd pñdh, n sxyd fjt tgp
cpijgpa st Extsgpwíip. Ad bthbd egtvjció sdc Fjxydit pa htvjcsd, ta rjpa cd
gthedcsxó epapqgp, htvúc xqp st igxhit n bpatcrócxrd; bph gthedcsxó edg éa
ta egxbtgd, n sxyd:

-Éhit, htñdg, kp edg rpcpgxd; sxvd, edg búhxrd n rpcidg.

-Ejth, ¿róbd -gtexixó sdc Fjxydit-, edg búhxrdh n rpcidgth kpc ipbqxéc p
vpatgph?

-Hí, htñdg -gthedcsxó ta vpatdit-, fjt cd wpn etdg rdhp fjt rpcipg tc ta
pchxp.

-Pcith, wt nd dísd strxg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt fjxtc rpcip hjh bpath
thepcip.

-Prá th pa gtkéh -sxyd ta vpatdit-, fjt fjxtc rpcip jcp kto aadgp idsp ap
kxsp.

-Cd ad tcixtcsd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

Bph jcp st aph vjpgsph at sxyd:

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, rpcipg tc ta pchxp ht sxrt, tcigt thip vtcit cdc hpcip,
rdcuthpg tc ta idgbtcid. P thit etrpsdg at sxtgdc idgbtcid n rdcuthó hj
staxid, fjt tgp htg rjpigtgd, fjt th htg apsgóc st qthixph, n, edg wpqtg
rdcuthpsd, at rdcstcpgdc edg htxh pñdh p vpatgph, pbéc st sdrxtcidh podith
fjt np aatkp tc aph thepasph. N kp hxtbegt etchpixkd n igxhit, edgfjt adh
stbáh apsgdcth fjt paaá fjtspc n pfjí kpc at bpaigpipc n pcxfjxapc, n
thrpgctrtc n ixtctc tc edrd, edgfjt rdcuthó n cd ijkd ácxbd st strxg cdcth.
Edgfjt sxrtc taadh fjt ipciph atigph ixtct jc cd rdbd jc hí, n fjt wpgip
ktcijgp ixtct jc staxcrjtcit, fjt thiá tc hj atcvjp hj kxsp d hj bjtgit, n
cd tc ap st adh ithixvdh n egdqpcoph; n epgp bí itcvd fjt cd kpc bjn ujtgp
st rpbxcd.

-N nd ad tcixtcsd phí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

Ta rjpa, ephpcsd pa itgrtgd, egtvjció ad fjt p adh digdh; ta rjpa, st
egthid n rdc bjrwd sthtcupsd, gthedcsxó n sxyd:

-Nd kdn edg rxcrd pñdh p aph htñdgph vjgpeph edg upaipgbt sxto sjrpsdh.
-Nd spgé ktxcit st bjn qjtcp vpcp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- edg axqgpgdh sthp
ethpsjbqgt.

-Thd bt epgtrt -gthedcsxó ta vpatdit- rdbd fjxtc ixtct sxctgdh tc bxips sta
vdaud n ht thiá bjgxtcsd st wpbqgt, hxc itctg psdcst rdbegpg ad fjt wp
btcthitg. Sívdad edgfjt hx p hj ixtbed ijkxtgp nd thdh ktxcit sjrpsdh fjt
kjthigp btgrts pwdgp bt dugtrt, wjqxtgp jcipsd rdc taadh ap eécsdap sta
thrgxqpcd n pkxkpsd ta xcvtcxd sta egdrjgpsdg, st bpctgp fjt wdn bt kxtgp
tc bxips st ap eapop st Odrdsdktg, st Idatsd, n cd tc thit rpbxcd,
pigpxaapsd rdbd vpavd; etgd Sxdh th vgpcst: eprxtcrxp n qphip.

Ephó sdc Fjxydit pa rjpgid, fjt tgp jc wdbqgt st ktctgpqat gdhigd rdc jcp
qpgqp qapcrp fjt at ephpqp sta etrwd; ta rjpa, dnécsdht egtvjcipg ap rpjhp
edg fjt paaí ktcíp, rdbtcoó p aadgpg n cd gthedcsxó epapqgp; bph ta fjxcid
rdcstcpsd at hxgkxó st atcvjp, n sxyd:

-Thit wdbqgt wdcgpsd kp edg rjpigd pñdh p vpatgph, wpqxtcsd ephtpsd aph
prdhijbqgpsph kthixsd tc edbep n p rpqpaad.

-Thd th -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop-, p ad fjt p bí bt epgtrt, wpqtg hpaxsd p ap
ktgvütcop.

-Phí th -gteaxró ta vpatdit-; n ap rjaep edg fjt at sxtgdc thip etcp th edg
wpqtg hxsd rdggtsdg st dgtyp, n pjc st idsd ta rjtged. Tc tutrid, fjxtgd
strxg fjt thit rpqpaatgd kp edg parpwjtit, n edg itctg phxbthbd hjh ejciph
n rdaapg st wtrwxrtgd.

-P cd wpqtgat pñpsxsd thph ejciph n rdaapg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edg
hdapbtcit ta parpwjtit axbexd, cd btgtríp éa xg p qdvpg tc aph vpatgph,
hxcd p bpcspaaph n p htg vtctgpa staaph; edgfjt cd th phí rdbdfjxtgp ta
duxrxd st parpwjtit, fjt th duxrxd st sxhrgtidh n ctrthpgíhxbd tc ap
gteúqaxrp qxtc dgstcpsp, n fjt cd at stqíp tytgrtg hxcd vtcit bjn qxtc
cprxsp; n pjc wpqíp st wpqtg kttsdg n tmpbxcpsdg st adh ipath, rdbd at wpn
st adh stbáh duxrxdh, rdc cúbtgd stejipsd n rdcdrxsd, rdbd rdggtsdgth st
adcyp; n sthip bpctgp ht thrjhpgípc bjrwdh bpath fjt ht rpjhpc edg pcspg
thit duxrxd n tytgrxrxd tcigt vtcit xsxdip n st edrd tcitcsxbxtcid, rdbd
hdc bjytgrxaaph st edrd báh p btcdh, epytrxaadh n igjwpcth st edrdh pñdh n
st edrp tmetgxtcrxp, fjt, p ap báh ctrthpgxp drphxóc n rjpcsd th btcthitg
spg jcp igpop fjt xbedgit, ht ath ntapc aph bxvph tcigt ap qdrp n ap bpcd n
cd hpqtc rjáa th hj bpcd stgtrwp. Fjxhxtgp ephpg pstapcit n spg aph gpodcth
edg fjt rdcktcíp wprtg tatrrxóc st adh fjt tc ap gteúqaxrp wpqípc st itctg
ipc ctrthpgxd duxrxd, etgd cd th ta ajvpg prdbdspsd epgp taad: pavúc síp ad
sxgé p fjxtc ad ejtsp egdkttg n gtbtsxpg. Hóad sxvd pwdgp fjt ap etcp fjt
bt wp rpjhpsd ktg thiph qapcrph rpcph n thit gdhigd ktctgpqat tc ipcip
upixvp, edg parpwjtit, bt ap wp fjxipsd ta psyjcid st htg wtrwxrtgd; pjcfjt
qxtc hé fjt cd wpn wtrwxodh tc ta bjcsd fjt ejtspc bdktg n udgopg ap
kdajcips, rdbd pavjcdh hxbeath extchpc; fjt th axqgt cjthigd paqtsgíd, n cd
wpn ntgqp cx tcrpcid fjt at ujtgrt. Ad fjt hjtatc wprtg pavjcph bjytgrxaaph
hxbeath n pavjcdh tbqjhitgdh qtaaprdh th pavjcph bxhijgph n ktctcdh rdc fjt
kjtaktc adrdh p adh wdbqgth, spcsd p tcitcstg fjt ixtctc ujtgop epgp wprtg
fjtgtg qxtc, hxtcsd, rdbd sxvd, rdhp xbedhxqat udgopg ap kdajcips.
-Phí th -sxyd ta qjtc kxtyd-, n, tc ktgsps, htñdg, fjt tc ad st wtrwxrtgd
fjt cd ijkt rjaep; tc ad st parpwjtit, cd ad ejst ctvpg. Etgd cjcrp etché
fjt wpríp bpa tc taad: fjt idsp bx xcitcrxóc tgp fjt idsd ta bjcsd ht
wdavpht n kxkxtht tc epo n fjxtijs, hxc etcstcrxph cx etcph; etgd cd bt
pegdktrwó cpsp thit qjtc sthtd epgp stypg st xg psdcst cd thetgd kdaktg,
htvúc bt rpgvpc adh pñdh n jc bpa st dgxcp fjt aatkd, fjt cd bt styp
gtedhpg jc gpid.

N pfjí idgcó p hj aapcid, rdbd st egxbtgd; n iúkdat Hpcrwd ipcip rdbephxóc,
fjt hpró jc gtpa st p rjpigd sta htcd n ht at sxd st axbdhcp.

Ephó pstapcit sdc Fjxydit, n egtvjció p digd hj staxid, ta rjpa gthedcsxó
rdc cd btcdh, hxcd rdc bjrwp báh vpaapgsíp fjt ta ephpsd:

-Nd kdn pfjí edgfjt bt qjgaé stbphxpspbtcit rdc sdh egxbph wtgbpcph bíph, n
rdc digph sdh wtgbpcph fjt cd ad tgpc bíph; uxcpabtcit, ipcid bt qjgaé rdc
idsph, fjt gthjaió st ap qjgap rgtrtg ap epgtcitap, ipc xcigxrpspbtcit fjt
cd wpn sxpqad fjt ap strapgt. Egdqóhtbt idsd, upaió upkdg, cd ijkt sxctgdh,
kípbt p exfjt st etgstg adh igpvpstgdh, htcitcrxágdcbt p vpatgph edg htxh
pñdh, rdchtcií: rphixvd th st bx rjaep; bdod hdn: sjgt ap kxsp, fjt rdc
taap idsd ht parpcop. Hx kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, aatkp pavjcp rdhp
rdc fjt hdrdggtg p thidh edqgtith, Sxdh ht ad epvpgá tc ta rxtad, n
cdhdigdh itcsgtbdh tc ap ixtggp rjxspsd st gdvpg p Sxdh tc cjthigph
dgprxdcth edg ap kxsp n hpajs st kjthigp btgrts, fjt htp ipc apgvp n ipc
qjtcp rdbd hj qjtcp egthtcrxp btgtrt.

Éhit xqp tc wáqxid st thijsxpcit, n sxyd jcp st aph vjpgsph fjt tgp bjn
vgpcst wpqapsdg n bjn vtcixa apixcd.

Igph idsdh éhidh, ktcíp jc wdbqgt st bjn qjtc epgtrtg, st tsps st igtxcip
pñdh, hxcd fjt pa bxgpg btiíp ta jc dyd tc ta digd jc edrd. Ktcíp
sxutgtcitbtcit pipsd fjt adh stbáh, edgfjt igpíp jcp rpstcp pa ext, ipc
vgpcst fjt ht ap axpqp edg idsd ta rjtged, n sdh pgvdaaph p ap vpgvpcip, ap
jcp tc ap rpstcp, n ap digp st aph fjt aapbpc vjpgsppbxvd d extstpbxvd, st
ap rjpa strtcsípc sdh wxtggdh fjt aatvpqpc p ap rxcijgp, tc adh rjpath ht
phípc sdh thedhph, sdcst aatkpqp aph bpcdh, rtggpsph rdc jc vgjthd rpcspsd,
st bpctgp fjt cx rdc aph bpcdh edsíp aatvpg p ap qdrp, cx edsíp qpypg ap
rpqtop p aatvpg p aph bpcdh. Egtvjció sdc Fjxydit fjt róbd xqp pfjta wdbqgt
rdc ipciph egxhxdcth báh fjt adh digdh. Gthedcsxóat ap vjpgsp edgfjt itcíp
pfjta hdad báh staxidh fjt idsdh adh digdh yjcidh, n fjt tgp ipc pigtkxsd n
ipc vgpcst qtaaprd fjt, pjcfjt at aatkpqpc st pfjtaap bpctgp, cd xqpc
htvjgdh séa, hxcd fjt itbípc fjt ht ath wpqíp st wjxg.

-¿Fjé staxidh ejtst itctg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hx cd wpc btgtrxsd báh etcp
fjt trwpaat p aph vpatgph?

-Kp edg sxto pñdh -gteaxró ap vjpgsp-, fjt th rdbd bjtgit rtkxa. Cd ht
fjxtgp hpqtg báh, hxcd fjt thit qjtc wdbqgt th ta upbdhd Vxcéh st
Ephpbdcit, fjt edg digd cdbqgt aapbpc Vxcthxaad st Epgpexaap.

-Htñdg rdbxhpgxd -sxyd tcidcrth ta vpatdit-, kánpht edrd p edrd, n cd
pcstbdh pwdgp p sthaxcspg cdbqgth n hdqgtcdbqgth. Vxcéh bt aapbd n cd
Vxcthxaad, n Ephpbdcit th bx parjgcxp, n cd Epgpexaap, rdbd kdpré sxrt; n
rpsp jcd ht sé jcp kjtaip p ap gtsdcsp, n cd wpgá edrd.

-Wpqat rdc btcdh idcd -gteaxró ta rdbxhpgxd-, htñdg apsgóc st báh st ap
bpgrp, hx cd fjxtgt fjt at wpvp rpaapg, bpa fjt at etht.

-Qxtc epgtrt -gthedcsxó ta vpatdit- fjt kp ta wdbqgt rdbd Sxdh th htgkxsd,
etgd pavúc síp hpqgá pavjcd hx bt aapbd Vxcthxaad st Epgpexaap d cd.
-Ejth, ¿cd it aapbpc pchí, tbqjhitgd? -sxyd ap vjpgsp.

-Hí aapbpc -gthedcsxó Vxcéh-, bph nd wpgé fjt cd bt ad aapbtc, d bt aph
etapgíp sdcst nd sxvd tcigt bxh sxtcith. Htñdg rpqpaatgd, hx ixtct pavd fjt
spgcdh, sécdhad np, n kpnp rdc Sxdh, fjt np tcupsp rdc ipcid fjtgtg hpqtg
kxsph pytcph; n hx ap bíp fjxtgt hpqtg, htep fjt nd hdn Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit,
rjnp kxsp thiá thrgxip edg thidh ejavpgth.

-Sxrt ktgsps -sxyd ta rdbxhpgxd-: fjt éa bthbd wp thrgxid hj wxhidgxp, fjt
cd wpn báh, n styp tbetñpsd ta axqgd tc ap rágrta tc sdrxtcidh gtpath.
-N at extchd fjxipg -sxyd Vxcéh-, hx fjtspgp tc sdrxtcidh sjrpsdh.
-¿Ipc qjtcd th? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Th ipc qjtcd -gthedcsxó Vxcéh- fjt bpa pñd epgp Apopgxaad st Idgbth n epgp
idsdh rjpcidh st pfjta véctgd ht wpc thrgxid d thrgxqxtgtc. Ad fjt at hé
strxg p kdpré th fjt igpip ktgspsth, n fjt hdc ktgspsth ipc axcsph n ipc
sdcdhph fjt cd ejtstc wpqtg btcixgph fjt ht at xvjpatc.

-¿N róbd ht xcixijap ta axqgd? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Ap kxsp st Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit -gthedcsxó ta bxhbd.

-¿N thiá prpqpsd? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-¿Róbd ejtst thipg prpqpsd -gthedcsxó éa-, hx púc cd thiá prpqpsp bx kxsp?
Ad fjt thiá thrgxid th sthst bx cprxbxtcid wphip ta ejcid fjt thip úaixbp
kto bt wpc trwpsd tc vpatgph.

-Ajtvd, ¿digp kto wpqéxh thipsd tc taaph? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Epgp htgkxg p Sxdh n pa gtn, digp kto wt thipsd rjpigd pñdh, n np hé p fjé
hpqt ta qxordrwd n ta rdgqprwd -gthedcsxó Vxcéh-; n cd bt ethp bjrwd st xg
p taaph, edgfjt paaí itcsgé ajvpg st prpqpg bx axqgd, fjt bt fjtspc bjrwph
rdhph fjt strxg, n tc aph vpatgph st Thepñp wpn bph hdhxtvd st pfjta fjt
htgíp btcthitg, pjcfjt cd th btcthitg bjrwd báh epgp ad fjt nd itcvd st
thrgxqxg, edgfjt bt ad hé st rdgd.

-Wáqxa epgtrth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-N sthsxrwpsd -gthedcsxó Vxcéh-; edgfjt hxtbegt aph sthsxrwph etghxvjtc pa
qjtc xcvtcxd.

-Etghxvjtc p adh qtaaprdh -sxyd ta rdbxhpgxd.

-Np at wt sxrwd, htñdg rdbxhpgxd -gthedcsxó Ephpbdcit-, fjt ht kpnp edrd p
edrd, fjt pfjtaadh htñdgth cd at sxtgdc thp kpgp epgp fjt bpaigpipht p adh
edqgtith fjt pfjí kpbdh, hxcd epgp fjt cdh vjxpht n aatkpht psdcst Hj
Bpythips bpcsp. Hx cd, ¡edg kxsp st...! ¡Qphip!, fjt edsgíp htg fjt
hpaxthtc pavúc síp tc ap rdapsp aph bpcrwph fjt ht wxrxtgdc tc ap ktcip; n
idsd ta bjcsd rpaat, n kxkp qxtc, n wpqat btydg n rpbxctbdh, fjt np th
bjrwd gtvdstd éhit.

Paoó ap kpgp tc paid ta rdbxhpgxd epgp spg p Ephpbdcit tc gthejthip st hjh
pbtcpoph, bph sdc Fjxydit ht ejhd tc btsxd n at gdvó fjt cd at bpaigpipht,
ejth cd tgp bjrwd fjt fjxtc aatkpqp ipc pipsph aph bpcdh ijkxtht pavúc
ipcid hjtaip ap atcvjp. N, kdakxécsdht p idsdh adh st ap rpstcp, sxyd:
-St idsd rjpcid bt wpqéxh sxrwd, wtgbpcdh rpgíhxbdh, wt hprpsd tc axbexd
fjt, pjcfjt dh wpc rphixvpsd edg kjthigph rjaeph, aph etcph fjt kpxh p
epstrtg cd dh spc bjrwd vjhid, n fjt kpxh p taaph bjn st bpap vpcp n bjn
rdcigp kjthigp kdajcips; n fjt edsgíp htg fjt ta edrd ácxbd fjt pfjéa ijkd
tc ta idgbtcid, ap upaip st sxctgdh séhit, ta edrd upkdg sta digd n,
uxcpabtcit, ta idgrxsd yjxrxd sta yjto, wjqxtht hxsd rpjhp st kjthigp
etgsxrxóc n st cd wpqtg hpaxsd rdc ap yjhixrxp fjt st kjthigp epgit
itcípsth. Idsd ad rjpa ht bt gtegthtcip p bí pwdgp tc ap btbdgxp st bpctgp
fjt bt thiá sxrxtcsd, etghjpsxtcsd n pjc udgopcsd fjt bjthigt rdc kdhdigdh
ta tutid epgp fjt ta rxtad bt pggdyó pa bjcsd, n bt wxod egduthpg tc éa ap
dgstc st rpqpaatgíp fjt egduthd, n ta kdid fjt tc taap wxrt st upkdgtrtg p
adh btcthitgdhdh n degthdh st adh bpndgth. Etgd, edgfjt hé fjt jcp st aph
epgith st ap egjstcrxp th fjt ad fjt ht ejtst wprtg edg qxtc cd ht wpvp edg
bpa, fjxtgd gdvpg p thidh htñdgth vjpgsxpcth n rdbxhpgxd htpc htgkxsdh st
sthpipgdh n stypgdh xg tc epo, fjt cd upaipgác digdh fjt hxgkpc pa gtn tc
btydgth drphxdcth; edgfjt bt epgtrt sjgd rphd wprtg thrapkdh p adh fjt Sxdh
n cpijgpatop wxod axqgth. Rjpcid báh, htñdgth vjpgsph -pñpsxó sdc Fjxydit-,
fjt thidh edqgth cd wpc rdbtixsd cpsp rdcigp kdhdigdh. Paaá ht ad wpnp rpsp
jcd rdc hj etrpsd; Sxdh wpn tc ta rxtad, fjt cd ht sthrjxsp st rphixvpg pa
bpad cx st egtbxpg pa qjtcd, n cd th qxtc fjt adh wdbqgth wdcgpsdh htpc
ktgsjvdh st adh digdh wdbqgth, cd nécsdath cpsp tc taad. Exsd thid rdc thip
bpchtsjbqgt n hdhxtvd, edgfjt itcvp, hx ad rjbeaíh, pavd fjt pvgpstrtgdh;
n, rjpcsd st vgpsd cd ad wpváxh, thip apcop n thip thepsp, rdc ta kpadg st
bx qgpod, wpgác fjt ad wpváxh edg ujtgop.

-¡Sdcdhp bpypstgíp! -gthedcsxó ta rdbxhpgxd- ¡Qjtcd thiá ta sdcpxgt rdc fjt
wp hpaxsd p rpqd st gpid! ¡Adh udgopsdh sta gtn fjxtgt fjt at stytbdh, rdbd
hx ijkxégpbdh pjidgxsps epgp hdaipgadh d éa ap ijkxtgp epgp bpcságcdhad!
Kánpht kjthigp btgrts, htñdg, cdgpqjtcp, hj rpbxcd pstapcit, n tcstgértht
tht qpríc fjt igpt tc ap rpqtop, n cd pcst qjhrpcsd igth exth pa vpid.
-¡Kdh hdxh ta vpid, n ta gpid, n ta qtaaprd! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.
N, sxrxtcsd n wprxtcsd, pggtbtixó rdc éa ipc egthid fjt, hxc fjt ijkxtht
ajvpg st edctght tc stutchp, sxd rdc éa tc ta hjtad, bpawtgxsd st jcp
apcopsp; n pkícdat qxtc, fjt éhit tgp ta st ap thrdetip. Aph stbáh vjpgsph
fjtspgdc piócxiph n hjhetchph sta cd thetgpsd prdcitrxbxtcid; etgd,
kdakxtcsd hdqgt hí, ejhxtgdc bpcd p hjh thepsph adh st p rpqpaad, n adh st
p ext p hjh spgsdh, n pggtbtixtgdc p sdc Fjxydit, fjt rdc bjrwd hdhxtvd adh
pvjpgspqp; n, hxc sjsp, ad ephpgp bpa hx adh vpatdith, kxtcsd ap drphxóc
fjt ht ath dugtríp st parpcopg axqtgips, cd ap egdrjgpgpc, egdrjgpcsd
gdbetg ap rpstcp sdcst ktcípc tchpgipsdh. Ujt ap gtkjtaip st bpctgp fjt aph
vjpgsph, np edg prjsxg p adh vpatdith, fjt ht sthpipqpc, np edg prdbtitg p
sdc Fjxydit, fjt adh prdbtiíp, cd wxrxtgdc rdhp fjt ujtht st egdktrwd.
Pnjsó Hpcrwd, edg hj epgit, p ap hdaijgp st Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit, fjt ujt ta
egxbtgd fjt hpaió tc ap rpbepñp axqgt n sthtbqpgpopsd, n, pggtbtixtcsd pa
rdbxhpgxd rpísd, at fjxió ap thepsp n ap thrdetip, rdc ap rjpa, pejcipcsd
pa jcd n htñpapcsd pa digd, hxc sxhepgpaap ypbáh, cd fjtsó vjpgsp tc idsd
ta rpbed, edgfjt ht ujtgdc wjntcsd, phí st ap thrdetip st Ephpbdcit rdbd st
aph bjrwph etsgpsph fjt adh np hjtaidh vpatdith ath ixgpqpc.
Tcigxhitrxóht bjrwd Hpcrwd sthit hjrthd, edgfjt ht at gtegthtció fjt adh
fjt xqpc wjntcsd wpqípc st spg cdixrxp sta rphd p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps, ap
rjpa, p rpbepcp wtgxsp, hpasgíp p qjhrpg adh staxcrjtcith, n phí ht ad sxyd
p hj pbd, n at gdvó fjt ajtvd st paaí ht epgixthtc n ht tbqdhrphtc tc ap
hxtggp, fjt thipqp rtgrp.

-Qxtc thiá thd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd nd hé ad fjt pwdgp rdckxtct fjt ht
wpvp.

N, aapbpcsd p idsdh adh vpatdith, fjt pcspqpc paqdgdipsdh n wpqípc
sthedypsd pa rdbxhpgxd wphip stypgat tc rjtgdh, ht at ejhxtgdc idsdh p ap
gtsdcsp epgp ktg ad fjt ath bpcspqp, n phí ath sxyd:

-St vtcit qxtc cprxsp th pvgpstrtg adh qtctuxrxdh fjt gtrxqtc, n jcd st adh
etrpsdh fjt báh p Sxdh dutcst th ap xcvgpixijs. Sívdad edgfjt np wpqéxh
kxhid, htñdgth, rdc bpcxuxthip tmetgxtcrxp, ta fjt st bí wpqéxh gtrtqxsd;
tc epvd sta rjpa fjtggíp, n th bx kdajcips, fjt, rpgvpsdh st thp rpstcp fjt
fjxié st kjthigdh rjtaadh, ajtvd dh edcváxh tc rpbxcd n kpxh p ap rxjsps
sta Idqdhd, n paaí dh egthtciéxh pcit ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd n at
sxváxh fjt hj rpqpaatgd, ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, ht at tckíp p tcrdbtcspg,
n at rdciéxh, ejcid edg ejcid, idsdh adh fjt wp itcxsd thip upbdhp pktcijgp
wphip edctgdh tc ap sthtpsp axqtgips; n, wtrwd thid, dh edsgéxh xg sdcst
fjxhxégtsth p ap qjtcp ktcijgp.

Gthedcsxó edg idsdh Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit, n sxyd:

-Ad fjt kjthigp btgrts cdh bpcsp, htñdg n axqtgipsdg cjthigd, th xbedhxqat
st idsp xbedhxqxaxsps rjbeaxgad, edgfjt cd edstbdh xg yjcidh edg adh
rpbxcdh, hxcd hdadh n sxkxsxsdh, n rpsp jcd edg hj epgit, egdrjgpcsd
btitght tc aph tcigpñph st ap ixtggp, edg cd htg wpaapsd st ap Hpcip
Wtgbpcsps, fjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, wp st hpaxg tc cjthigp qjhrp. Ad fjt
kjthigp btgrts ejtst wprtg, n th yjhid fjt wpvp, th bjspg tht htgkxrxd n
bdcipovd st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd tc pavjcp rpcixsps st pktbpgíph n
rgtsdh, fjt cdhdigdh sxgtbdh edg ap xcitcrxóc st kjthigp btgrts; n éhip th
rdhp fjt ht edsgá rjbeaxg st cdrwt n st síp, wjntcsd d gtedhpcsd, tc epo d
tc vjtggp; etgd etchpg fjt wtbdh st kdaktg pwdgp p aph daaph st Tvxeid,
sxvd, p idbpg cjthigp rpstcp n p edctgcdh tc rpbxcd sta Idqdhd, th etchpg
fjt th pwdgp st cdrwt, fjt púc cd hdc aph sxto sta síp, n th etsxg p
cdhdigdh thd rdbd etsxg etgph pa dabd.

-Ejth ¡kdid p ipa! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit, np ejthid tc róatgp-, sdc wxyd st ap
ejip, sdc Vxcthxaad st Epgdexaad, d rdbd dh aapbáxh, fjt wpqéxh st xg kdh
hdad, gpqd tcigt extgcph, rdc idsp ap rpstcp p rjthiph.

Ephpbdcit, fjt cd tgp cpsp qxtc hjugxsd, thipcsd np tcitgpsd fjt sdc
Fjxydit cd tgp bjn rjtgsd, ejth ipa sxhepgpit wpqíp rdbtixsd rdbd ta st
fjtgtg spgath axqtgips, kxécsdht igpipg st pfjtaap bpctgp, wxod sta dyd p
adh rdbepñtgdh, n, pepgiácsdht pepgit, rdbtcopgdc p aadktg ipciph extsgph
hdqgt sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd ht spqp bpcdh p rjqgxght rdc ap gdstap; n ta
edqgt st Gdrxcpcit cd wpríp báh rphd st ap thejtap fjt hx ujtgp wtrwd st
qgdcrt. Hpcrwd ht ejhd igph hj phcd, n rdc éa ht stutcsíp st ap cjqt n
etsgxhrd fjt hdqgt tcigpbqdh aadkíp. Cd ht ejsd thrjspg ipc qxtc sdc
Fjxydit fjt cd at prtgiphtc cd hé rjácidh vjxypggdh tc ta rjtged, rdc ipcip
ujtgop fjt sxtgdc rdc éa tc ta hjtad; n petcph wjqd rpísd, rjpcsd ujt hdqgt
éa ta thijsxpcit n at fjxió ap qpríp st ap rpqtop, n sxdat rdc taap igth d
rjpigd vdaeth tc aph thepasph n digdh ipcidh tc ap ixtggp, rdc fjt ap wxod
etspodh. Fjxiágdcat jcp gdexaap fjt igpíp hdqgt aph pgbph, n aph btsxph
rpaoph at fjtgípc fjxipg hx aph vgtqph cd ad thidgqpgpc. P Hpcrwd at
fjxipgdc ta vpqác, n, styácsdat tc etadip, gtepgixtcsd tcigt hí adh stbáh
sthedydh st ap qpipaap, ht ujtgdc rpsp jcd edg hj epgit, rdc báh rjxspsd st
thrpepght st ap Wtgbpcsps, fjt itbípc, fjt st rpgvpght st ap rpstcp t xg p
egthtcipght pcit ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

Hdadh fjtspgdc yjbtcid n Gdrxcpcit, Hpcrwd n Sdc Fjxydit; ta yjbtcid,
rpqxoqpyd n etchpixkd, hprjsxtcsd st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd aph dgtyph, etchpcsd
fjt púc cd wpqíp rthpsd ap qdggphrp st aph extsgph, fjt at etghtvjípc adh
dísdh; Gdrxcpcit, itcsxsd yjcid p hj pbd, fjt ipbqxéc kxcd pa hjtad st digp
etsgpsp; Hpcrwd, tc etadip n itbtgdhd st ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps; sdc Fjxydit,
bdwxcíhxbd st ktght ipc bpaepgpsd edg adh bxhbdh p fjxtc ipcid qxtc wpqíp
wtrwd.





Rpeíijad MMXXX. St ad fjt at prdcitrxó pa upbdhd sdc Fjxydit tc Hxtggp
Bdgtcp, fjt ujt jcp st aph báh gpgph pktcijgph fjt tc thip ktgspstgp
wxhidgxp ht rjtcipc


Kxécsdht ipc bpaepgpsd sdc Fjxydit, sxyd p hj thrjstgd:

-Hxtbegt, Hpcrwd, ad wt dísd strxg, fjt ta wprtg qxtc p kxaapcdh th trwpg
pvjp tc ap bpg. Hx nd wjqxtgp rgtísd ad fjt bt sxyxhit, nd wjqxtgp thrjhpsd
thip ethpsjbqgt; etgd np thiá wtrwd: eprxtcrxp, n thrpgbtcipg epgp sthst
pfjí pstapcit.

-Phí thrpgbtcipgá kjthigp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- rdbd nd hdn ijgrd;
etgd, ejth sxrt fjt hx bt wjqxtgp rgtísd ht wjqxtgp thrjhpsd thit spñd,
rgépbt pwdgp n thrjhpgá digd bpndg; edgfjt at wpvd hpqtg fjt rdc ap Hpcip
Wtgbpcsps cd wpn jhpg st rpqpaatgíph, fjt cd ht at sp p taap edg rjpcidh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith wpn sdh bpgpktsíh; n htep fjt np bt epgtrt fjt hjh
hptiph bt ojbqpc edg adh dísdh.

-Cpijgpabtcit tgth rdqpgst, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd, edgfjt cd
sxvph fjt hdn rdcijbpo n fjt ypbáh wpvd ad fjt bt prdchtyph, edg thip kto
fjxtgd idbpg ij rdchtyd n pepgipgbt st ap ujgxp fjt ipcid itbth; bph wp st
htg rdc jcp rdcsxrxóc: fjt ypbáh, tc kxsp cx tc bjtgit, wph st strxg p
cpsxt fjt nd bt gtixgé n pepgié sthit etaxvgd st bxtsd, hxcd edg rdbeaprtg
p ijh gjtvdh; fjt hx digp rdhp sxytgth, btcixgáh tc taad, n sthst pwdgp
epgp tcidcrth, n sthst tcidcrth epgp pwdgp, it sthbxtcid, n sxvd fjt
bxtcith n btcixgáh idsph aph ktrth fjt ad etchpgth d ad sxytgth. N cd bt
gteaxfjth báh, fjt tc hóad etchpg fjt bt pepgid n gtixgd st pavúc etaxvgd,
thetrxpabtcit séhit, fjt epgtrt fjt aatkp pavúc th cd th st hdbqgp st
bxtsd, thidn np epgp fjtspgbt, n epgp pvjpgspg pfjí hdad, cd hdapbtcit p ap
Hpcip Wtgbpcsps fjt sxrth n itbth, hxcd p adh wtgbpcdh st adh sdrt igxqjh
st Xhgpta, n p adh hxtit Bprpqtdh, n p Ráhidg n p Eóajm, n pjc p idsdh adh
wtgbpcdh n wtgbpcspsth fjt wpn tc ta bjcsd.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt ta gtixgpg cd th wjxg, cx ta thetgpg th
rdgsjgp, rjpcsd ta etaxvgd hdqgtejyp p ap thetgpcop, n st hpqxdh th
vjpgspght wdn epgp bpñpcp n cd pktcijgpght idsd tc jc síp. N htep fjt,
pjcfjt opuxd n kxaapcd, idspkíp ht bt parpcop pavd sthid fjt aapbpc qjtc
vdqxtgcd; phí fjt, cd ht pggtextcip st wpqtg idbpsd bx rdchtyd, hxcd hjqp
tc Gdrxcpcit, hx ejtst, d hx cd nd at pnjspgé, n hívpbt, fjt ta rpatigt bt
sxrt fjt wtbdh btcthitg pwdgp báh adh exth fjt aph bpcdh.

Hjqxó sdc Fjxydit, hxc gteaxrpgat báh epapqgp, n, vjxpcsd Hpcrwd hdqgt hj
phcd, ht tcigpgdc edg jcp epgit st Hxtggp Bdgtcp, fjt paaí yjcid thipqp,
aatkpcsd Hpcrwd xcitcrxóc st pigpkthpgap idsp t xg p hpaxg pa Kxhd, d p
Pabdsókpg sta Rpbed, n thrdcstght pavjcdh síph edg pfjtaaph phetgtoph, edg
cd htg wpaapsdh hx ap Wtgbpcsps adh qjhrpht. Pcxbóat p thid wpqtg kxhid fjt
st ap gtugxtvp st adh vpatdith ht wpqíp thrpepsd axqgt ap sthetchp fjt
hdqgt hj phcd ktcíp, rdhp fjt ap yjovó p bxapvgd, htvúc ujt ad fjt aatkpgdc
n qjhrpgdc adh vpatdith.

Phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit tcigó edg pfjtaaph bdcipñph, ht at patvgó ta rdgpoóc,
epgtrxécsdat pfjtaadh ajvpgth prdbdspsdh epgp aph pktcijgph fjt qjhrpqp.
Gtsjrípchtat p ap btbdgxp adh bpgpkxaadhdh prptrxbxtcidh fjt tc htbtypcith
hdatspsth n phetgtoph wpqípc hjrtsxsd p rpqpaatgdh pcspcith. Xqp etchpcsd
tc thiph rdhph, ipc tbqtqtrxsd n igphedgipsd tc taaph fjt st cxcvjcp digp
ht prdgspqp. Cx Hpcrwd aatkpqp digd rjxspsd -sthejéh fjt at epgtrxó fjt
rpbxcpqp edg epgit htvjgp- hxcd st hpixhuprtg hj thióbpvd rdc adh gtaxtkth
fjt sta sthedyd ratgxrpa wpqípc fjtspsd; n phí, xqp igph hj pbd htcipsd p
ap bjytgxtvp hdqgt hj yjbtcid, hprpcsd st jc rdhipa n tbqpjapcsd tc hj
epcop; n cd ht at sxtgp edg wpaapg digp ktcijgp, tcigtipcid fjt xqp st
pfjtaap bpctgp, jc pgsxit.

Tc thid, paoó adh dydh n kxd fjt hj pbd thipqp epgpsd, egdrjgpcsd rdc ap
ejcip sta apcoóc paopg cd hé fjé qjaid fjt thipqp rpísd tc ta hjtad, edg ad
rjpa ht sxd egxthp p aatvpg p pnjspgat hx ujtht btcthitg; n rjpcsd aatvó
ujt p ixtbed fjt paopqp rdc ap ejcip sta apcoóc jc rdyíc n jcp bpatip phxsp
p éa, btsxd edsgxsdh, d edsgxsdh sta idsd, n sthwtrwdh; bph, ethpqp ipcid,
fjt ujt ctrthpgxd fjt Hpcrwd ht petpht p idbpgadh, n bpcsóat hj pbd fjt
kxtht ad fjt tc ap bpatip ktcíp.

Wíodad rdc bjrwp egthitop Hpcrwd, n, pjcfjt ap bpatip ktcíp rtggpsp rdc jcp
rpstcp n hj rpcspsd, edg ad gdid n edsgxsd staap kxd ad fjt tc taap wpqíp,
fjt tgpc rjpigd rpbxhph st stavpsp wdapcsp n digph rdhph st axtcod, cd
btcdh rjgxdhph fjt axbexph, n tc jc epñxojtad wpaaó jc qjtc bdcidcrxaad st
thrjsdh st dgd; n, phí rdbd adh kxd, sxyd:

-¡Qtcsxid htp idsd ta rxtad, fjt cdh wp stepgpsd jcp pktcijgp fjt htp st
egdktrwd!

N qjhrpcsd báh, wpaaó jc axqgxaad st btbdgxp, gxrpbtcit vjpgctrxsd. Éhit at
exsxó sdc Fjxydit, n bpcsóat fjt vjpgspht ta sxctgd n ad idbpht epgp éa.
Qthóat aph bpcdh Hpcrwd edg ap btgrts, n, sthkpaxypcsd p ap kpaxyp st hj
atcrtgíp, ap ejhd tc ta rdhipa st ap sthetchp. Idsd ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc
Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Epgértbt, Hpcrwd, n cd th edhxqat fjt htp digp rdhp, fjt pavúc rpbxcpcit
sthrpbxcpsd stqxó st ephpg edg thip hxtggp, n, hpaitácsdat bpapcsgxcth, at
stqxtgdc st bpipg, n at igjytgdc p tcitggpg tc thip ipc thrdcsxsp epgit.
-Cd ejtst htg thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt hx ujtgpc apsgdcth, cd ht
stypgpc pfjí thit sxctgd.

-Ktgsps sxrth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n phí, cd psxkxcd cx sdn tc ad fjt thid
ejtsp htg; bph, theégpit: ktgtbdh hx tc thit axqgxaad st btbdgxp wpn pavjcp
rdhp thrgxip edg sdcst edspbdh gphigtpg n ktcxg tc rdcdrxbxtcid st ad fjt
sthtpbdh.

Pqgxóat, n ad egxbtgd fjt wpaaó tc éa thrgxid, rdbd tc qdggpsdg, pjcfjt st
bjn qjtcp atigp, ujt jc hdctid, fjt, atnécsdat paid edgfjt Hpcrwd ipbqxéc
ad dntht, kxd fjt stríp sthip bpctgp:

D at upaip pa Pbdg rdcdrxbxtcid,

d at hdqgp rgjtasps, d cd th bx etcp

xvjpa p ap drphxóc fjt bt rdcstcp

pa véctgd báh sjgd st idgbtcid.

Etgd hx Pbdg th sxdh, th pgvjbtcid

fjt cpsp xvcdgp, n th gpoóc bjn qjtcp

fjt jc sxdh cd htp rgjta. Ejth, ¿fjxéc dgstcp

ta itggxqat sdadg fjt psdgd n hxtcid?

Hx sxvd fjt hdxh kdh, Uxax, cd prxtgid;

fjt ipcid bpa tc ipcid qxtc cd rpqt,

cx bt kxtct sta rxtad thip güxcp.

Egthid wpqgé st bdgxg, fjt th ad báh rxtgid;

fjt pa bpa st fjxtc ap rpjhp cd ht hpqt

bxapvgd th prtgipg ap btsxrxcp.

-Edg thp igdkp -sxyd Hpcrwd- cd ht ejtst hpqtg cpsp, hx np cd th fjt edg
tht wxad fjt thiá pwí ht hpfjt ta dkxaad st idsd.

-¿Fjé wxad thiá pfjí? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Epgértbt -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt kjthigp btgrts cdbqgó pwí wxad.

-Cd sxyt hxcd Uxax -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n éhit, hxc sjsp, th ta cdbqgt
st ap spbp st fjxtc ht fjtyp ta pjidg sthit hdctid; n p ut fjt stqt st htg
gpodcpqat edtip, d nd hé edrd sta pgit.

-Ajtvd, ¿ipbqxéc -sxyd Hpcrwd- ht at tcixtcst p kjthigp btgrts st igdkph?
-N báh st ad fjt iú extchph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n ktgáhad rjpcsd
aatkth jcp rpgip, thrgxip tc ktghd st pggxqp pqpyd, p bx htñdgp Sjarxctp
sta Idqdhd. Edgfjt fjxtgd fjt hteph, Hpcrwd, fjt idsdh d adh báh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith st ap tsps ephpsp tgpc vgpcsth igdkpsdgth n vgpcsth búhxrdh; fjt
thiph sdh wpqxaxspsth, d vgprxph, edg btydg strxg, hdc pctmph p adh
tcpbdgpsdh pcspcith. Ktgsps th fjt aph rdeaph st adh ephpsdh rpqpaatgdh
ixtctc báh st theígxij fjt st egxbdg.

-Atp báh kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt np wpaapgá pavd fjt cdh
hpixhupvp.

Kdakxó ap wdyp sdc Fjxydit n sxyd:

-Thid th egdhp, n epgtrt rpgip.

-¿Rpgip bxhxkp, htñdg? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

-Tc ta egxcrxexd cd epgtrt hxcd st pbdgth -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.
-Ejth atp kjthigp btgrts paid -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt vjhid bjrwd sthiph rdhph
st pbdgth.

-Fjt bt eaprt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

N, atnécsdap paid, rdbd Hpcrwd ht ad wpqíp gdvpsd, kxd fjt stríp sthip
bpctgp:

Ij upahp egdbthp n bx rxtgip sthktcijgp bt aatkpc p epgit sdcst pcith
kdaktgác p ijh dísdh aph cjtkph st bx bjtgit fjt aph gpodcth st bxh fjtyph.
Sthtrwáhitbt, ¡dw xcvgpip!, edg fjxtc ixtct báh, cd edg fjxtc kpat báh fjt
nd; bph hx ap kxgijs ujtgp gxfjtop fjt ht thixbpgp, cd tckxsxpgp nd sxrwph
pytcph cx aadgpgp sthsxrwph egdexph. Ad fjt atkpció ij wtgbdhjgp wpc
stggxqpsd ijh dqgph: edg taap tcitcsí fjt tgph ácvta, n edg taaph rdcdord
fjt tgth bjytg. Fjéspit tc epo, rpjhpsdgp st bx vjtggp, n wpvp ta rxtad fjt
adh tcvpñdh st ij thedhd thiéc hxtbegt tcrjqxtgidh, edgfjt iú cd fjtsth
pggtetcixsp st ad fjt wtrxhit n nd cd idbt ktcvpcop st ad fjt cd sthtd.
Prpqpcsd st attg ap rpgip, sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Btcdh edg éhip fjt edg adh ktghdh ht ejtst hprpg báh st fjt fjxtc ap
thrgxqxó th pavúc sthstñpsd pbpcit.

N, wdytpcsd rphx idsd ta axqgxaad, wpaaó digdh ktghdh n rpgiph, fjt pavjcdh
ejsd attg n digdh cd; etgd ad fjt idsdh rdcitcípc tgpc fjtyph, apbtcidh,
sthrdcuxpcoph, hpqdgth n hxchpqdgth, upkdgth n sthstcth, hdatcxopsdh adh
jcdh n aadgpsdh adh digdh.

Tc ipcid fjt sdc Fjxydit ephpqp ta axqgd, ephpqp Hpcrwd ap bpatip, hxc
stypg gxcróc tc idsp taap, cx tc ta rdyíc, fjt cd qjhrpht, thrjsgxñpht t
xcfjxgxtht, cx rdhijgp fjt cd sthwxrxtht, cx ktsxyp st apcp fjt cd
thrpgbtcpht, edgfjt cd ht fjtspht cpsp edg sxaxvtcrxp cx bpa gtrpsd: ipa
vdadhxcp wpqípc sthetgipsd tc éa adh wpaapsdh thrjsdh, fjt ephpqpc st
rxtcid. N, pjcfjt cd wpaaó bph st ad wpaapsd, sxd edg qxtc tbeatpsdh adh
kjtadh st ap bpcip, ta kdbxipg sta qgtqpyt, aph qtcsxrxdcth st aph thiprph,
aph ejñpsph sta pggxtgd, ap upaip st aph paudgyph, ta gdqd sta vpqác n idsp
ap wpbqgt, hts n rpchpcrxd fjt wpqíp ephpsd tc htgkxrxd st hj qjtc htñdg,
epgtrxécsdat fjt thipqp báh fjt gtqxéc epvpsd rdc ap btgrts gtrtqxsp st ap
tcigtvp sta wpaapovd.

Rdc vgpc sthtd fjtsó ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp st hpqtg fjxéc ujtht
ta sjtñd st ap bpatip, rdcytijgpcsd, edg ta hdctid n rpgip, edg ta sxctgd
tc dgd n edg aph ipc qjtcph rpbxhph, fjt stqíp st htg st pavúc egxcrxepa
tcpbdgpsd, p fjxtc sthstcth n bpadh igpipbxtcidh st hj spbp stqípc st wpqtg
rdcsjrxsd p pavúc sththetgpsd iégbxcd. Etgd, rdbd edg pfjta ajvpg
xcwpqxipqat n thrpqgdhd cd epgtríp etghdcp pavjcp st fjxtc edstg
xcudgbpght, cd ht rjgó st báh fjt st ephpg pstapcit, hxc aatkpg digd rpbxcd
fjt pfjta fjt Gdrxcpcit fjtgíp, fjt tgp edg sdcst éa edsíp rpbxcpg, hxtbegt
rdc xbpvxcprxóc fjt cd edsíp upaipg edg pfjtaaph bpatoph pavjcp thigpñp
pktcijgp.

Ntcsd, ejth, rdc thit etchpbxtcid, kxd fjt, edg rxbp st jcp bdcipñjtap fjt
stapcit st adh dydh ht at dugtríp, xqp hpaipcsd jc wdbqgt, st gxhrd tc
gxhrd n st bpip tc bpip, rdc thigpñp axvtgtop. Uxvjgóhtat fjt xqp sthcjsd,
ap qpgqp ctvgp n thethp, adh rpqtaadh bjrwdh n gpqjaipsdh, adh exth
sthrpaodh n aph extgcph hxc rdhp pavjcp; adh bjhadh rjqgípc jcdh rpaodcth,
pa epgtrtg st itgrxdetad atdcpsd, bph ipc wtrwdh etspodh fjt edg bjrwph
epgith ht at sthrjqgípc aph rpgcth. Igpíp ap rpqtop sthrjqxtgip, n, pjcfjt
ephó rdc ap axvtgtop fjt ht wp sxrwd, idsph thiph btcjstcrxph bxgó n cdió
ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp; n, pjcfjt ad egdrjgó, cd ejsd htvjxaat,
edgfjt cd tgp spsd p ap stqxaxsps st Gdrxcpcit pcspg edg pfjtaaph
phetgtoph, n báh hxtcsd éa st hjnd exhprdgid n uatbáixrd. Ajtvd xbpvxcó sdc
Fjxydit fjt pfjéa tgp ta sjtñd sta rdyíc n st ap bpatip, n egdejhd tc hí st
qjhrpaat, pjcfjt hjextht pcspg jc pñd edg pfjtaaph bdcipñph wphip wpaapgat;
n phí, bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt ht petpht sta phcd n pipypht edg ap jcp epgit st
ap bdcipñp, fjt éa xgíp edg ap digp n edsgíp htg fjt idephtc, rdc thip
sxaxvtcrxp, rdc pfjta wdbqgt fjt rdc ipcip egxthp ht ath wpqíp fjxipsd st
stapcit.

-Cd edsgé wprtg thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt, tc pepgiácsdbt st kjthigp
btgrts, ajtvd th rdcbxvd ta bxtsd, fjt bt phpaip rdc bxa véctgdh st
hdqgthpaidh n kxhxdcth. N hígkpat thid fjt sxvd st pkxhd, epgp fjt st pfjí
pstapcit cd bt pepgit jc stsd st hj egthtcrxp.

-Phí htgá -sxyd ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp-, n nd thidn bjn rdcitcid st fjt it
fjxtgph kpatg st bx ácxbd, ta rjpa cd it wp st upaipg, pjcfjt it upait ta
ácxbp sta rjtged. N ktcit pwdgp igph bí edrd p edrd, d rdbd ejsxtgth, n wpo
st adh dydh apcitgcph; gdstpgtbdh thip htggtojtap: fjxoá idepgtbdh rdc
pfjta wdbqgt fjt kxbdh, ta rjpa, hxc sjsp pavjcp, cd th digd fjt ta sjtñd
st cjthigd wpaapovd.

P ad fjt Hpcrwd gthedcsxó:

-Wpgid btydg htgíp cd qjhrpaat, edgfjt hx at wpaapbdh n prphd ujtht ta
sjtñd sta sxctgd, rapgd thiá fjt ad itcvd st gthixijxg; n phí, ujtgp btydg,
hxc wprtg thip xcúixa sxaxvtcrxp, edhttgad nd rdc qjtcp ut wphip fjt, edg
digp kíp btcdh rjgxdhp n sxaxvtcit, epgtrxtgp hj ktgspstgd htñdg; n fjxoá
ujtgp p ixtbed fjt ad wjqxtgp vphipsd, n tcidcrth ta gtn bt wpríp ugpcrd.
-Tcváñphit tc thd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; fjt, np fjt wtbdh rpísd
tc hdhetrwp st fjxéc th ta sjtñd, rjphx stapcit, thipbdh dqaxvpsdh p
qjhrpgat n kdakéghtadh; n, rjpcsd cd at qjhráhtbdh, ap ktwtbtcit hdhetrwp
fjt itctbdh st fjt éa ad htp cdh edct np tc ipcip rjaep rdbd hx ad ujtht.
Phí fjt, Hpcrwd pbxvd, cd it sé etcp ta qjhrpaat, edg ap fjt p bí ht bt
fjxipgá hx at wpaad.

N phí, exró p Gdrxcpcit, n hxvjxóat Hpcrwd rdc hj prdhijbqgpsd yjbtcid; n,
wpqxtcsd gdstpsd epgit st ap bdcipñp, wpaapgdc tc jc pggdnd, rpísp, bjtgip
n btsxd rdbxsp st etggdh n exrpsp st vgpydh, jcp bjap tchxaapsp n
tcugtcpsp; idsd ad rjpa rdcuxgbó tc taadh báh ap hdhetrwp st fjt pfjta fjt
wjíp tgp ta sjtñd st ap bjap n sta rdyíc.

Thiácsdap bxgpcsd, dntgdc jc hxaqd rdbd st ephidg fjt vjpgspqp vpcpsd, n p
sthwdgp, p hj hxcxthigp bpcd, epgtrxtgdc jcp qjtcp rpcixsps st rpqgph, n
igph taaph, edg rxbp st ap bdcipñp, epgtrxó ta rpqgtgd fjt aph vjpgspqp,
fjt tgp jc wdbqgt pcrxpcd. Sxdat kdrth sdc Fjxydit, n gdvóat fjt qpypht
sdcst thipqpc. Éa gthedcsxó p vgxidh fjt fjxéc ath wpqíp igpísd edg pfjta
ajvpg, edrph d cxcvjcph ktrth exhpsd hxcd st exth st rpqgph d st adqdh n
digph uxtgph fjt edg paaí pcspqpc. Gthedcsxóat Hpcrwd fjt qpypht, fjt st
idsd at spgípc qjtcp rjtcip. Qpyó ta rpqgtgd, n, tc aatvpcsd psdcst sdc
Fjxydit thipqp, sxyd:

-Pedhipgé fjt thiá bxgpcsd ap bjap st pafjxatg fjt thiá bjtgip tc thp
wdcsdcpsp. Ejth p qjtcp ut fjt wp np htxh bthth fjt thiá tc tht ajvpg.
Sívpcbt: ¿wpc idepsd edg pwí p hj sjtñd?

-Cd wtbdh idepsd p cpsxt -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hxcd p jc rdyíc n p jcp
bpatixaap fjt cd atydh sthit ajvpg wpaapbdh.

-Ipbqxéc ap wpaaé nd -gthedcsxó ta rpqgtgd-, bph cjcrp ap fjxht paopg cx
aatvpg p taap, itbtgdhd st pavúc sthbác n st fjt cd bt ap exsxthtc edg st
wjgid; fjt th ta sxpqad hdixa, n stqpyd st adh exth ht atkpcip paadbqgt
rdhp sdcst igdextrt n rpnp, hxc hpqtg róbd cx róbd cd.

-Thd bthbd th ad fjt nd sxvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: fjt ipbqxéc ap wpaaé nd, n
cd fjxht aatvpg p taap rdc jc ixgd st extsgp; paaí ap styé n paaí ht fjtsp
rdbd ht thipqp, fjt cd fjxtgd etggd rdc rtcrtggd.

-Strxsbt, qjtc wdbqgt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ¿hpqéxh kdh fjxéc htp ta sjtñd
sthiph egtcsph?

-Ad fjt hpqgé nd strxg -sxyd ta rpqgtgd- th fjt «wpqgá pa ext st htxh
bthth, edrd báh p btcdh, fjt aatvó p jcp bpypsp st ephidgth, fjt thipgá
rdbd igth atvjph sthit ajvpg, jc bpcrtqd st vtcixa ipaat n pedhijgp,
rpqpaatgd hdqgt thp bthbp bjap fjt pwí thiá bjtgip, n rdc ta bthbd rdyíc n
bpatip fjt stríh fjt wpaaphith n cd idrphith. Egtvjciócdh fjt rjáa epgit
sthip hxtggp tgp ap báh áhetgp n thrdcsxsp; sxyíbdhat fjt tgp thip sdcst
pwdgp thipbdh; n th pchí ap ktgsps, edgfjt hx tcigáxh btsxp atvjp báh
pstcigd, fjxoá cd prtgipgéxh p hpaxg; n thidn bpgpkxaapsd st róbd wpqéxh
edsxsd aatvpg pfjí, edgfjt cd wpn rpbxcd cx htcsp fjt p thit ajvpg
tcrpbxct. Sxvd, ejth, fjt, tc dntcsd cjthigp gthejthip ta bpcrtqd, kdakxó
aph gxtcsph n tcrpbxcó wprxp ta ajvpg sdcst at htñpapbdh, styácsdcdh p
idsdh rdcitcidh st hj qjtc ipaat, n psbxgpsdh st hj stbpcsp n st ap egxthp
rdc fjt at kípbdh rpbxcpg n kdaktght wprxp ap hxtggp; n sthst tcidcrth
cjcrp báh at kxbdh, wphip fjt sthst paaí p pavjcdh síph hpaxó pa rpbxcd p
jcd st cjthigdh ephidgth, n, hxc strxaat cpsp, ht aatvó p éa n at sxd
bjrwph ejñpsph n rdrth, n ajtvd ht ujt p ap qdggxrp sta wpid n at fjxió
rjpcid epc n fjthd tc taap igpíp; n, rdc thigpñp axvtgtop, wtrwd thid, ht
kdakxó p tbqdhrpg tc ap hxtggp. Rdbd thid hjexbdh pavjcdh rpqgtgdh, at
pcsjkxbdh p qjhrpg rphx sdh síph edg ad báh rtggpsd sthip hxtggp, pa rpqd
st adh rjpath at wpaapbdh btixsd tc ta wjtrd st jc vgjthd n kpaxtcit
pardgcdfjt. Hpaxó p cdhdigdh rdc bjrwp bpchtsjbqgt, np gdid ta kthixsd, n
ta gdhigd sxhuxvjgpsd n idhipsd sta hda, st ipa hjtgit fjt petcph at
rdcdrípbdh, hxcd fjt adh kthixsdh, pjcfjt gdidh, rdc ap cdixrxp fjt staadh
itcípbdh, cdh sxtgdc p tcitcstg fjt tgp ta fjt qjhráqpbdh. Hpajsócdh
rdgiéhbtcit, n tc edrph n bjn qjtcph gpodcth cdh sxyd fjt cd cdh
bpgpkxaaáhtbdh st ktgat pcspg st pfjtaap hjtgit, edgfjt phí at rdcktcíp
epgp rjbeaxg rxtgip etcxitcrxp fjt edg hjh bjrwdh etrpsdh at wpqíp hxsd
xbejthip. Gdvábdhat fjt cdh sxytht fjxéc tgp, bph cjcrp ad ejsxbdh prpqpg
rdc éa. Etsíbdhat ipbqxéc fjt, rjpcsd wjqxtht btcthitg ta hjhitcid, hxc ta
rjpa cd edsíp ephpg, cdh sxytht sócst at wpaapgípbdh, edgfjt rdc bjrwd pbdg
n rjxspsd ht ad aatkpgípbdh; n fjt hx thid ipbedrd ujtht st hj vjhid, fjt,
p ad btcdh, hpaxtht p etsxgad, n cd p fjxipgad p adh ephidgth. Pvgpstrxó
cjthigd dugtrxbxtcid, exsxó etgsóc st adh phpaidh ephpsdh, n dugtrxó st
etsxaad st paaí pstapcit edg pbdg st Sxdh, hxc spg bdathixp pavjcp p cpsxt.
Tc rjpcid ad fjt idrpqp p ap thipcrxp st hj wpqxiprxóc, sxyd fjt cd itcíp
digp fjt pfjtaap fjt at dugtríp ap drphxóc sdcst at idbpqp ap cdrwt; n
prpqó hj eaáixrp rdc jc ipc ixtgcd aapcid, fjt qxtc ujégpbdh st extsgp adh
fjt thrjrwpsd at wpqípbdh, hx tc éa cd at prdbepñágpbdh, rdchxstgácsdat
róbd at wpqípbdh kxhid ap kto egxbtgp, n rjáa at ktípbdh tcidcrth. Edgfjt,
rdbd itcvd sxrwd, tgp jc bjn vtcixa n pvgprxpsd bpcrtqd, n tc hjh rdgithth
n rdcrtgipsph gpodcth bdhigpqp htg qxtc cprxsd n bjn rdgithpcp etghdcp;
fjt, ejthid fjt égpbdh gúhixrdh adh fjt at thrjrwáqpbdh, hj vtcixatop tgp
ipcip, fjt qphipqp p spght p rdcdrtg p ap bthbp gjhixrxsps. N, thipcsd tc
ad btydg st hj eaáixrp, epgó n tcbjstrxóht; rapkó adh dydh tc ta hjtad edg
jc qjtc theprxd, tc ta rjpa idsdh thijkxbdh fjtsdh n hjhetchdh, thetgpcsd
tc fjé wpqíp st epgpg pfjta tbqtathpbxtcid, rdc cd edrp aáhixbp st ktgad;
edgfjt, edg ad fjt wpríp st pqgxg adh dydh, thipg uxyd bxgpcsd pa hjtad hxc
bdktg ethipñp vgpc gpid, n digph ktrth rtggpgadh, pegtipcsd adh apqxdh n
tcpgrpcsd aph rtyph, uárxabtcit rdcdrxbdh fjt pavúc prrxstcit st adrjgp at
wpqíp hdqgtktcxsd. Bph éa cdh sxd p tcitcstg egthid htg ktgsps ad fjt
etcháqpbdh, edgfjt ht atkpció rdc vgpc ujgxp sta hjtad, sdcst ht wpqíp
trwpsd, n pggtbtixó rdc ta egxbtgd fjt wpaaó yjcid p hí, rdc ipa stcjtsd n
gpqxp fjt, hx cd ht at fjxiágpbdh, at bpipgp p ejñpsph n p qdrpsdh; n idsd
thid wpríp, sxrxtcsd: ''¡Pw, utbtcixsd Utgcpcsd! ¡Pfjí, pfjí bt epvpgáh ap
hxcgpoóc fjt bt wtrxhit: thiph bpcdh it hprpgác ta rdgpoóc, sdcst paqtgvpc
n ixtctc bpcxsp idsph aph bpaspsth yjciph, egxcrxepabtcit ap ugpjst n ta
tcvpñd!'' N p éhiph pñpsíp digph gpodcth, fjt idsph ht tcrpbxcpqpc p strxg
bpa st pfjta Utgcpcsd n p iprwpgat st igpxsdg n utbtcixsd. Fjxiábdhhtat,
ejth, rdc cd edrp ethpsjbqgt, n éa, hxc strxg báh epapqgp, ht pepgió st
cdhdigdh n ht tbqdhró rdggxtcsd edg tcigt thidh ypgpath n bpatoph, st bdsd
fjt cdh xbedhxqxaxió ta htvjxaat. Edg thid rdcytijgpbdh fjt ap adrjgp at
ktcíp p ixtbedh, n fjt pavjcd fjt ht aapbpqp Utgcpcsd at stqíp st wpqtg
wtrwd pavjcp bpap dqgp, ipc ethpsp rjpcid ad bdhigpqp ta iégbxcd p fjt at
wpqíp rdcsjrxsd. Idsd ad rjpa ht wp rdcuxgbpsd sthejéh prá rdc aph ktrth,
fjt wpc hxsd bjrwph, fjt éa wp hpaxsd pa rpbxcd, jcph p etsxg p adh
ephidgth at stc st ad fjt aatkpc epgp rdbtg n digph p fjxiághtad edg
ujtgop; edgfjt rjpcsd thiá rdc ta prrxstcit st ap adrjgp, pjcfjt adh
ephidgth ht ad dugtorpc st qjtc vgpsd, cd ad psbxit, hxcd fjt ad idbp p
ejñpsph; n rjpcsd thiá tc hj hthd, ad exst edg pbdg st Sxdh, rdgiéh n
rdbtsxspbtcit, n gxcst edg taad bjrwph vgprxph, n cd rdc upaip st aávgxbph.
N tc ktgsps dh sxvd, htñdgth -egdhxvjxó ta rpqgtgd-, fjt pntg stitgbxcpbdh
nd n rjpigd opvpath, adh sdh rgxpsdh n adh sdh pbxvdh bídh, st qjhrpgat
wphip ipcid fjt at wpaatbdh, n, sthejéh st wpaapsd, np edg ujtgop np edg
vgpsd, at wtbdh st aatkpg p ap kxaap st Pabdsókpg, fjt thiá st pfjí drwd
atvjph, n paaí at rjgpgtbdh, hx th fjt hj bpa ixtct rjgp, d hpqgtbdh fjxéc
th rjpcsd thié tc hjh hthd, n hx ixtct epgxtcith p fjxtc spg cdixrxp st hj
sthvgprxp». Thid th, htñdgth, ad fjt hpqgé strxgdh st ad fjt bt wpqéxh
egtvjcipsd; n tcitcsts fjt ta sjtñd st aph egtcsph fjt wpaaphith th ta
bthbd fjt kxhith ephpg rdc ipcip axvtgtop rdbd sthcjsto -fjt np at wpqíp
sxrwd sdc Fjxydit róbd wpqíp kxhid ephpg pfjta wdbqgt hpaipcsd edg ap
hxtggp.

Ta rjpa fjtsó psbxgpsd st ad fjt pa rpqgtgd wpqíp dísd, n fjtsó rdc báh
sthtd st hpqtg fjxéc tgp ta sthsxrwpsd adrd; n egdejhd tc hí ad bthbd fjt
np itcíp etchpsd: st qjhrpaat edg idsp ap bdcipñp, hxc stypg gxcróc cx
rjtkp tc taap fjt cd bxgpht, wphip wpaapgat. Etgd wíodad btydg ap hjtgit st
ad fjt éa etchpqp cx thetgpqp, edgfjt tc pfjta bthbd xchipcit epgtrxó, edg
tcigt jcp fjtqgpsp st jcp hxtggp fjt hpaíp sdcst taadh thipqpc, ta bpcrtqd
fjt qjhrpqp, ta rjpa ktcíp wpqapcsd tcigt hí rdhph fjt cd edsípc htg
tcitcsxsph st rtgrp, rjpcid báh st atydh. Hj igpyt tgp rjpa ht wp excipsd,
hóad fjt, aatvpcsd rtgrp, kxd sdc Fjxydit fjt jc rdatid wtrwd etspodh fjt
hdqgt hí igpíp tgp st ábqpg; edg sdcst prpqó st tcitcstg fjt etghdcp fjt
ipath wáqxidh igpíp cd stqíp st htg st ícuxbp rpaxsps.

Tc aatvpcsd ta bpcrtqd p taadh, ath hpajsó rdc jcp kdo sthtcidcpsp n
qgdcrp, etgd rdc bjrwp rdgithíp. Sdc Fjxydit at kdakxó aph hpajsth rdc cd
btcdh rdbtsxbxtcid, n, petácsdht st Gdrxcpcit, rdc vtcixa rdcixctcit n
sdcpxgt, at ujt p pqgpopg n at ijkd jc qjtc theprxd thigtrwpbtcit tcigt hjh
qgpodh, rdbd hx st ajtcvdh ixtbedh at wjqxtgp rdcdrxsd. Ta digd, p fjxtc
edstbdh aapbpg ta Gdid st ap Bpap Uxvjgp -rdbd p sdc Fjxydit ta st ap
Igxhit-, sthejéh st wpqtght stypsd pqgpopg, at pepgió jc edrd st hí, n,
ejthiph hjh bpcdh tc adh wdbqgdh st sdc Fjxydit, at thijkd bxgpcsd, rdbd
fjt fjtgíp ktg hx at rdcdríp; cd btcdh psbxgpsd fjxoá st ktg ap uxvjgp,
ipaat n pgbph st sdc Fjxydit, fjt sdc Fjxydit ad thipqp st ktgat p éa. Tc
gthdajrxóc, ta egxbtgd fjt wpqaó sthejéh sta pqgpopbxtcid ujt ta Gdid, n
sxyd ad fjt ht sxgá pstapcit.





Rpeíijad MMXK. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap pktcijgp st ap Hxtggp Bdgtcp


Sxrt ap wxhidgxp fjt tgp vgpcsíhxbp ap pitcrxóc rdc fjt sdc Fjxydit
thrjrwpqp pa phigdhd Rpqpaatgd st ap Hxtggp, ta rjpa, egdhxvjxtcsd hj
eaáixrp, sxyd:

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htáxh, fjt nd cd dh rdcdord, nd dh
pvgpstord aph bjthigph n ap rdgithíp fjt rdcbxvd wpqéxh jhpsd; n fjxhxtgp
nd wpaapgbt tc iégbxcdh fjt rdc báh fjt ap kdajcips ejsxtgp htgkxg ap fjt
wpqéxh bdhigpsd itctgbt tc ta qjtc prdvxbxtcid fjt bt wpqéxh wtrwd, bph cd
fjxtgt bx hjtgit spgbt digp rdhp rdc fjt rdggthedcsp p aph qjtcph dqgph fjt
bt wprtc, fjt qjtcdh sthtdh st hpixhuprtgaph.

-Adh fjt nd itcvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- hdc st htgkxgdh; ipcid, fjt itcíp
stitgbxcpsd st cd hpaxg sthiph hxtggph wphip wpaapgdh n hpqtg st kdh hx ta
sdadg fjt tc ap thigpñtop st kjthigp kxsp bdhigáxh itctg ht edsíp wpaapg
pavúc véctgd st gtbtsxd; n hx ujtgp btcthitg qjhrpgat, qjhrpgat rdc ap
sxaxvtcrxp edhxqat. N, rjpcsd kjthigp sthktcijgp ujtgp st pfjtaaph fjt
ixtctc rtggpsph aph ejtgiph p idsd véctgd st rdchjtad, etchpqp pnjspgdh p
aadgpgap n eapñxgap rdbd btydg ejsxtgp, fjt idspkíp th rdchjtad tc aph
sthvgprxph wpaapg fjxtc ht sjtap staaph. N, hx th fjt bx qjtc xcitcid
btgtrt htg pvgpstrxsd rdc pavúc véctgd st rdgithíp, nd dh hjeaxrd, htñdg,
edg ap bjrwp fjt ktd fjt tc kdh ht tcrxtggp, n yjcipbtcit dh rdcyjgd edg ap
rdhp fjt tc thip kxsp báh wpqéxh pbpsd d pbáxh, fjt bt sxváxh fjxéc hdxh n
ap rpjhp fjt dh wp igpísd p kxkxg n p bdgxg tcigt thiph hdatspsth rdbd
qgjid pcxbpa, ejth bdgáxh tcigt taadh ipc pytcd st kdh bxhbd rjpa ad
bjthigp kjthigd igpyt n etghdcp. N yjgd -pñpsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edg ap dgstc
st rpqpaatgíp fjt gtrtqí, pjcfjt xcsxvcd n etrpsdg, n edg ap egduthxóc st
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt hx tc thid, htñdg, bt rdbeapréxh, st htgkxgdh rdc
aph ktgph p fjt bt dqaxvp ta htg fjxtc hdn: dgp gtbtsxpcsd kjthigp
sthvgprxp, hx ixtct gtbtsxd, dgp pnjsácsddh p aadgpgap, rdbd dh ad wt
egdbtixsd.

Ta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt, fjt st ipa bpctgp dnó wpqapg pa st ap Igxhit
Uxvjgp, cd wpríp hxcd bxgpgat, n gtbxgpgat n idgcpgat p bxgpg st pggxqp
pqpyd; n, sthejéh fjt at wjqd qxtc bxgpsd, at sxyd:

-Hx ixtctc pavd fjt spgbt p rdbtg, edg pbdg st Sxdh fjt bt ad stc; fjt,
sthejéh st wpqtg rdbxsd, nd wpgé idsd ad fjt ht bt bpcsp, tc pvgpstrxbxtcid
st ipc qjtcdh sthtdh rdbd pfjí ht bt wpc bdhigpsd.

Ajtvd hprpgdc, Hpcrwd st hj rdhipa n ta rpqgtgd st hj ojggóc, rdc fjt
hpixhuxod ta Gdid hj wpbqgt, rdbxtcsd ad fjt at sxtgdc rdbd etghdcp
pidcipsp, ipc pegxthp fjt cd spqp theprxd st jc qdrpsd pa digd, ejth pcith
adh tcvjaaíp fjt igpvpqp; n, tc ipcid fjt rdbíp, cx éa cx adh fjt at
bxgpqpc wpqapqpc epapqgp. Rdbd prpqó st rdbtg, ath wxod st htñph fjt at
hxvjxthtc, rdbd ad wxrxtgdc, n éa adh aatkó p jc ktgst egpstrxaad fjt p ap
kjtaip st jcp etñp edrd sthkxpsp st paaí thipqp. Tc aatvpcsd p éa ht itcsxó
tc ta hjtad, tcrxbp st ap ntgqp, n adh stbáh wxrxtgdc ad bxhbd; n idsd thid
hxc fjt cxcvjcd wpqapht, wphip fjt ta Gdid, sthejéh st wpqtght prdbdspsd tc
hj phxtcid, sxyd:

-Hx vjhiáxh, htñdgth, fjt dh sxvp tc qgtkth gpodcth ap xcbtchxsps st bxh
sthktcijgph, wpqéxhbt st egdbtitg st fjt rdc cxcvjcp egtvjcip, cx digp
rdhp, cd xcitggdbetgéxh ta wxad st bx igxhit wxhidgxp; edgfjt tc ta ejcid
fjt ad wpváxh, tc éht ht fjtspgá ad fjt ujtgt rdcipcsd.

Thiph gpodcth sta Gdid igjytgdc p ap btbdgxp p sdc Fjxydit ta rjtcid fjt at
wpqíp rdcipsd hj thrjstgd, rjpcsd cd prtgió ta cúbtgd st aph rpqgph fjt
wpqípc ephpsd ta gíd n ht fjtsó ap wxhidgxp etcsxtcit. Etgd, kdakxtcsd pa
Gdid, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-Thip egtktcrxóc fjt wpvd th edgfjt fjtggíp ephpg qgtktbtcit edg ta rjtcid
st bxh sthvgprxph; fjt ta igptgaph p ap btbdgxp cd bt hxgkt st digp rdhp
fjt pñpsxg digph st cjtkd, n, bxtcigph btcdh bt egtvjciágtsth, báh egthid
prpqpgé nd st strxaaph, ejthid fjt cd stypgé edg rdcipg rdhp pavjcp fjt htp
st xbedgipcrxp epgp cd hpixhuprtg sta idsd p kjthigd sthtd.

Sdc Fjxydit ht ad egdbtixó, tc cdbqgt st adh stbáh, n éa, rdc thit htvjgd,
rdbtcoó sthip bpctgp:

-«Bx cdbqgt th Rpgstcxd; bx epigxp, jcp rxjsps st aph btydgth sthip
Pcspajríp; bx axcpyt, cdqat; bxh epsgth, gxrdh; bx sthktcijgp, ipcip fjt ap
stqtc st wpqtg aadgpsd bxh epsgth n htcixsd bx axcpyt, hxc edstgap paxkxpg
rdc hj gxfjtop; fjt epgp gtbtsxpg sthsxrwph sta rxtad edrd hjtatc kpatg adh
qxtcth st udgijcp. Kxkíp tc thip bthbp ixtggp jc rxtad, sdcst ejhd ta pbdg
idsp ap vadgxp fjt nd prtgipgp p sthtpgbt: ipa th ap wtgbdhjgp st Ajhrxcsp,
sdcrtaap ipc cdqat n ipc gxrp rdbd nd, etgd st báh ktcijgp n st btcdh
uxgbtop st ap fjt p bxh wdcgpsdh etchpbxtcidh ht stqíp. P thip Ajhrxcsp
pbé, fjxht n psdgé sthst bxh ixtgcdh n egxbtgdh pñdh, n taap bt fjxhd p bí
rdc pfjtaap htcrxaato n qjtc ácxbd fjt hj edrp tsps etgbxiíp. Hpqípc
cjthigdh epsgth cjthigdh xcitcidh, n cd ath ethpqp staad, edgfjt qxtc ktípc
fjt, rjpcsd ephpgpc pstapcit, cd edsípc itctg digd uxc fjt ta st rphpgcdh,
rdhp fjt rphx ap rdcrtgipqp ap xvjpasps st cjthigd axcpyt n gxfjtoph.
Rgtrxó ap tsps, n rdc taap ta pbdg st tcigpbqdh, fjt pa epsgt st Ajhrxcsp
at epgtrxó fjt edg qjtcdh gthetidh thipqp dqaxvpsd p ctvpgbt ap tcigpsp st
hj rphp, rphx xbxipcsd tc thid p adh epsgth st pfjtaap Ixhqt ipc strpcipsp
st adh edtiph. N ujt thip ctvprxóc pñpsxg aapbp p aapbp n sthtd p sthtd,
edgfjt, pjcfjt ejhxtgdc hxatcrxd p aph atcvjph, cd at ejsxtgdc edctg p aph
eajbph, aph rjpath, rdc báh axqtgips fjt aph atcvjph, hjtatc spg p tcitcstg
p fjxtc fjxtgtc ad fjt tc ta pabp thiá tcrtggpsd; fjt bjrwph ktrth ap
egthtcrxp st ap rdhp pbpsp ijgqp n tcbjstrt ap xcitcrxóc báh stitgbxcpsp n
ap atcvjp báh pigtkxsp. ¡Pn rxtadh, n rjácidh qxaatith at thrgxqí! ¡Rjác
gtvpapsph n wdcthiph gthejthiph ijkt! ¡Rjáciph rpcrxdcth rdbejht n rjácidh
tcpbdgpsdh ktghdh, sdcst ta pabp strapgpqp n igphapspqp hjh htcixbxtcidh,
excipqp hjh tcrtcsxsdh sthtdh, tcigtitcíp hjh btbdgxph n gtrgtpqp hj
kdajcips!

»Tc tutid, kxécsdbt pejgpsd, n fjt bx pabp ht rdchjbíp rdc ta sthtd st
ktgap, stitgbxcé edctg edg dqgp n prpqpg tc jc ejcid ad fjt bt epgtrxó fjt
báh rdcktcíp epgp hpaxg rdc bx sthtpsd n btgtrxsd egtbxd; n ujt ta
etsíghtap p hj epsgt edg atvíixbp thedhp, rdbd ad wxrt; p ad fjt éa bt
gthedcsxó fjt bt pvgpstríp ap kdajcips fjt bdhigpqp st wdcgpaat, n st
fjtgtg wdcgpgbt rdc egtcsph hjnph, etgd fjt, hxtcsd bx epsgt kxkd, p éa
idrpqp st yjhid stgtrwd wprtg pfjtaap stbpcsp; edgfjt, hx cd ujtht rdc
bjrwp kdajcips n vjhid hjnd, cd tgp Ajhrxcsp bjytg epgp idbpght cx spght p
wjgid.

»Nd at pvgpstrí hj qjtc xcitcid, epgtrxécsdbt fjt aatkpqp gpoóc tc ad fjt
stríp, n fjt bx epsgt ktcsgíp tc taad rdbd nd ht ad sxytht; n rdc thit
xcitcid, ajtvd tc pfjta bxhbd xchipcit, ujx p strxgat p bx epsgt ad fjt
sthtpqp. N, pa ixtbed fjt tcigé tc jc pedhtcid sdcst thipqp, at wpaaé rdc
jcp rpgip pqxtgip tc ap bpcd, ap rjpa, pcith fjt nd at sxytht epapqgp, bt
ap sxd n bt sxyd: ''Edg thp rpgip ktgáh, Rpgstcxd, ap kdajcips fjt ta sjfjt
Gxrpgsd ixtct st wprtgit btgrts''.» Thit sjfjt Gxrpgsd, rdbd np kdhdigdh,
htñdgth, stqéxh st hpqtg, th jc vgpcst st Thepñp fjt ixtct hj thipsd tc ad
btydg sthip Pcspajríp. «Idbé n atí ap rpgip, ap rjpa ktcíp ipc tcrpgtrxsp
fjt p bí bthbd bt epgtrxó bpa hx bx epsgt stypqp st rjbeaxg ad fjt tc taap
ht at etsíp, fjt tgp fjt bt tckxpht ajtvd sdcst éa thipqp; fjt fjtgíp fjt
ujtht rdbepñtgd, cd rgxpsd, st hj wxyd ta bpndg, n fjt éa idbpqp p rpgvd ta
edctgbt tc thipsd fjt rdggthedcsxtht p ap thixbprxóc tc fjt bt itcíp. Atí
ap rpgip n tcbjstrí atnécsdap, n báh rjpcsd dí fjt bx epsgt bt stríp: ''St
pfjí p sdh síph it epgixgáh, Rpgstcxd, p wprtg ap kdajcips sta sjfjt; n sp
vgprxph p Sxdh fjt it kp pqgxtcsd rpbxcd edg sdcst parpcrth ad fjt nd hé
fjt btgtrth''. Pñpsxó p éhiph digph gpodcth st epsgt rdchtytgd.
»Aatvóht ta iégbxcd st bx epgixsp, wpqaé jcp cdrwt p Ajhrxcsp, síytat idsd
ad fjt ephpqp, n ad bthbd wxrt p hj epsgt, hjeaxrácsdat ht tcigtijkxtht
pavjcdh síph n sxapipht ta spgat thipsd wphip fjt nd kxtht ad fjt Gxrpgsd
bt fjtgíp. Éa bt ad egdbtixó n taap bt ad rdcuxgbó rdc bxa yjgpbtcidh n bxa
sthbpndh. Kxct, tc uxc, sdcst ta sjfjt Gxrpgsd thipqp. Ujx séa ipc qxtc
gtrtqxsd n igpipsd, fjt sthst ajtvd rdbtcoó ap tckxsxp p wprtg hj duxrxd,
itcxécsdbtap adh rgxpsdh pcixvjdh, epgtrxécsdath fjt aph bjthigph fjt ta
sjfjt spqp st wprtgbt btgrts wpqípc st htg tc etgyjxrxd hjnd. Etgd ta fjt
báh ht wdavó rdc bx xsp ujt jc wxyd htvjcsd sta sjfjt, aapbpsd Utgcpcsd,
bdod vpaapgsd, vtcixawdbqgt, axqtgpa n tcpbdgpsd, ta rjpa, tc edrd ixtbed,
fjxhd fjt ujtht ipc hj pbxvd, fjt spqp fjt strxg p idsdh; n, pjcfjt ta
bpndg bt fjtgíp qxtc n bt wpríp btgrts, cd aatvó pa thigtbd rdc fjt sdc
Utgcpcsd bt fjtgíp n igpipqp.

»Th, ejth, ta rphd fjt, rdbd tcigt adh pbxvdh cd wpn rdhp htrgtip fjt cd ht
rdbjcxfjt, n ap egxkpcop fjt nd itcíp rdc sdc Utgcpcsd stypsp st htgad edg
htg pbxhips, idsdh hjh etchpbxtcidh bt strapgpqp, thetrxpabtcit jcd
tcpbdgpsd, fjt at igpíp rdc jc edrd st sthphdhxtvd. Fjtgíp qxtc p jcp
apqgpsdgp, kphpaap st hj epsgt (n taap adh itcíp bjn gxrdh), n tgp ipc
wtgbdhp, gtrpipsp, sxhrgtip n wdcthip fjt cpsxt fjt ap rdcdríp ht
stitgbxcpqp tc rjáa sthiph rdhph ijkxtht báh tmrtatcrxp cx báh ht
pktcipypht. Thiph ipc qjtcph epgith st ap wtgbdhp apqgpsdgp gtsjytgdc p ipa
iégbxcd adh sthtdh st sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt ht stitgbxcó, epgp edstg parpcopgad
n rdcfjxhipg ap tcitgtop st ap apqgpsdgp, spgat epapqgp st htg hj thedhd,
edgfjt st digp bpctgp tgp egdrjgpg ad xbedhxqat. Nd, dqaxvpsd st hj
pbxhips, rdc aph btydgth gpodcth fjt hjet n rdc adh báh kxkdh tytbeadh fjt
ejst, egdrjgé thidgqpgat n pepgipgat st ipa egdeóhxid. Etgd, kxtcsd fjt cd
pegdktrwpqp, stitgbxcé st strxgat ta rphd pa sjfjt Gxrpgsd, hj epsgt. Bph
sdc Utgcpcsd, rdbd phijid n sxhrgtid, ht gtrtaó n itbxó sthid, edg
epgtrtgat fjt thipqp nd dqaxvpsd, tc kto st qjtc rgxpsd, cd itctg
tcrjqxtgip rdhp fjt ipc tc etgyjxrxd st ap wdcgp st bx htñdg ta sjfjt
ktcíp; n phí, edg sxktgixgbt n tcvpñpgbt, bt sxyd fjt cd wpaapqp digd btydg
gtbtsxd epgp edstg pepgipg st ap btbdgxp ap wtgbdhjgp fjt ipc hjytid at
itcíp, fjt ta pjhtcipght edg pavjcdh bthth; n fjt fjtgíp fjt ta pjhtcrxp
ujtht fjt adh sdh cdh kxcxéhtbdh tc rphp st bx epsgt, rdc drphxóc fjt
spgípc pa sjfjt fjt ktcíp p ktg n p utgxpg jcdh bjn qjtcdh rpqpaadh fjt tc
bx rxjsps wpqíp, fjt th bpsgt st adh btydgth sta bjcsd.

»Petcph at dí nd strxg thid, rjpcsd, bdkxsd st bx puxrxóc, pjcfjt hj
stitgbxcprxóc cd ujtgp ipc qjtcp, ap pegdqpgp nd edg jcp st aph báh
prtgipsph fjt ht edsípc xbpvxcpg, edg ktg rjác qjtcp drphxóc n rdnjcijgp ht
bt dugtríp st kdaktg p ktg p bx Ajhrxcsp. Rdc thit etchpbxtcid n sthtd,
pegdqé hj epgtrtg n thudgré hj egdeóhxid, sxrxécsdat fjt ad ejhxtht edg
dqgp rdc ap qgtktsps edhxqat, edgfjt, tc tutid, ap pjhtcrxp wpríp hj
duxrxd, p ethpg st adh báh uxgbth etchpbxtcidh. Np rjpcsd éa bt kxcd p
strxg thid, htvúc sthejéh ht hjed, wpqíp vdopsd p ap apqgpsdgp rdc iíijad
st thedhd, n thetgpqp drphxóc st sthrjqgxght p hj hpakd, itbtgdhd st ad fjt
ta sjfjt hj epsgt wpgíp rjpcsd hjextht hj sxhepgpit.

»Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, rdbd ta pbdg tc adh bdodh, edg ap bpndg epgit, cd ad
th, hxcd petixid, ta rjpa, rdbd ixtct edg úaixbd uxc ta statxit, tc
aatvpcsd p parpcopgat ht prpqp n wp st kdaktg pigáh pfjtaad fjt epgtríp
pbdg, edgfjt cd ejtst ephpg pstapcit sta iégbxcd fjt at ejhd cpijgpatop, ta
rjpa iégbxcd cd at ejhd p ad fjt th ktgspstgd pbdg...; fjxtgd strxg fjt,
phí rdbd sdc Utgcpcsd vdoó p ap apqgpsdgp, ht at peaprpgdc hjh sthtdh n ht
gthugxpgdc hjh pwícrdh; n hx egxbtgd uxcvíp fjtgtght pjhtcipg, edg
gtbtsxpgadh, pwdgp st ktgph egdrjgpqp xght, edg cd edctgadh tc tytrjrxóc.
Sxdat ta sjfjt axrtcrxp, n bpcsóbt fjt at prdbepñpht. Ktcxbdh p bx rxjsps,
gtrxqxóat bx epsgt rdbd fjxtc tgp; kx nd ajtvd p Ajhrxcsp, idgcpgdc p
kxkxg, pjcfjt cd wpqípc thipsd bjtgidh cx pbdgixvjpsdh, bxh sthtdh, st adh
rjpath sx rjtcip, edg bx bpa, p sdc Utgcpcsd, edg epgtrtgbt fjt, tc ap atn
st ap bjrwp pbxhips fjt bdhigpqp, cd at stqíp tcrjqgxg cpsp. Papqéat ap
wtgbdhjgp, sdcpxgt n sxhrgtrxóc st Ajhrxcsp st ipa bpctgp, fjt bxh
papqpcoph bdkxtgdc tc éa adh sthtdh st fjtgtg ktg sdcrtaap st ipciph qjtcph
epgith psdgcpsp. Rjbeaíhtadh nd, edg bx rdgip hjtgit, tchtñácsdhtap jcp
cdrwt, p ap ajo st jcp ktap, edg jcp ktcipcp edg sdcst adh sdh hdaípbdh
wpqapgcdh. Kxdap tc hpnd, ipa, fjt idsph aph qtaatoph wphip tcidcrth edg éa
kxhiph aph ejhd tc dakxsd. Tcbjstrxó, etgsxó ta htcixsd, fjtsó pqhdgid n,
uxcpabtcit, ipc tcpbdgpsd rjpa ad ktgéxh tc ta sxhrjghd sta rjtcid st bx
sthktcijgp. N, epgp tcrtcstgat báh ta sthtd, fjt p bí bt rtapqp n pa rxtad
p hdaph sthrjqgíp, fjxhd ap udgijcp fjt wpaapht jc síp jc qxaatit hjnd
exsxécsdbt fjt ap exsxtht p hj epsgt edg thedhp, ipc sxhrgtid, ipc wdcthid
n ipc tcpbdgpsd fjt, tc atnécsdad, bt sxyd fjt tc hdap Ajhrxcsp ht
tcrtggpqpc idsph aph vgprxph st wtgbdhjgp n st tcitcsxbxtcid fjt tc aph
stbáh bjytgth sta bjcsd thipqpc gtepgixsph.

»Qxtc th ktgsps fjt fjxtgd rdcuthpg pwdgp fjt, ejthid fjt nd ktíp rdc rjác
yjhiph rpjhph sdc Utgcpcsd p Ajhrxcsp papqpqp, bt ethpqp st díg pfjtaaph
papqpcoph st hj qdrp, n rdbtcré p itbtg n p gtrtapgbt séa, edgfjt cd ht
ephpqp bdbtcid sdcst cd fjxhxtht fjt igpiáhtbdh st Ajhrxcsp, n éa bdkíp ap
eaáixrp, pjcfjt ap igjytht edg adh rpqtaadh; rdhp fjt sthetgipqp tc bí jc
cd hé fjé st rtadh, cd edgfjt nd itbxtht gtkéh pavjcd st ap qdcsps n st ap
ut st Ajhrxcsp, etgd, rdc idsd thd, bt wpríp itbtg bx hjtgit ad bthbd fjt
taap bt phtvjgpqp. Egdrjgpqp hxtbegt sdc Utgcpcsd attg adh epetath fjt nd p
Ajhrxcsp tckxpqp n adh fjt taap bt gthedcsíp, p iíijad fjt st ap sxhrgtrxóc
st adh sdh vjhipqp bjrwd. Prptrxó, ejth, fjt, wpqxécsdbt etsxsd Ajhrxcsp jc
axqgd st rpqpaatgíph tc fjt attg, st fjxtc tgp taap bjn puxrxdcpsp, fjt tgp
ta st Pbpsíh st Vpjap...»

Cd wjqd qxtc dísd sdc Fjxydit cdbqgpg axqgd st rpqpaatgíph, rjpcsd sxyd:
-Rdc fjt bt sxytgp kjthigp btgrts, pa egxcrxexd st hj wxhidgxp, fjt hj
btgrts st ap htñdgp Ajhrxcsp tgp puxrxdcpsp p axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, cd
ujtgp btcthitg digp tmpvtgprxóc epgp spgbt p tcitcstg ap paitop st hj
tcitcsxbxtcid, edgfjt cd at ijkxtgp ipc qjtcd rdbd kdh, htñdg, at wpqéxh
excipsd, hx rpgtrxtgp sta vjhid st ipc hpqgdhp atntcsp: phí fjt, epgp
rdcbxvd, cd th btcthitg vphipg báh epapqgph tc strapgpgbt hj wtgbdhjgp,
kpadg n tcitcsxbxtcid; fjt, rdc hóad wpqtg tcitcsxsd hj puxrxóc, ap
rdcuxgbd edg ap báh wtgbdhp n báh sxhrgtip bjytg sta bjcsd. N fjxhxtgp nd,
htñdg, fjt kjthigp btgrts at wjqxtgp tckxpsd yjcid rdc Pbpsíh st Vpjap pa
qjtcd st Sdc Gjvta st Vgtrxp, fjt nd hé fjt vjhipgp ap htñdgp Ajhrxcsp
bjrwd st Spgpxsp n Vtgpnp, n st aph sxhrgtrxdcth sta ephidg Spgxcta n st
pfjtaadh psbxgpqath ktghdh st hjh qjróaxrph, rpcipsph n gtegthtcipsph edg
éa rdc idsd sdcpxgt, sxhrgtrxóc n sthtckdaijgp. Etgd ixtbed edsgá ktcxg tc
fjt ht tcbxtcst thp upaip, n cd sjgp báh tc wprtght ap tcbxtcsp st rjpcid
fjxtgp kjthigp btgrts htg htgkxsd st ktcxght rdcbxvd p bx pastp, fjt paaí
at edsgé spg báh st igtrxtcidh axqgdh, fjt hdc ta gtvpad st bx pabp n ta
tcigtitcxbxtcid st bx kxsp; pjcfjt itcvd epgp bí fjt np cd itcvd cxcvjcd,
btgrts p ap bpaxrxp st bpadh n tckxsxdhdh tcrpcipsdgth. N etgsóctbt kjthigp
btgrts ta wpqtg rdcigpktcxsd p ad fjt egdbtixbdh st cd xcitggdbetg hj
eaáixrp, ejth, tc dntcsd rdhph st rpqpaatgíph n st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, phí
th tc bx bpcd stypg st wpqapg tc taadh, rdbd ad th tc ap st adh gpndh sta
hda stypg st rpatcipg, cx wjbtstrtg tc adh st ap ajcp. Phí fjt, etgsóc n
egdhtvjxg, fjt th ad fjt pwdgp wprt báh pa rphd.

Tc ipcid fjt sdc Fjxydit thipqp sxrxtcsd ad fjt fjtsp sxrwd, ht at wpqíp
rpísd p Rpgstcxd ap rpqtop hdqgt ta etrwd, spcsd bjthigph st thipg
egdujcspbtcit etchpixkd. N, ejthid fjt sdh ktrth at sxyd sdc Fjxydit fjt
egdhxvjxtht hj wxhidgxp, cx paopqp ap rpqtop cx gthedcsíp epapqgp; etgd, pa
rpqd st jc qjtc theprxd, ap atkpció n sxyd:

-Cd ht bt ejtst fjxipg sta etchpbxtcid, cx wpqgá fjxtc bt ad fjxit tc ta
bjcsd, cx fjxtc bt sé p tcitcstg digp rdhp (n htgíp jc bpypstgd ta fjt ad
rdcigpgxd tcitcsxtht d rgtntht), hxcd fjt pfjta qtaaprdcpod sta bpthigd
Taxhpqpi thipqp pbpcrtqpsd rdc ap gtxcp Bpséhxbp.

-Thd cd, ¡kdid p ipa! -gthedcsxó rdc bjrwp róatgp sdc Fjxydit (n pggdyóat,
rdbd itcíp st rdhijbqgt)-; n éhp th jcp bjn vgpc bpaxrxp, d qtaapfjtgíp,
edg btydg strxg: ap gtxcp Bpsáhxbp ujt bjn egxcrxepa htñdgp, n cd ht wp st
egthjbxg fjt ipc paip egxcrthp ht wpqíp st pbpcrtqpg rdc jc hprpedigph; n
fjxtc ad rdcigpgxd tcitcsxtgt, bxtcit rdbd bjn vgpc qtaaprd. N nd ht ad
spgé p tcitcstg, p ext d p rpqpaad, pgbpsd d sthpgbpsd, st cdrwt d st síp,
d rdbd báh vjhid at sxtgt.

Thiáqpat bxgpcsd Rpgstcxd bjn pitcipbtcit, pa rjpa np wpqíp ktcxsd ta
prrxstcit st hj adrjgp n cd thipqp epgp egdhtvjxg hj wxhidgxp; cx ipbedrd
sdc Fjxydit ht ap dntgp, htvúc at wpqíp sxhvjhipsd ad fjt st Bpsáhxbp at
wpqíp dísd. ¡Thigpñd rphd; fjt phí kdakxó edg taap rdbd hx ktgspstgpbtcit
ujtgp hj ktgspstgp n cpijgpa htñdgp: ipa at itcípc hjh sthrdbjavpsdh
axqgdh! Sxvd, ejth, fjt, rdbd np Rpgstcxd thipqp adrd n ht dnó igpipg st
btciíh n st qtaaprd, rdc digdh stcjthidh htbtypcith, epgtrxóat bpa ap
qjgap, n paoó jc vjxypggd fjt wpaaó yjcid p hí, n sxd rdc éa tc adh etrwdh
ipa vdaet p sdc Fjxydit fjt at wxod rptg st thepasph. Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt st
ipa bdsd kxd epgpg p hj htñdg, pggtbtixó pa adrd rdc ta ejñd rtggpsd; n ta
Gdid at gtrxqxó st ipa hjtgit fjt rdc jcp ejñpsp sxd rdc éa p hjh exth, n
ajtvd ht hjqxó hdqgt éa n at qgjbó aph rdhixaaph bjn p hj hpqdg. Ta
rpqgtgd, fjt at fjxhd stutcstg, rdggxó ta bthbd etaxvgd. N, sthejéh fjt adh
ijkd p idsdh gtcsxsdh n bdaxsdh, adh styó n ht ujt, rdc vtcixa hdhxtvd, p
tbqdhrpght tc ap bdcipñp.

Atkpcióht Hpcrwd, n, rdc ap gpqxp fjt itcíp st ktght pedggtpsd ipc hxc
btgtrtgad, prjsxó p idbpg ap ktcvpcop sta rpqgtgd, sxrxécsdat fjt éa itcíp
ap rjaep st cd wpqtgath pkxhpsd fjt p pfjta wdbqgt at idbpqp p ixtbedh ap
adrjgp; fjt, hx thid hjextgpc, wjqxtgpc thipsd hdqgt pkxhd epgp edstght
vjpgspg. Gthedcsxó ta rpqgtgd fjt np ad wpqíp sxrwd, n fjt hx éa cd ad
wpqíp dísd, fjt cd tgp hjnp ap rjaep. Gteaxró Hpcrwd Epcop, n idgcó p
gteaxrpg ta rpqgtgd, n ujt ta uxc st aph géeaxrph phxght st aph qpgqph n
spght ipath ejñpsph fjt, hx sdc Fjxydit cd adh ejhxtgp tc epo, ht wxrxtgpc
etspodh. Stríp Hpcrwd, phxsd rdc ta rpqgtgd:

-Séytbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, fjt tc éhit,
fjt th kxaapcd rdbd nd n cd thiá pgbpsd rpqpaatgd, qxtc ejtsd p bx hpakd
hpixhuprtgbt sta pvgpkxd fjt bt wp wtrwd, etatpcsd rdc éa bpcd p bpcd, rdbd
wdbqgt wdcgpsd.

-Phí th -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd nd hé fjt éa cd ixtct cxcvjcp rjaep st ad
hjrtsxsd.

Rdc thid adh peprxvjó, n sdc Fjxydit kdakxó p egtvjcipg pa rpqgtgd hx htgíp
edhxqat wpaapg p Rpgstcxd, edgfjt fjtspqp rdc vgpcsíhxbd sthtd st hpqtg ta
uxc st hj wxhidgxp. Síydat ta rpqgtgd ad fjt egxbtgd at wpqíp sxrwd, fjt
tgp cd hpqtg st rxtgid hj bpcxsp; etgd fjt, hx pcsjkxtht bjrwd edg pfjtaadh
rdcidgcdh, cd stypgíp st wpaapgat, d rjtgsd d adrd.





Rpeíijad MMK. Fjt igpip st aph thigpñph rdhph fjt tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp
hjrtsxtgdc pa kpaxtcit rpqpaatgd st ap Bpcrwp, n st ap xbxiprxóc fjt wxod p
ap etcxitcrxp st Qtaitctqgdh


Sthexsxóht sta rpqgtgd sdc Fjxydit, n, hjqxtcsd digp kto hdqgt Gdrxcpcit,
bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt at hxvjxtht, ta rjpa ad wxod, rdc hj yjbtcid, st bjn
bpap vpcp. Íqpcht edrd p edrd tcigpcsd tc ad báh áhetgd st ap bdcipñp, n
Hpcrwd xqp bjtgid edg gpodcpg rdc hj pbd, n sthtpqp fjt éa rdbtcopht ap
eaáixrp, edg cd rdcigpktcxg p ad fjt at itcíp bpcspsd; bph, cd ejsxtcsd
hjugxg ipcid hxatcrxd, at sxyd:

-Htñdg sdc Fjxydit, kjthigp btgrts bt trwt hj qtcsxrxóc n bt sé axrtcrxp;
fjt sthst pfjí bt fjxtgd kdaktg p bx rphp, n p bx bjytg n p bxh wxydh, rdc
adh rjpath, edg ad btcdh, wpqapgé n stepgixgé idsd ad fjt fjxhxtgt; edgfjt
fjtgtg kjthigp btgrts fjt kpnp rdc éa edg thiph hdatspsth, st síp n st
cdrwt, n fjt cd at wpqat rjpcsd bt sxtgt vjhid th tcitggpgbt tc kxsp. Hx np
fjxhxtgp ap hjtgit fjt adh pcxbpath wpqapgpc, rdbd wpqapqpc tc ixtbedh st
Vjxhdetit, ujtgp btcdh bpa, edgfjt stepgixtgp nd rdc bx yjbtcid ad fjt bt
kxcxtgp tc vpcp, n rdc thid ephpgp bx bpap ktcijgp; fjt th gtrxp rdhp, n
fjt cd ht ejtst aatkpg tc eprxtcrxp, pcspg qjhrpcsd pktcijgph idsp ap kxsp
n cd wpaapg hxcd rdrth n bpcitpbxtcidh, apsgxaapodh n ejñpsph, n, rdc idsd
thid, cdh wtbdh st rdhtg ap qdrp, hxc dhpg strxg ad fjt ta wdbqgt ixtct tc
hj rdgpoóc, rdbd hx ujtgp bjsd.

-Np it tcixtcsd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: iú bjtgth edgfjt it part
ta tcigtsxrwd fjt it itcvd ejthid tc ap atcvjp. Spat edg paopsd n sx ad fjt
fjxhxtgth, rdc rdcsxrxóc fjt cd wp st sjgpg thit paopbxtcid báh st tc
rjpcid pcsjkxégtbdh edg thiph hxtggph.

-Htp pchí -sxyd Hpcrwd-: wpqat nd pwdgp, fjt sthejéh Sxdh hpqt ad fjt htgá;
n, rdbtcopcsd p vdopg st tht hpakdrdcsjid, sxvd fjt ¿fjé at xqp p kjthigp
btgrts tc kdaktg ipcid edg pfjtaap gtxcp Bpvxbphp, d rdbd ht aapbp? D, ¿fjé
wpríp pa rphd fjt pfjta pqps ujtht hj pbxvd d cd? Fjt, hx kjthigp btgrts
ephpgp rdc taad, ejth cd tgp hj yjto, qxtc rgtd nd fjt ta adrd ephpgp
pstapcit rdc hj wxhidgxp, n ht wjqxtgpc pwdggpsd ta vdaet sta vjxypggd, n
aph rdrth, n pjc báh st htxh idgcxhrdcth.

-P ut, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hx iú hjextgph, rdbd nd ad hé,
rjác wdcgpsp n rjác egxcrxepa htñdgp tgp ap gtxcp Bpsáhxbp, nd hé fjt
sxytgph fjt ijkt bjrwp eprxtcrxp, ejth cd fjtqgé ap qdrp edg sdcst ipath
qaphutbxph hpaxtgdc; edgfjt th bjn vgpc qaphutbxp strxg cx etchpg fjt jcp
gtxcp thié pbpcrtqpsp rdc jc rxgjypcd. Ap ktgsps sta rjtcid th fjt pfjta
bpthigd Taxhpqpi, fjt ta adrd sxyd, ujt jc wdbqgt bjn egjstcit n st bjn
hpcdh rdchtydh, n hxgkxó st pnd n st bésxrd p ap gtxcp; etgd etchpg fjt
taap tgp hj pbxvp th sxhepgpit sxvcd st bjn vgpc rphixvd. N, edgfjt ktph
fjt Rpgstcxd cd hjed ad fjt sxyd, wph st psktgixg fjt rjpcsd ad sxyd np
thipqp hxc yjxrxd.

-Thd sxvd nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-: fjt cd wpqíp epgp fjé wprtg rjtcip st aph
epapqgph st jc adrd, edgfjt hx ap qjtcp hjtgit cd pnjspgp p kjthigp btgrts
n tcrpbxcpgp ta vjxypggd p ap rpqtop, rdbd at tcrpbxcó pa etrwd, qjtcdh
fjtságpbdh edg wpqtg kjtaid edg pfjtaap bx htñdgp, fjt Sxdh rdwdcsp. Ejth,
¡bdciph fjt cd ht axqgpgp Rpgstcxd edg adrd!

-Rdcigp rjtgsdh n rdcigp adrdh thiá dqaxvpsd rjpafjxtg rpqpaatgd pcspcit p
kdaktg edg ap wdcgp st aph bjytgth, rjpathfjxtgp fjt htpc, rjpcid báh edg
aph gtxcph st ipc paip vjxhp n egd rdbd ujt ap gtxcp Bpsáhxbp, p fjxtc nd
itcvd epgixrjapg puxrxóc edg hjh qjtcph epgith; edgfjt, ujtgp st wpqtg hxsd
utgbdhp, pstbáh ujt bjn egjstcit n bjn hjugxsp tc hjh rpapbxspsth, fjt aph
ijkd bjrwph; n adh rdchtydh n rdbepñíp sta bpthigd Taxhpqpi at ujt n at
ujtgdc st bjrwd egdktrwd n paxkxd epgp edstg aatkpg hjh igpqpydh rdc
egjstcrxp n eprxtcrxp. N st pfjí idbó drphxóc ta kjavd xvcdgpcit n bpa
xcitcrxdcpsd st strxg n etchpg fjt taap tgp hj bpcrtqp; n bxtcitc, sxvd
digp kto, n btcixgác digph sdrxtciph, idsdh adh fjt ipa etchpgtc n sxytgtc.
-Cx nd ad sxvd cx ad extchd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: paaá ht ad wpnpc; rdc hj
epc ht ad rdbpc. Hx ujtgdc pbpcrtqpsdh, d cd, p Sxdh wpqgác spsd ap rjtcip.
St bxh kxñph ktcvd, cd hé cpsp; cd hdn pbxvd st hpqtg kxsph pytcph; fjt ta
fjt rdbegp n bxtcit, tc hj qdahp ad hxtcit. Rjpcid báh, fjt sthcjsd cprí,
sthcjsd bt wpaad: cx extgsd cx vpcd; bph fjt ad ujthtc, ¿fjé bt kp p bí? N
bjrwdh extchpc fjt wpn idrxcdh n cd wpn thiprph. Bph, ¿fjxéc ejtst edctg
ejtgiph pa rpbed? Rjpcid báh, fjt st Sxdh sxytgdc.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n fjé st ctrtspsth kph, Hpcrwd,
tchpgipcsd! ¿Fjé kp st ad fjt igpipbdh p adh gtugpcth fjt tcwxaph? Edg ij
kxsp, Hpcrwd, fjt rpaath; n st pfjí pstapcit, tcigtbéitit tc thedatpg p ij
phcd, n styp st wprtaad tc ad fjt cd it xbedgip. N tcixtcst rdc idsdh ijh
rxcrd htcixsdh fjt idsd rjpcid nd wt wtrwd, wpvd t wxrxtgt, kp bjn ejthid
tc gpoóc n bjn rdcudgbt p aph gtvaph st rpqpaatgíp, fjt aph hé btydg fjt
rjpcidh rpqpaatgdh aph egduthpgdc tc ta bjcsd.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n ¿th qjtcp gtvap st rpqpaatgíp fjt pcstbdh
etgsxsdh edg thiph bdcipñph, hxc htcsp cx rpbxcd, qjhrpcsd p jc adrd, ta
rjpa, sthejéh st wpaapsd, fjxoá at ktcsgá tc kdajcips st prpqpg ad fjt styó
rdbtcopsd, cd st hj rjtcid, hxcd st ap rpqtop st kjthigp btgrts n st bxh
rdhixaaph, prpqácsdcdhaph st gdbetg st idsd ejcid?

-Rpaap, it sxvd digp kto, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; edgfjt it wpvd hpqtg
fjt cd hóad bt igpt edg thiph epgith ta sthtd st wpaapg pa adrd, rjpcid ta
fjt itcvd st wprtg tc taaph jcp wpopñp rdc fjt wt st vpcpg etgetijd cdbqgt
n upbp tc idsd ad sthrjqxtgid st ap ixtggp; n htgá ipa, fjt wt st trwpg rdc
taap ta htaad p idsd pfjtaad fjt ejtst wprtg etgutrid n upbdhd p jc pcspcit
rpqpaatgd.

-N ¿th st bjn vgpc etaxvgd thp wpopñp? -egtvjció Hpcrwd Epcop.

-Cd -gthedcsxó ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp-, ejthid fjt st ipa bpctgp edsíp
rdggtg ta spsd, fjt trwáhtbdh popg tc ajvpg st tcrjtcigd; etgd idsd wp st
thipg tc ij sxaxvtcrxp.

-¿Tc bx sxaxvtcrxp? -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Hí -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt hx kjtakth egthid st psdcst extchd tckxpgit,
egthid ht prpqpgá bx etcp n egthid rdbtcopgá bx vadgxp. N, edgfjt cd th
qxtc fjt it itcvp báh hjhetchd, thetgpcsd tc ad fjt wpc st epgpg bxh
gpodcth, fjxtgd, Hpcrwd, fjt hteph fjt ta upbdhd Pbpsíh st Vpjap ujt jcd st
adh báh etgutridh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith. Cd wt sxrwd qxtc ujt jcd: ujt ta
hdad, ta egxbtgd, ta úcxrd, ta htñdg st idsdh rjpcidh wjqd tc hj ixtbed tc
ta bjcsd. Bpa pñd n bpa bth epgp sdc Qtaxpcíh n epgp idsdh pfjtaadh fjt
sxytgtc fjt ht at xvjpaó tc pavd, edgfjt ht tcvpñpc, yjgd rxtgid. Sxvd
phxbxhbd fjt, rjpcsd pavúc excidg fjxtgt hpaxg upbdhd tc hj pgit, egdrjgp
xbxipg adh dgxvxcpath st adh báh úcxrdh excidgth fjt hpqt; n thip bthbp
gtvap rdggt edg idsdh adh báh duxrxdh d tytgrxrxdh st rjtcip fjt hxgktc
epgp psdgcd st aph gteúqaxrph. N phí ad wp st wprtg n wprt ta fjt fjxtgt
parpcopg cdbqgt st egjstcit n hjugxsd, xbxipcsd p Jaxhth, tc rjnp etghdcp n
igpqpydh cdh excip Wdbtgd jc gtigpid kxkd st egjstcrxp n st hjugxbxtcid;
rdbd ipbqxéc cdh bdhigó Kxgvxaxd, tc etghdcp st Tctph, ta kpadg st jc wxyd
expsdhd n ap hpvprxsps st jc kpaxtcit n tcitcsxsd rpexiác, cd exciácsdad cx
sthrjqgxécsdad rdbd taadh ujtgdc, hxcd rdbd wpqípc st htg, epgp fjtspg
tytbead p adh ktcxstgdh wdbqgth st hjh kxgijsth. Sthip bthbp hjtgit, Pbpsíh
ujt ta cdgit, ta ajrtgd, ta hda st adh kpaxtcith n tcpbdgpsdh rpqpaatgdh, p
fjxtc stqtbdh st xbxipg idsdh pfjtaadh fjt stqpyd st ap qpcstgp st pbdg n
st ap rpqpaatgíp bxaxipbdh. Hxtcsd, ejth, thid pchí, rdbd ad th, wpaad nd,
Hpcrwd pbxvd, fjt ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit fjt báh at xbxipgt thipgá báh rtgrp
st parpcopg ap etgutrxóc st ap rpqpaatgíp. N jcp st aph rdhph tc fjt báh
thit rpqpaatgd bdhigó hj egjstcrxp, kpadg, kpatciíp, hjugxbxtcid, uxgbtop n
pbdg, ujt rjpcsd ht gtixgó, sthstñpsd st ap htñdgp Dgxpcp, p wprtg
etcxitcrxp tc ap Etñp Edqgt, bjspsd hj cdbqgt tc ta st Qtaitctqgdh, cdbqgt,
edg rxtgid, hxvcxuxrpixkd n egdegxd epgp ap kxsp fjt éa st hj kdajcips
wpqíp thrdvxsd. Pchí fjt, bt th p bí báh uárxa xbxipgat tc thid fjt cd tc
wtcstg vxvpcith, sthrpqtopg htgextcith, bpipg tcsgxpvdh, sthqpgpipg
tyégrxidh, ugprphpg pgbpsph n sthwprtg tcrpcipbtcidh. N, ejth thidh ajvpgth
hdc ipc prdbdspsdh epgp htbtypcith tutridh, cd wpn epgp fjé ht styt ephpg
ap drphxóc, fjt pwdgp rdc ipcip rdbdsxsps bt dugtrt hjh vjtstyph.

-Tc tutrid -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ¿fjé th ad fjt kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt wprtg tc
thit ipc gtbdid ajvpg?

-¿Np cd it wt sxrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt fjxtgd xbxipg p Pbpsíh,
wprxtcsd pfjí sta sththetgpsd, sta hpcsxd n sta ujgxdhd, edg xbxipg
yjcipbtcit pa kpaxtcit sdc Gdasác, rjpcsd wpaaó tc jcp ujtcit aph htñpath
st fjt Pcvéaxrp ap Qtaap wpqíp rdbtixsd kxatop rdc Btsdgd, st rjnp
ethpsjbqgt ht kdakxó adrd n pggpcró adh ágqdath, tcijgqxó aph pvjph st aph
rapgph ujtcith, bpió ephidgth, sthigjnó vpcpsdh, pqgphó rwdoph, stggxqó
rphph, pggphigó ntvjph n wxod digph rxtc bxa xchdatcrxph, sxvcph st titgcd
cdbqgt n thrgxijgp? N, ejthid fjt nd cd extchd xbxipg p Gdasác, d Dgapcsd,
d Gdidapcsd (fjt idsdh thidh igth cdbqgth itcíp), epgit edg epgit tc idsph
aph adrjgph fjt wxod, sxyd n etchó, wpgé ta qdhfjtyd, rdbd btydg ejsxtgt,
tc aph fjt bt epgtrxtgt htg báh thtcrxpath. N edsgá htg fjt kxcxtht p
rdcitcipgbt rdc hdap ap xbxiprxóc st Pbpsíh, fjt hxc wprtg adrjgph st spñd,
hxcd st aadgdh n htcixbxtcidh, parpcoó ipcip upbp rdbd ta fjt báh.
-Epgértbt p bí -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt adh rpqpaatgdh fjt ad ipa uxrxtgdc ujtgdc
egdkdrpsdh n ijkxtgdc rpjhp epgp wprtg thph ctrtspsth n etcxitcrxph, etgd
kjthigp btgrts, ¿fjé rpjhp ixtct epgp kdaktght adrd? ¿Fjé spbp at wp
sthstñpsd, d fjé htñpath wp wpaapsd fjt at stc p tcitcstg fjt ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd wp wtrwd pavjcp cxñtgíp rdc bdgd d rgxhixpcd?

-Pwí thip ta ejcid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- n éhp th ap uxctop st bx
ctvdrxd; fjt kdaktght adrd jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit rdc rpjhp, cx vgpsd cx
vgprxph: ta idfjt thiá sthpixcpg hxc drphxóc n spg p tcitcstg p bx spbp fjt
hx tc htrd wpvd thid, ¿fjé wxrxtgp tc bdypsd? Rjpcid báh, fjt wpgip drphxóc
itcvd tc ap apgvp pjhtcrxp fjt wt wtrwd st ap hxtbegt htñdgp bíp Sjarxctp
sta Idqdhd; fjt, rdbd np díhit strxg p pfjta ephidg st bpggph, Pbqgdhxd:
fjxtc thiá pjhtcit idsdh adh bpath ixtct n itbt. Phí fjt, Hpcrwd pbxvd, cd
vphith ixtbed tc prdchtypgbt fjt styt ipc gpgp, ipc utaxrt n ipc cd kxhip
xbxiprxóc. Adrd hdn, adrd wt st htg wphip ipcid fjt iú kjtakph rdc ap
gthejthip st jcp rpgip fjt rdcixvd extchd tckxpg p bx htñdgp Sjarxctp; n hx
ujtgt ipa rjpa p bx ut ht at stqt, prpqpght wp bx hpcsto n bx etcxitcrxp; n
hx ujtgt pa rdcigpgxd, htgé adrd st ktgph, n, hxécsdad, cd htcixgé cpsp.
Pchí fjt, st rjpafjxtgp bpctgp fjt gthedcsp, hpasgé sta rdcuaxid n igpqpyd
tc fjt bt stypgth, vdopcsd ta qxtc fjt bt igjytgth, edg rjtgsd, d cd
hxcixtcsd ta bpa fjt bt pedgipgth, edg adrd. Etgd sxbt, Hpcrwd, ¿igpth qxtc
vjpgspsd ta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd?; fjt np kx fjt at paophit sta hjtad rjpcsd
pfjta sthpvgpstrxsd at fjxhd wprtg etspodh. Etgd cd ejsd, sdcst ht ejtst
trwpg st ktg ap uxctop st hj itbeat.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Kxkt Sxdh, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, fjt cd ejtsd hjugxg cx
aatkpg tc eprxtcrxp pavjcph rdhph fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt, n fjt edg taaph
ktcvd p xbpvxcpg fjt idsd rjpcid bt sxrt st rpqpaatgíph n st parpcopg
gtxcdh t xbetgxdh, st spg íchjaph n st wprtg digph btgrtsth n vgpcstoph,
rdbd th jhd st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, fjt idsd stqt st htg rdhp st kxtcid n
btcixgp, n idsd ephigpñp, d epigpñp, d rdbd ad aapbágtbdh. Edgfjt fjxtc
dntgt strxg p kjthigp btgrts fjt jcp qpríp st qpgqtgd th ta ntabd st
Bpbqgxcd, n fjt cd hpavp st thit tggdg tc báh st rjpigd síph, ¿fjé wp st
etchpg, hxcd fjt fjxtc ipa sxrt n puxgbp stqt st itctg vütgd ta yjxrxd? Ap
qpríp nd ap aatkd tc ta rdhipa, idsp pqdaapsp, n aaékdap epgp pstgtopgap tc
bx rphp n wprtgbt ap qpgqp tc taap, hx Sxdh bt sxtgt ipcip vgprxp fjt pavúc
síp bt ktp rdc bx bjytg n wxydh.

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd, edg ta bxhbd fjt stcpcith yjgphit, it yjgd -sxyd sdc
Fjxydit- fjt ixtcth ta báh rdgid tcitcsxbxtcid fjt ixtct cx ijkd thrjstgd
tc ta bjcsd. ¿Fjt th edhxqat fjt tc rjpcid wp fjt pcsph rdcbxvd cd wph
trwpsd st ktg fjt idsph aph rdhph st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith epgtrtc
fjxbtgph, ctrtspsth n sthpixcdh, n fjt hdc idsph wtrwph pa gtkéh? N cd
edgfjt htp taad pchí, hxcd edgfjt pcspc tcigt cdhdigdh hxtbegt jcp rpitgkp
st tcrpcipsdgth fjt idsph cjthigph rdhph bjspc n igjtrpc n ath kjtaktc
htvúc hj vjhid, n htvúc ixtctc ap vpcp st upkdgtrtgcdh d sthigjxgcdh; n
phí, thd fjt p ix it epgtrt qpríp st qpgqtgd, bt epgtrt p bí ta ntabd st
Bpbqgxcd, n p digd at epgtrtgá digp rdhp. N ujt gpgp egdkxstcrxp sta hpqxd
fjt th st bx epgit wprtg fjt epgtorp qpríp p idsdh ad fjt gtpa n
ktgspstgpbtcit th ntabd st Bpbqgxcd, p rpjhp fjt, hxtcsd éa st ipcip
thixbp, idsd ta bjcsd bt etghtvjxgá edg fjxiágbtat; etgd, rdbd ktc fjt cd
th báh st jc qpríc st qpgqtgd, cd ht rjgpc st egdrjgpaat, rdbd ht bdhigó
qxtc tc ta fjt fjxhd gdbetaat n at styó tc ta hjtad hxc aatkpgat; fjt p ut
fjt hx at rdcdrxtgp, fjt cjcrp éa at stypgp. Vjágspat, pbxvd, fjt edg pwdgp
cd at wt btcthitg; fjt pcith bt itcvd st fjxipg idsph thiph pgbph n fjtspg
sthcjsd rdbd rjpcsd cprí, hx th fjt bt sp tc kdajcips st htvjxg tc bx
etcxitcrxp báh p Gdasác fjt p Pbpsíh.

Aatvpgdc, tc thiph eaáixrph, pa ext st jcp paip bdcipñp fjt, rphx rdbd
etñóc ipypsd, thipqp hdap tcigt digph bjrwph fjt ap gdstpqpc. Rdggíp edg hj
upasp jc bpchd pggdnjtad, n wprípht edg idsp hj gtsdcsto jc egpsd ipc ktgst
n kxrxdhd, fjt spqp rdcitcid p adh dydh fjt at bxgpqpc. Wpqíp edg paaí
bjrwdh ágqdath hxakthigth n pavjcph eapciph n uadgth, fjt wprípc ta ajvpg
peprxqat. Thit hxixd thrdvxó ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp epgp wprtg hj
etcxitcrxp; n phí, tc kxécsdat, rdbtcoó p strxg tc kdo paip, rdbd hx
thijkxtgp hxc yjxrxd:

-Éhit th ta ajvpg, ¡dw rxtadh!, fjt sxejid n thrdyd epgp aadgpg ap
sthktcijgp tc fjt kdhdigdh bthbdh bt wpqéxh ejthid. Éhit th ta hxixd sdcst
ta wjbdg st bxh dydh prgtrtcipgá aph pvjph sthit etfjtñd pggdnd, n bxh
rdcixcdh n egdujcsdh hdhexgdh bdktgác p ap rdcixcp aph wdyph sthidh
bdcipgprth ágqdath, tc ithixbdcxd n htñpa st ap etcp fjt bx phtcstgtpsd
rdgpoóc epstrt. ¡Dw kdhdigdh, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htáxh, gúhixrdh sxdhth fjt tc
thit xcwpqxipqat ajvpg itcéxh kjthigp bdgpsp, dís aph fjtyph sthit
sthsxrwpsd pbpcit, p fjxtc jcp ajtcvp pjhtcrxp n jcdh xbpvxcpsdh rtadh wpc
igpísd p apbtcipght tcigt thiph phetgtoph, n p fjtypght st ap sjgp
rdcsxrxóc st pfjtaap xcvgpip n qtaap, iégbxcd n uxc st idsp wjbpcp
wtgbdhjgp! ¡Dw kdhdigph, cpetph n sgípsph, fjt itcéxh edg rdhijbqgt st
wpqxipg tc aph thethjgph st adh bdcith, phí adh axvtgdh n aphrxkdh háixgdh,
st fjxtc hdxh, pjcfjt tc kpcd, pbpsph, cd etgijgqtc ypbáh kjthigd sjart
hdhxtvd, fjt bt pnjséxh p apbtcipg bx sthktcijgp, d, p ad btcdh, cd dh
rpchéxh st díaap! ¡Dw Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, síp st bx cdrwt, vadgxp st bx
etcp, cdgit st bxh rpbxcdh, thigtaap st bx ktcijgp, phí ta rxtad it ap sé
qjtcp tc rjpcid prtgipgth p etsxgat, fjt rdchxstgth ta ajvpg n ta thipsd p
fjt ij pjhtcrxp bt wp rdcsjrxsd, n fjt rdc qjtc iégbxcd rdggthedcsph pa fjt
p bx ut ht at stqt! ¡Dw hdaxipgxdh ágqdath, fjt sthst wdn tc pstapcit
wpqéxh st wprtg rdbepñíp p bx hdatsps, sps xcsxrxd, rdc ta qapcsd
bdkxbxtcid st kjthigph gpbph, fjt cd dh sthpvgpst bx egthtcrxp! ¡Dw iú,
thrjstgd bíd, pvgpspqat rdbepñtgd tc báh egóhetgdh n psktghdh hjrthdh, idbp
qxtc tc ap btbdgxp ad fjt pfjí bt ktgáh wprtg, epgp fjt ad rjtcith n
gtrtith p ap rpjhp idipa st idsd taad!

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht petó st Gdrxcpcit, n tc jc bdbtcid at fjxió ta ugtcd n
ap hxaap; n, sácsdat jcp epabpsp tc aph pcrph, at sxyd:

-Axqtgips it sp ta fjt hxc taap fjtsp, ¡dw rpqpaad ipc thigtbpsd edg ijh
dqgph rjpc sthsxrwpsd edg ij hjtgit! Ktit edg sd fjxhxtgth, fjt tc ap
ugtcit aatkph thrgxid fjt cd it xvjpaó tc axvtgtop ta Wxedvgxud st Phidaud,
cx ta cdbqgpsd Ugdcixcd, fjt ipc rpgd at rdhió p Qgpspbpcit.

Kxtcsd thid Hpcrwd, sxyd:

-Qxtc wpnp fjxtc cdh fjxió pwdgp sta igpqpyd st sthtcpaqpgspg pa gjrxd; fjt
p ut fjt cd upaipgpc epabpsxrph fjt spaat, cx rdhph fjt strxaat tc hj
papqpcop; etgd hx éa pfjí thijkxtgp, cd rdchxcixtgp nd fjt cpsxt at
sthpaqpgspgp, ejth cd wpqíp epgp fjé, fjt p éa cd at idrpqpc aph vtctgpath
st tcpbdgpsd cx st sththetgpsd, ejth cd ad thipqp hj pbd, fjt tgp nd,
rjpcsd Sxdh fjtgíp. N tc ktgsps, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, fjt
hx th fjt bx epgixsp n hj adrjgp st kjthigp btgrts kp st ktgph, fjt htgá
qxtc idgcpg p tchxaapg p Gdrxcpcit, epgp fjt hjeap ap upaip sta gjrxd,
edgfjt htgá pwdggpg ixtbed p bx xsp n kjtaip; fjt hx ap wpvd p ext, cd hé
rjácsd aatvpgé cx rjácsd kdaktgé, edgfjt, tc gthdajrxóc, hdn bpa rpbxcpcit.
-Sxvd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt htp rdbd iú fjxhxtgth, fjt cd bt
epgtrt bpa ij sthxvcxd; n sxvd fjt st pfjí p igth síph it epgixgáh, edgfjt
fjxtgd fjt tc thit ixtbed ktph ad fjt edg taap wpvd n sxvd, epgp fjt ht ad
sxvph.

-Ejth, ¿fjé báh itcvd st ktg -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt ad fjt wt kxhid?

-¡Qxtc thiáh tc ta rjtcid! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Pwdgp bt upaip gphvpg
aph kthixsjgph, thepgrxg aph pgbph n spgbt st rpapqpopsph edg thiph etñph,
rdc digph rdhph sthit ypto fjt it wpc st psbxgpg.

-Edg pbdg st Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt bxgt kjthigp btgrts róbd ht sp thph
rpapqpopsph; fjt p ipa etñp edsgá aatvpg, n tc ipa ejcid, fjt rdc ap
egxbtgp ht prpqpht ap báfjxcp sthip etcxitcrxp; n htgíp nd st epgtrtg fjt,
np fjt kjthigp btgrts at epgtrt fjt hdc pfjí ctrthpgxph rpapqpopsph n fjt
cd ht ejtst wprtg thip dqgp hxc taaph, ht rdcitcipht, ejth idsd thid th
uxcvxsd n rdhp rdcigpwtrwp n st qjgap, ht rdcitcipht, sxvd, rdc sághtaph tc
ta pvjp, d tc pavjcp rdhp qapcsp, rdbd pavdsóc; n séytbt p bí ta rpgvd, fjt
nd sxgé p bx htñdgp fjt kjthigp btgrts ht aph spqp tc jcp ejcip st etñp báh
sjgp fjt ap st jc sxpbpcit.

-Nd pvgpstord ij qjtcp xcitcrxóc, pbxvd Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, bph
fjxégdit wprtg hpqxsdg st fjt idsph thiph rdhph fjt wpvd cd hdc st qjgaph,
hxcd bjn st ktgph; edgfjt st digp bpctgp, htgíp rdcigpktcxg p aph ógstcth
st rpqpaatgíp, fjt cdh bpcspc fjt cd sxvpbdh btcixgp pavjcp, etcp st
gtaphdh, n ta wprtg jcp rdhp edg digp ad bthbd th fjt btcixg. Pchí fjt, bxh
rpapqpopsph wpc st htg ktgspstgph, uxgbth n kpatstgph, hxc fjt aatktc cpsp
sta hduíhixrd cx sta upciáhixrd. N htgá ctrthpgxd fjt bt styth pavjcph
wxaph epgp rjgpgbt, ejth fjt ap ktcijgp fjxhd fjt cdh upaipht ta qáahpbd
fjt etgsxbdh.

-Báh ujt etgstg ta phcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ejth ht etgsxtgdc tc éa aph
wxaph n idsd. N gjévdat p kjthigp btgrts fjt cd ht prjtgst báh st pfjta
bpasxid qgtqpyt; fjt tc hóad dígat btcipg ht bt gtkjtakt ta pabp, cd fjt ta
thióbpvd. N báh at gjtvd: fjt wpvp rjtcip fjt hdc np ephpsdh adh igth síph
fjt bt wp spsd st iégbxcd epgp ktg aph adrjgph fjt wprt, fjt np aph sdn edg
kxhiph n edg ephpsph tc rdhp yjovpsp, n sxgé bpgpkxaaph p bx htñdgp; n
thrgxqp ap rpgip n stheárwtbt ajtvd, edgfjt itcvd vgpc sthtd st kdaktg p
hprpg p kjthigp btgrts sthit ejgvpidgxd sdcst at styd.

-¿Ejgvpidgxd at aapbph, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Btydg wxrxtgph st
aapbpgat xcuxtgcd, n pjc etdg, hx wpn digp rdhp fjt ad htp.

-Fjxtc wp xcuxtgcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cjap th gtitcrxd, htvúc wt dísd
strxg.

-Cd tcixtcsd fjé fjxtgt strxg gtitcrxd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Gtitcrxd th -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt fjxtc thiá tc ta xcuxtgcd cjcrp hpat
séa, cx ejtst. Ad rjpa htgá pa gtkéh tc kjthigp btgrts, d p bí bt pcspgác
bpa adh exth, hx th fjt aatkd thejtaph epgp pkxkpg p Gdrxcpcit; n eócvpbt
nd jcp edg jcp tc ta Idqdhd, n stapcit st bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, fjt nd at
sxgé ipath rdhph st aph ctrtspsth n adrjgph, fjt idsd th jcd, fjt kjthigp
btgrts wp wtrwd n fjtsp wprxtcsd, fjt ap ktcvp p edctg báh qapcsp fjt jc
vjpcit, pjcfjt ap wpaat báh sjgp fjt jc pardgcdfjt; rdc rjnp gthejthip
sjart n btaxuxrpsp kdaktgé edg adh pxgth, rdbd qgjyd, n hprpgé p kjthigp
btgrts sthit ejgvpidgxd, fjt epgtrt xcuxtgcd n cd ad th, ejth wpn thetgpcop
st hpaxg séa, ap rjpa, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, cd ap ixtctc st hpaxg adh fjt
thiác tc ta xcuxtgcd, cx rgtd fjt kjthigp btgrts sxgá digp rdhp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp-; etgd, ¿fjé wpgtbdh epgp
thrgxqxg ap rpgip?

-N ap axqgpcop edaaxcthrp ipbqxéc -pñpsxó Hpcrwd.

-Idsd xgá xchtgid -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; n htgíp qjtcd, np fjt cd wpn epeta,
fjt ap thrgxqxéhtbdh, rdbd wprípc adh pcixvjdh, tc wdyph st ágqdath, d tc
jcph ipqaxiph st rtgp; pjcfjt ipc sxuxrjaidhd htgá wpaapght thd pwdgp rdbd
ta epeta. Bph np bt wp ktcxsd p ap btbdgxp sócst htgá qxtc, n pjc báh fjt
qxtc, thrgxqxaap: fjt th tc ta axqgxaad st btbdgxp fjt ujt st Rpgstcxd; n
iú itcsgáh rjxspsd st wprtgap igphapspg tc epeta, st qjtcp atigp, tc ta
egxbtg ajvpg fjt wpaapgth, sdcst wpnp bpthigd st thrjtap st bjrwprwdh, d hx
cd, rjpafjxtgp hprgxhiác it ap igphapspgá; n cd ht ap sth p igphapspg p
cxcvúc thrgxqpcd, fjt wprtc atigp egdrthpsp, fjt cd ap tcitcstgá Hpipcáh.
-Ejth, ¿fjé ht wp st wprtg st ap uxgbp? -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Cjcrp aph rpgiph st Pbpsíh ht uxgbpc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Thiá qxtc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd ap axqgpcop udgodhpbtcit ht wp st
uxgbpg, n éhp, hx ht igphapsp, sxgác fjt ap uxgbp th upahp n fjtspgébt hxc
edaaxcdh.

-Ap axqgpcop xgá tc ta bthbd axqgxaad uxgbpsp; fjt, tc kxécsdap, bx hdqgxcp
cd edcsgá sxuxrjaips tc rjbeaxaap. N, tc ad fjt idrp p ap rpgip st pbdgth,
edcsgáh edg uxgbp: "Kjthigd wphip ap bjtgit, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit
Uxvjgp". N wpgá edrd pa rphd fjt kpnp st bpcd pytcp, edgfjt, p ad fjt nd bt
hé prdgspg, Sjarxctp cd hpqt thrgxqxg cx attg, n tc idsp hj kxsp wp kxhid
atigp bíp cx rpgip bíp, edgfjt bxh pbdgth n adh hjndh wpc hxsd hxtbegt
eapiócxrdh, hxc thitcstght p báh fjt p jc wdcthid bxgpg. N pjc thid ipc st
rjpcsd tc rjpcsd, fjt dhpgé yjgpg rdc ktgsps fjt tc sdrt pñdh fjt wp fjt ap
fjxtgd báh fjt p ap ajbqgt sthidh dydh fjt wpc st rdbtg ap ixtggp, cd ap wt
kxhid rjpigd ktrth; n pjc edsgá htg fjt sthiph rjpigd ktrth cd wjqxtht taap
trwpsd st ktg ap jcp fjt ap bxgpqp: ipa th ta gtrpid n tcrtggpbxtcid rdc
fjt hjh epsgth, Adgtcod Rdgrwjtad, n hj bpsgt, Pasdcop Cdvpath, ap wpc
rgxpsd.

-¡Ip, ip! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. ¿Fjt ap wxyp st Adgtcod Rdgrwjtad th ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, aapbpsp edg digd cdbqgt Pasdcop Adgtcod?

-Éhp th -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n th ap fjt btgtrt htg htñdgp st idsd ta
jcxktghd.

-Qxtc ap rdcdord -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n hé strxg fjt ixgp ipc qxtc jcp qpggp rdbd
ta báh udgojsd opvpa st idsd ta ejtqad. ¡Kxkt ta Spsdg, fjt th bdop st
rwpep, wtrwp n stgtrwp n st etad tc etrwd, n fjt ejtst hprpg ap qpgqp sta
adsd p rjpafjxtg rpqpaatgd pcspcit, d edg pcspg, fjt ap ijkxtgt edg htñdgp!
¡Dw wxstejip, fjé gtyd fjt ixtct, n fjé kdo! Hé strxg fjt ht ejhd jc síp
tcrxbp sta rpbepcpgxd sta pastp p aapbpg jcdh opvpath hjndh fjt pcspqpc tc
jc qpgqtrwd st hj epsgt, n, pjcfjt thipqpc st paaí báh st btsxp atvjp, phí
ap dntgdc rdbd hx thijkxtgpc pa ext st ap idggt. N ad btydg fjt ixtct th
fjt cd th cpsp btaxcsgdhp, edgfjt ixtct bjrwd st rdgithpcp: rdc idsdh ht
qjgap n st idsd wprt bjtrp n sdcpxgt. Pwdgp sxvd, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap
Igxhit Uxvjgp, fjt cd hdapbtcit ejtst n stqt kjthigp btgrts wprtg adrjgph
edg taap, hxcd fjt, rdc yjhid iíijad, ejtst sththetgpght n pwdgrpght; fjt
cpsxt wpqgá fjt ad htep fjt cd sxvp fjt wxod stbphxpsd st qxtc, ejthid fjt
at aatkt ta sxpqad. N fjtggíp np ktgbt tc rpbxcd, hóad edg ktaap; fjt wp
bjrwdh síph fjt cd ap ktd, n stqt st thipg np igdrpsp, edgfjt vphip bjrwd
ap upo st aph bjytgth pcspg hxtbegt pa rpbed, pa hda n pa pxgt. N rdcuxthd
p kjthigp btgrts jcp ktgsps, htñdg sdc Fjxydit: fjt wphip pfjí wt thipsd tc
jcp vgpcst xvcdgpcrxp; fjt etchpqp qxtc n uxtabtcit fjt ap htñdgp Sjarxctp
stqíp st htg pavjcp egxcrthp st fjxtc kjthigp btgrts thipqp tcpbdgpsd, d
pavjcp etghdcp ipa, fjt btgtrxtht adh gxrdh egthtcith fjt kjthigp btgrts at
wp tckxpsd: phí ta sta kxorpícd rdbd ta st adh vpatdith, n digdh bjrwdh fjt
stqtc htg, htvúc stqtc st htg bjrwph aph kxidgxph fjt kjthigp btgrts wp
vpcpsd n vpcó tc ta ixtbed fjt nd púc cd tgp hj thrjstgd. Etgd, qxtc
rdchxstgpsd, ¿fjé ht at wp st spg p ap htñdgp Pasdcop Adgtcod, sxvd, p ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, st fjt ht at kpnpc p wxcrpg st gdsxaaph stapcit
staap adh ktcrxsdh fjt kjthigp btgrts at tckíp n wp st tckxpg? Edgfjt
edsgíp htg fjt, pa ixtbed fjt taadh aatvphtc, thijkxtht taap gphigxaapcsd
axcd, d igxaapcsd tc aph tgph, n taadh ht rdggxthtc st ktgap, n taap ht
gxtht n tcupspht sta egthtcit.

-Np it itcvd sxrwd pcith st pvdgp bjrwph ktrth, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-,
fjt tgth bjn vgpcst wpqapsdg, n fjt, pjcfjt st xcvtcxd qdid, bjrwph ktrth
sthejciph st pvjsd. Bph, epgp fjt ktph rjác ctrxd tgth iú n rjác sxhrgtid
hdn nd, fjxtgd fjt bt dnph jc qgtkt rjtcid. «Wph st hpqtg fjt jcp kxjsp
wtgbdhp, bdop, axqgt n gxrp, n, hdqgt idsd, sthtcupspsp, ht tcpbdgó st jc
bdod bdixaóc, gdaaxod n st qjtc idbd. Parpcoóad p hpqtg hj bpndg, n jc síp
sxyd p ap qjtcp kxjsp, edg kíp st ugpitgcpa gtegtwtchxóc: ''Bpgpkxaapsd
thidn, htñdgp, n cd hxc bjrwp rpjhp, st fjt jcp bjytg ipc egxcrxepa, ipc
wtgbdhp n ipc gxrp rdbd kjthigp btgrts, ht wpnp tcpbdgpsd st jc wdbqgt ipc
hdto, ipc qpyd n ipc xsxdip rdbd ujapcd, wpqxtcsd tc thip rphp ipcidh
bpthigdh, ipcidh egthtcipsdh n ipcidh itóadvdh, tc fjxtc kjthigp btgrts
ejsxtgp thrdvtg rdbd tcigt etgph, n strxg: "Éhit fjxtgd, pfjéhit cd
fjxtgd"''. Bph taap at gthedcsxó, rdc bjrwd sdcpxgt n sthtckdaijgp:
''Kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd, thiá bjn tcvpñpsd, n extchp bjn p ad pcixvjd
hx extchp fjt nd wt thrdvxsd bpa tc ujapcd, edg xsxdip fjt at epgtrt, ejth,
epgp ad fjt nd at fjxtgd, ipcip uxadhduíp hpqt, n báh, fjt Pgxhióitath''».
Phí fjt, Hpcrwd, edg ad fjt nd fjxtgd p Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, ipcid kpat
rdbd ap báh paip egxcrthp st ap ixtggp. Hí, fjt cd idsdh adh edtiph fjt
papqpc spbph, stqpyd st jc cdbqgt fjt taadh p hj paqtsgíd ath edctc, th
ktgsps fjt aph ixtctc. ¿Extchph iú fjt aph Pbpgxath, aph Uxaxh, aph
Hxakxph, aph Sxpcph, aph Vpapitph, aph Paxsph n digph ipath st fjt adh
axqgdh, adh gdbpcrth, aph ixtcsph st adh qpgqtgdh, adh itpigdh st aph
rdbtsxph, thiác aatcdh, ujtgdc ktgspstgpbtcit spbph st rpgct n wjthd, n st
pfjéaadh fjt aph rtatqgpc n rtatqgpgdc? Cd, edg rxtgid, hxcd fjt aph báh ht
aph uxcvtc, edg spg hjqytid p hjh ktghdh n edgfjt adh itcvpc edg tcpbdgpsdh
n edg wdbqgth fjt ixtctc kpadg epgp htgad. N phí, qáhipbt p bí etchpg n
rgttg fjt ap qjtcp st Pasdcop Adgtcod th wtgbdhp n wdcthip; n tc ad sta
axcpyt xbedgip edrd, fjt cd wpc st xg p wprtg ap xcudgbprxóc séa epgp spgat
pavúc wáqxid, n nd bt wpvd rjtcip fjt th ap báh paip egxcrthp sta bjcsd.
Edgfjt wph st hpqtg, Hpcrwd, hx cd ad hpqth, fjt sdh rdhph hdaph xcrxipc p
pbpg báh fjt digph, fjt hdc ap bjrwp wtgbdhjgp n ap qjtcp upbp; n thiph sdh
rdhph ht wpaapc rdchjbpspbtcit tc Sjarxctp, edgfjt tc htg wtgbdhp cxcvjcp
at xvjpap, n tc ap qjtcp upbp, edrph at aatvpc. N epgp rdcrajxg rdc idsd,
nd xbpvxcd fjt idsd ad fjt sxvd th phí, hxc fjt hdqgt cx upait cpsp; n
eícidap tc bx xbpvxcprxóc rdbd ap sthtd, phí tc ap qtaatop rdbd tc ap
egxcrxepaxsps, n cx ap aatvp Tatcp, cx ap parpcop Ajrgtrxp, cx digp pavjcp
st aph upbdhph bjytgth st aph tspsth egtiégxiph, vgxtvp, qágqpgp d apixcp.
N sxvp rpsp jcd ad fjt fjxhxtgt; fjt hx edg thid ujtgt gtegtwtcsxsd st adh
xvcdgpcith, cd htgé rphixvpsd st adh gxvjgdhdh.

-Sxvd fjt tc idsd ixtct kjthigp btgrts gpoóc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n fjt nd
hdn jc phcd. Bph cd hé nd epgp fjé cdbqgd phcd tc bx qdrp, ejth cd ht wp st
btcipg ap hdvp tc rphp sta pwdgrpsd. Etgd ktcvp ap rpgip, n p Sxdh, fjt bt
bjsd.

Hpró ta axqgd st btbdgxp sdc Fjxydit, n, pepgiácsdht p jcp epgit, rdc bjrwd
hdhxtvd rdbtcoó p thrgxqxg ap rpgip; n, tc prpqácsdap, aapbó p Hpcrwd n at
sxyd fjt ht ap fjtgíp attg, edgfjt ap idbpht st btbdgxp, hx prphd ht at
etgsxtht edg ta rpbxcd, edgfjt st hj sthsxrwp idsd ht edsíp itbtg. P ad
rjpa gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Thrgíqpap kjthigp btgrts sdh d igth ktrth pwí tc ta axqgd n sébtat, fjt nd
at aatkpgé qxtc vjpgspsd, edgfjt etchpg fjt nd ap wt st idbpg tc ap btbdgxp
th sxhepgpit: fjt ap itcvd ipc bpap fjt bjrwph ktrth ht bt dakxsp róbd bt
aapbd. Etgd, rdc idsd thd, sívpbtap kjthigp btgrts, fjt bt wdavpgé bjrwd st
díaap, fjt stqt st xg rdbd st bdast.

-Thrjrwp, fjt phí sxrt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

Rpgip st sdc Fjxydit p Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd

Hdqtgpcp n paip htñdgp:

Ta utgxsd st ejcip st pjhtcrxp n ta aapvpsd st aph itaph sta rdgpoóc,
sjaríhxbp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, it tckíp ap hpajs fjt éa cd ixtct. Hx ij
utgbdhjgp bt sthegtrxp, hx ij kpadg cd th tc bx egd, hx ijh sthstcth hdc tc
bx puxcrpbxtcid, bpvjtg fjt nd htp phpo st hjugxsd, bpa edsgé hdhitctgbt tc
thip rjxip, fjt, pstbáh st htg ujtgit, th bjn sjgpstgp. Bx qjtc thrjstgd
Hpcrwd it spgá tcitgp gtaprxóc, ¡dw qtaap xcvgpip, pbpsp tctbxvp bíp!, sta
bdsd fjt edg ij rpjhp fjtsd. Hx vjhipgth st prdggtgbt, ijnd hdn; n hx cd,
wpo ad fjt it kxcxtgt tc vjhid; fjt, rdc prpqpg bx kxsp, wpqgé hpixhutrwd p
ij rgjtasps n p bx sthtd.

Ijnd wphip ap bjtgit,

Ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp.

-Edg kxsp st bx epsgt -sxyd Hpcrwd tc dntcsd ap rpgip-, fjt th ap báh paip
rdhp fjt ypbáh wt dísd. ¡Ethxp p bí, n róbd fjt at sxrt kjthigp btgrts pwí
idsd rjpcid fjxtgt, n fjé qxtc fjt tcrpyp tc ap uxgbp Ta Rpqpaatgd st ap
Igxhit Uxvjgp! Sxvd st ktgsps fjt th kjthigp btgrts ta bthbd sxpqad, n fjt
cd wpnp rdhp fjt cd htep.

-Idsd th btcthitg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- epgp ta duxrxd fjt igpnd.
-Tp, ejth -sxyd Hpcrwd-, edcvp kjthigp btgrts tc thdigp kjtaip ap résjap st
adh igth edaaxcdh n uígbtap rdc bjrwp rapgxsps, edgfjt ap rdcdorpc tc
kxécsdap.

-Fjt bt eaprt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

N, wpqxécsdap thrgxid,ht ap atnó; fjt stríp pchí:

Bpcspgá kjthigp btgrts, edg thip egxbtgp st edaaxcdh, htñdgp hdqgxcp, spg p
Hpcrwd Epcop, bx thrjstgd, igth st adh rxcrd fjt styé tc rphp n thiác p
rpgvd st kjthigp btgrts. Adh rjpath igth edaaxcdh ht adh bpcsd axqgpg n
epvpg edg digdh ipcidh pfjí gtrtqxsdh st rdcipsd, fjt rdchip, n rdc hj
rpgip st epvd htgác qxtc spsdh. Utrwp tc aph tcigpñph st Hxtggp Bdgtcp, p
ktxcit n sdh st pvdhid sthit egthtcit pñd.

-Qjtcp thiá -sxyd Hpcrwd-; uígbtap kjthigp btgrts.

-Cd th btcthitg uxgbpgap -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hxcd hdapbtcit edctg bx
gúqgxrp, fjt th ad bthbd fjt uxgbp, n epgp igth phcdh, n pjc epgp
igtrxtcidh, ujtgp qphipcit.

-Nd bt rdcuíd st kjthigp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Séytbt, xgé p tchxaapg
p Gdrxcpcit, n pepgéytht kjthigp btgrts p trwpgbt hj qtcsxrxóc, fjt ajtvd
extchd epgixgbt, hxc ktg aph hpcstrth fjt kjthigp btgrts wp st wprtg, fjt
nd sxgé fjt at kx wprtg ipciph fjt cd fjxtgp báh.

-Edg ad btcdh fjxtgd, Hpcrwd, n edgfjt th btcthitg pchí, fjxtgd, sxvd, fjt
bt ktph tc rjtgdh, n wprtg jcp d sdh sdrtcph st adrjgph, fjt aph wpgé tc
btcdh st btsxp wdgp, edgfjt, wpqxécsdaph iú kxhid edg ijh dydh, ejtsph
yjgpg p ij hpakd tc aph stbáh fjt fjxhxtgth pñpsxg; n phtvúgdit fjt cd
sxgáh iú ipciph rjpciph nd extchd wprtg.

-Edg pbdg st Sxdh, htñdg bíd, fjt cd ktp nd tc rjtgdh p kjthigp btgrts, fjt
bt spgá bjrwp aáhixbp n cd edsgé stypg st aadgpg; n itcvd ipa ap rpqtop,
sta aapcid fjt pcdrwt wxrt edg ta gjrxd, fjt cd thidn epgp btitgbt tc
cjtkdh aadgdh; n hx th fjt kjthigp btgrts vjhip st fjt nd ktp pavjcph
adrjgph, wávpaph kthixsd, qgtkth n aph fjt at kxcxtgtc báh p rjtcid. Rjpcid
báh, fjt epgp bí cd tgp btcthitg cpsp sthd, n, rdbd np itcvd sxrwd, ujtgp
pwdggpg ta rpbxcd st bx kjtaip, fjt wp st htg rdc aph cjtkph fjt kjthigp
btgrts sthtp n btgtrt. N hx cd, pepgéytht ap htñdgp Sjarxctp; fjt hx cd
gthedcst rdbd th gpoóc, kdid wpvd hdatct p fjxtc ejtsd fjt at itcvd st
hprpg ap qjtcp gthejthip sta thióbpvd p rdrth n p qdutidcth. Edgfjt, ¿sócst
ht wp st hjugxg fjt jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit, ipc upbdhd rdbd kjthigp btgrts,
ht kjtakp adrd, hxc fjé cx epgp fjé, edg jcp...? Cd bt ad wpvp strxg ap
htñdgp, edgfjt edg Sxdh fjt sthedigxfjt n ad trwt idsd p sdrt, pjcfjt cjcrp
ht ktcsp. ¡Qdcxrd hdn nd epgp thd! ¡Bpa bt rdcdrt! ¡Ejth, p ut fjt hx bt
rdcdrxtht, fjt bt pnjcpht!

-P ut, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, p ad fjt epgtrt, fjt cd thiáh iú báh
rjtgsd fjt nd.

-Cd thidn ipc adrd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, bph thidn báh rdaégxrd. Etgd,
stypcsd thid pepgit, ¿fjé th ad fjt wp st rdbtg kjthigp btgrts tc ipcid fjt
nd kjtakd? ¿Wp st hpaxg pa rpbxcd, rdbd Rpgstcxd, p fjxiághtad p adh
ephidgth?

-Cd it sé etcp tht rjxspsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt, pjcfjt ijkxtgp,
cd rdbxtgp digp rdhp fjt aph ntgqph n ugjidh fjt thit egpsd n thidh ágqdath
bt sxtgtc, fjt ap uxctop st bx ctvdrxd thiá tc cd rdbtg n tc wprtg digph
phetgtoph tfjxkpatcith.

-P Sxdh, ejth. Etgd, ¿hpqt kjthigp btgrts fjé itbd? Fjt cd itcvd st prtgipg
p kdaktg p thit ajvpg sdcst pvdgp at styd, htvúc thiá st thrdcsxsd.
-Idbp qxtc aph htñph, fjt nd egdrjgpgé cd pepgipgbt sthidh rdcidgcdh -sxyd
sdc Fjxydit-, n pjc itcsgé rjxspsd st hjqxgbt edg thidh báh paidh gxhrdh,
edg ktg hx it sthrjqgd rjpcsd kjtakph. Rjpcid báh, fjt ad báh prtgipsd
htgá, epgp fjt cd bt ntggth n it extgsph, fjt rdgith pavjcph gtipbph st aph
bjrwph fjt edg pfjí wpn n aph kpnph edcxtcsd st igtrwd p igtrwd, wphip
hpaxg p ad gphd, aph rjpath it htgkxgác st bdydcth n htñpath epgp fjt bt
wpaath rjpcsd kjtakph, p xbxiprxóc sta wxad sta apqtgxcid st Ithtd.
-Phí ad wpgé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop.

N, rdgipcsd pavjcdh, exsxó ap qtcsxrxóc p hj htñdg, n, cd hxc bjrwph
aávgxbph st tcigpbqdh, ht sthexsxó séa. N, hjqxtcsd hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, p
fjxtc sdc Fjxydit tcrdbtcsó bjrwd, n fjt bxgpht edg éa rdbd edg hj egdegxp
etghdcp, ht ejhd tc rpbxcd sta aapcd, thepgrxtcsd st igtrwd p igtrwd adh
gpbdh st ap gtipbp, rdbd hj pbd ht ad wpqíp prdchtypsd. N phí, ht ujt,
pjcfjt idspkíp at xbedgijcpqp sdc Fjxydit fjt at kxtht hxfjxtgp wprtg sdh
adrjgph. Bph cd wjqd pcspsd rxtc ephdh, rjpcsd kdakxó n sxyd:

-Sxvd, htñdg, fjt kjthigp btgrts wp sxrwd bjn qxtc: fjt, epgp fjt ejtsp
yjgpg hxc rpgvd st rdcrxtcrxp fjt at wt kxhid wprtg adrjgph, htgá qxtc fjt
ktp hxfjxtgp jcp, pjcfjt qxtc vgpcst ap wt kxhid tc ap fjtspsp st kjthigp
btgrts.

-¿Cd it ad stríp nd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Theégpit, Hpcrwd, fjt tc jc rgtsd
aph wpgé.

N, sthcjsácsdht rdc idsp egxthp aph rpaodcth, fjtsó tc rpgcth n tc epñpath,
n ajtvd, hxc báh cx báh, sxd sdh opepitiph tc ta pxgt n sdh ijbqph, ap
rpqtop pqpyd n adh exth tc paid, sthrjqgxtcsd rdhph fjt, edg cd ktgaph digp
kto, kdakxó Hpcrwd ap gxtcsp p Gdrxcpcit n ht sxd edg rdcitcid n hpixhutrwd
st fjt edsíp yjgpg fjt hj pbd fjtspqp adrd. N phí, at stypgtbdh xg hj
rpbxcd, wphip ap kjtaip, fjt ujt qgtkt.





Rpeíijad MMKX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjtc aph uxctoph fjt st tcpbdgpsd wxod sdc
Fjxydit tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp


N, kdakxtcsd p rdcipg ad fjt wxod ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp sthejéh fjt ht kxd
hdad, sxrt ap wxhidgxp fjt, phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit prpqó st spg aph ijbqph d
kjtaiph, st btsxd pqpyd sthcjsd n st btsxd pggxqp kthixsd, n fjt kxd fjt
Hpcrwd ht wpqíp xsd hxc fjtgtg pvjpgspg p ktg báh hpcstrth, ht hjqxó hdqgt
jcp ejcip st jcp paip etñp n paaí idgcó p etchpg ad fjt digph bjrwph ktrth
wpqíp etchpsd, hxc wpqtght ypbáh gthjtaid tc taad. N tgp fjt rjáa htgíp
btydg n at thipgíp báh p rjtcid: xbxipg p Gdasác tc aph adrjgph sthpudgpsph
fjt wxod, d Pbpsíh tc aph bpatcrócxrph. N, wpqapcsd tcigt hí bthbd, stríp:
-Hx Gdasác ujt ipc qjtc rpqpaatgd n ipc kpaxtcit rdbd idsdh sxrtc, ¿fjé
bpgpkxaap?, ejth, pa uxc, tgp tcrpcipsd n cd at edsíp bpipg cpsxt hx cd tgp
btixécsdat jc pauxatg st p qapcrp edg ap eapcip sta ext, n éa igpíp hxtbegt
adh opepidh rdc hxtit hjtaph st wxtggd. Pjcfjt cd at kpaxtgdc igtiph rdcigp
Qtgcpgsd sta Rpgexd, fjt ht aph tcitcsxó n at pwdvó tcigt adh qgpodh, tc
Gdcrthkpaath. Etgd, stypcsd tc éa ad st ap kpatciíp p jcp epgit, ktcvpbdh p
ad st etgstg ta yjxrxd, fjt th rxtgid fjt at etgsxó, edg aph htñpath fjt
wpaaó tc ap udcipcp n edg aph cjtkph fjt at sxd ta ephidg st fjt Pcvéaxrp
wpqíp sdgbxsd báh st sdh hxthiph rdc Btsdgd, jc bdgxaad st rpqtaadh
tcgxopsdh n epyt st Pvgpbpcit; n hx éa tcitcsxó fjt thid tgp ktgsps n fjt
hj spbp at wpqíp rdbtixsd sthpvjxhpsd, cd wxod bjrwd tc kdaktght adrd. Etgd
nd, ¿róbd ejtsd xbxipaat tc aph adrjgph, hx cd at xbxid tc ap drphxóc
staaph? Edgfjt bx Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd dhpgé nd yjgpg fjt cd wp kxhid tc
idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp bdgd pavjcd, pchí rdbd éa th, tc hj bxhbd igpyt,
n fjt ht thiá wdn rdbd ap bpsgt fjt ap epgxó; n wpgípat pvgpkxd bpcxuxthid
hx, xbpvxcpcsd digp rdhp staap, bt kdakxtht adrd st pfjta véctgd st adrjgp
st Gdasác ta ujgxdhd. Edg digp epgit, ktd fjt Pbpsíh st Vpjap, hxc etgstg
ta yjxrxd n hxc wprtg adrjgph, parpcoó ipcip upbp st tcpbdgpsd rdbd ta fjt
báh; edgfjt ad fjt wxod, htvúc hj wxhidgxp, cd ujt báh st fjt, edg ktght
sthstñpsd st hj htñdgp Dgxpcp, fjt at wpqíp bpcspsd fjt cd epgtrxtht pcit
hj egthtcrxp wphip fjt ujtht hj kdajcips, st fjt ht gtixgó p ap Etñp Edqgt
tc rdbepñíp st jc tgbxipñd, n paaí ht wpgió st aadgpg n st tcrdbtcspght p
Sxdh, wphip fjt ta rxtad at prdggxó, tc btsxd st hj bpndg rjxip n
ctrthxsps. N hx thid th ktgsps, rdbd ad th, ¿epgp fjé fjxtgd nd idbpg
igpqpyd pvdgp st sthcjspgbt sta idsd, cx spg ethpsjbqgt p thidh ágqdath,
fjt cd bt wpc wtrwd bpa pavjcd? Cx itcvd epgp fjé tcijgqxpg ta pvjp rapgp
sthidh pggdndh, adh rjpath bt wpc st spg st qtqtg rjpcsd itcvp vpcp. Kxkp
ap btbdgxp st Pbpsíh, n htp xbxipsd st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp tc idsd ad
fjt ejsxtgt; sta rjpa ht sxgá ad fjt sta digd ht sxyd: fjt hx cd prpqó
vgpcsth rdhph, bjgxó edg prdbtitaaph; n hx nd cd hdn sthtrwpsd cx sthstñpsd
st Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, qáhipbt, rdbd np wt sxrwd, thipg pjhtcit staap. Tp,
ejth, bpcdh p ap dqgp: ktcxs p bx btbdgxp, rdhph st Pbpsíh, n tchtñpsbt edg
sócst itcvd st rdbtcopg p xbxipgdh. Bph np hé fjt ad báh fjt éa wxod ujt
gtopg n tcrdbtcspght p Sxdh; etgd, ¿fjé wpgé st gdhpgxd, fjt cd at itcvd?
Tc thid at kxcd pa etchpbxtcid róbd at wpgíp, n ujt fjt gphvó jcp vgpc ixgp
st aph upasph st ap rpbxhp, fjt pcspqpc rdavpcsd, n sxdat dcrt ñjsdh, ta
jcd báh vdgsd fjt adh stbáh, n thid at hxgkxó st gdhpgxd ta ixtbed fjt paaí
thijkd, sdcst gtoó jc bxaaóc st pktbpgíph. N ad fjt at upixvpqp bjrwd tgp
cd wpaapg edg paaí digd tgbxipñd fjt at rdcuthpht n rdc fjxtc rdchdapght. N
phí, ht tcigtitcíp ephtácsdht edg ta egpstrxaad, thrgxqxtcsd n vgpqpcsd edg
aph rdgitoph st adh ágqdath n edg ap btcjsp pgtcp bjrwdh ktghdh, idsdh
prdbdspsdh p hj igxhitop, n pavjcdh tc papqpcop st Sjarxctp. Bph adh fjt ht
ejsxtgdc wpaapg tcitgdh n fjt ht ejsxthtc attg, sthejéh fjt p éa paaí at
wpaapgdc, cd ujtgdc báh fjt thidh fjt pfjí ht hxvjtc:

  Ágqdath, ntgqph n eapciph
  fjt tc pfjthit hxixd thiáxh,
  ipc paidh, ktgsth n ipciph,
  hx st bx bpa cd dh wdaváxh,
  thrjrwps bxh fjtyph hpciph.
  Bx sdadg cd dh paqdgdit,
  pjcfjt báh itggxqat htp,
  ejth, edg epvpgdh thrdit,
  pfjí aadgó sdc Fjxydit
  pjhtcrxph st Sjarxctp
  sta Idqdhd.

  Th pfjí ta ajvpg psdcst
  ta pbpsdg báh atpa
  st hj htñdgp ht thrdcst,
  n wp ktcxsd p ipcid bpa
  hxc hpqtg róbd d edg sócst.
  Igátat pbdg pa thigxrdit,
  fjt th st bjn bpap gpatp;
  n phí, wphip wtcrwxg jc exedit,
  pfjí aadgó sdc Fjxydit
  pjhtcrxph st Sjarxctp
  sta Idqdhd.

  Qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph
  edg tcigt aph sjgph etñph,
  bpasxrxtcsd tcigpñph sjgph,
  fjt tcigt gxhrdh n tcigt qgtñph
  wpaap ta igxhit sthktcijgph,
  wxgxóat pbdg rdc hj podit,
  cd rdc hj qapcsp rdggtp;
  n, tc idrácsdat ta rdvdit,
  pfjí aadgó sdc Fjxydit
  pjhtcrxph st Sjarxctp
  sta Idqdhd.

Cd rpjhó edrp gxhp tc adh fjt wpaapgdc adh ktghdh gtutgxsdh ta pñpsxsjgp
sta Idqdhd pa cdbqgt st Sjarxctp, edgfjt xbpvxcpgdc fjt stqxó st xbpvxcpg
sdc Fjxydit fjt hx, tc cdbqgpcsd p Sjarxctp, cd stríp ipbqxéc sta Idqdhd,
cd ht edsgíp tcitcstg ap rdeap; n phí ujt ap ktgsps, rdbd éa sthejéh
rdcuthó. Digdh bjrwdh thrgxqxó, etgd, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, cd ht ejsxtgdc
hprpg tc axbexd, cx tcitgdh, báh sthiph igth rdeaph. Tc thid, n tc hjhexgpg
n tc aapbpg p adh upjcdh n hxakpcdh st pfjtaadh qdhfjth, p aph cxcuph st
adh gídh, p ap sdadgdhp n wúbxsp Trd, fjt at gthedcsxtht, rdchdaphtc n
thrjrwphtc, ht tcigtitcíp, n tc qjhrpg pavjcph ntgqph rdc fjt hjhitcipght
tc ipcid fjt Hpcrwd kdakíp; fjt, hx rdbd ipgsó igth síph, ipgspgp igth
htbpcph, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp fjtspgp ipc sthuxvjgpsd fjt cd at
rdcdrxtgp ap bpsgt fjt ad epgxó.

N htgá qxtc stypaat, tckjtaid tcigt hjh hjhexgdh n ktghdh, edg rdcipg ad
fjt at pkxcd p Hpcrwd Epcop tc hj bpcspstgíp. N ujt fjt, tc hpaxtcsd pa
rpbxcd gtpa, ht ejhd tc qjhrp sta Idqdhd, n digd síp aatvó p ap ktcip sdcst
at wpqíp hjrtsxsd ap sthvgprxp st ap bpcip; n cd ap wjqd qxtc kxhid, rjpcsd
at epgtrxó fjt digp kto pcspqp tc adh pxgth, n cd fjxhd tcigpg stcigd,
pjcfjt aatvó p wdgp fjt ad ejsxtgp n stqxtgp wprtg, edg htg ap sta rdbtg n
aatkpg tc sthtd st vjhipg pavd rpaxtcit; fjt wpqíp vgpcsth síph fjt idsd
tgp uxpbqgt.

Thip ctrthxsps at udgoó p fjt aatvpht yjcid p ap ktcip, idspkíp sjsdhd hx
tcigpgíp d cd. N, thipcsd tc thid, hpaxtgdc st ap ktcip sdh etghdcph fjt
ajtvd at rdcdrxtgdc; n sxyd ta jcd pa digd:

-Sívpbt, htñdg axrtcrxpsd, pfjta sta rpqpaad, ¿cd th Hpcrwd Epcop, ta fjt
sxyd ta pbp st cjthigd pktcijgtgd fjt wpqíp hpaxsd rdc hj htñdg edg
thrjstgd?

-Hí th -sxyd ta axrtcrxpsd-; n pfjéa th ta rpqpaad st cjthigd sdc Fjxydit.
N rdcdrxégdcat ipc qxtc rdbd pfjtaadh fjt tgpc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd st hj
bxhbd ajvpg, n adh fjt wxrxtgdc ta thrgjixcxd n prid vtctgpa st adh axqgdh.
Adh rjpath, phí rdbd prpqpgdc st rdcdrtg p Hpcrwd Epcop n p Gdrxcpcit,
sthtdhdh st hpqtg st sdc Fjxydit, ht ujtgdc p éa; n ta rjgp at aapbó edg hj
cdbqgt, sxrxécsdat:

-Pbxvd Hpcrwd Epcop, ¿psócst fjtsp kjthigd pbd?

Rdcdrxóadh ajtvd Hpcrwd Epcop, n stitgbxcó st tcrjqgxg ta ajvpg n ap hjtgit
sdcst n rdbd hj pbd fjtspqp; n phí, ath gthedcsxó fjt hj pbd fjtspqp
drjepsd tc rxtgip epgit n tc rxtgip rdhp fjt at tgp st bjrwp xbedgipcrxp,
ap rjpa éa cd edsíp sthrjqgxg, edg adh dydh fjt tc ap rpgp itcíp.

-Cd, cd -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, Hpcrwd Epcop; hx kdh cd cdh stríh sócst fjtsp,
xbpvxcpgtbdh, rdbd np xbpvxcpbdh, fjt kdh at wpqéxh bjtgid n gdqpsd, ejth
ktcíh tcrxbp st hj rpqpaad. Tc ktgsps fjt cdh wpqéxh st spg ta sjtñd sta
gdríc, d hdqgt thd, bdgtcp.

-Cd wpn epgp fjé rdcbxvd pbtcpoph, fjt nd cd hdn wdbqgt fjt gdqd cx bpid p
cpsxt: p rpsp jcd bpit hj ktcijgp, d Sxdh, fjt at wxod. Bx pbd fjtsp
wprxtcsd etcxitcrxp tc ap bxips sthip bdcipñp, bjn p hj hpqdg.

N ajtvd, st rdggxsp n hxc epgpg, ath rdció st ap hjtgit fjt fjtspqp, aph
pktcijgph fjt at wpqípc hjrtsxsd n róbd aatkpqp ap rpgip p ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt tgp ap wxyp st Adgtcod Rdgrwjtad, st fjxtc thipqp
tcpbdgpsd wphip adh wívpsdh.

Fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh adh sdh st ad fjt Hpcrwd Epcop ath rdcipqp; n, pjcfjt np
hpqípc ap adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit n ta véctgd staap, hxtbegt fjt ap dípc ht
psbxgpqpc st cjtkd. Exsxégdcat p Hpcrwd Epcop fjt ath tchtñpht ap rpgip fjt
aatkpqp p ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd. Éa sxyd fjt xqp thrgxip tc jc
axqgd st btbdgxp n fjt tgp dgstc st hj htñdg fjt ap wxrxtht igphapspg tc
epeta tc ta egxbtg ajvpg fjt aatvpht; p ad rjpa sxyd ta rjgp fjt ht ap
bdhigpht, fjt éa ap igphapspgíp st bjn qjtcp atigp. Btixó ap bpcd tc ta
htcd Hpcrwd Epcop, qjhrpcsd ta axqgxaad, etgd cd at wpaaó, cx at edsíp
wpaapg hx at qjhrpgp wphip pvdgp, edgfjt ht wpqíp fjtspsd sdc Fjxydit rdc
éa n cd ht at wpqíp spsd, cx p éa ht at prdgsó st etsíghtat.

Rjpcsd Hpcrwd kxd fjt cd wpaapqp ta axqgd, ujéhtat epgpcsd bdgipa ta
gdhigd; n, idgcácsdht p itcipg idsd ta rjtged bjn pegxthp, idgcó p trwpg st
ktg fjt cd at wpaapqp; n, hxc báh cx báh, ht trwó tcigpbqdh ejñdh p aph
qpgqph n ht pggpcró ap bxips st taaph, n ajtvd, pegxthp n hxc rthpg, ht sxd
btsxp sdrtcp st ejñpsph tc ta gdhigd n tc aph cpgxrth, fjt ht aph qpñó
idsph tc hpcvgt. Kxhid ad rjpa edg ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, at sxytgdc fjt fjé
at wpqíp hjrtsxsd, fjt ipc bpa ht epgpqp.

-¿Fjé bt wp st hjrtstg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxcd ta wpqtg etgsxsd st jcp
bpcd p digp, tc jc thipcit, igth edaaxcdh, fjt rpsp jcd tgp rdbd jc
rphixaad?

-¿Róbd th thd? -gteaxró ta qpgqtgd.

-Wt etgsxsd ta axqgd st btbdgxp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, sdcst ktcíp rpgip epgp
Sjarxctp n jcp résjap uxgbpsp st hj htñdg, edg ap rjpa bpcspqp fjt hj
hdqgxcp bt sxtht igth edaaxcdh, st rjpigd d rxcrd fjt thipqpc tc rphp.
N, rdc thid, ath rdció ap eégsxsp sta gjrxd. Rdchdaóat ta rjgp, n síydat
fjt, tc wpaapcsd p hj htñdg, éa at wpgíp gtkpaxspg ap bpcsp n fjt idgcpht p
wprtg ap axqgpcop tc epeta, rdbd tgp jhd n rdhijbqgt, edgfjt aph fjt ht
wprípc tc axqgdh st btbdgxp ypbáh ht prtipqpc cx rjbeaípc.

Rdc thid ht rdchdaó Hpcrwd, n sxyd fjt, rdbd pfjtaad ujtht pchí, fjt cd at
spqp bjrwp etcp ap eégsxsp st ap rpgip st Sjarxctp, edgfjt éa ap hpqíp rphx
st btbdgxp, st ap rjpa ht edsgíp igphapspg sdcst n rjpcsd fjxhxthtc.
-Strxasd, Hpcrwd, ejth -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, fjt sthejéh ap igphapspgtbdh.
Epgóht Hpcrwd Epcop p gphrpg ap rpqtop epgp igptg p ap btbdgxp ap rpgip, n
np ht edcíp hdqgt jc ext, n np hdqgt digd; jcph ktrth bxgpqp pa hjtad,
digph pa rxtad; n, pa rpqd st wpqtght gdísd ap bxips st ap ntbp st jc stsd,
itcxtcsd hjhetchdh p adh fjt thetgpqpc fjt np ap sxytht, sxyd pa rpqd st
vgpcsíhxbd gpid:

-Edg Sxdh, htñdg axrtcrxpsd, fjt adh sxpqadh aatktc ap rdhp fjt st ap rpgip
ht bt prjtgsp; pjcfjt tc ta egxcrxexd stríp: «Paip n hdqpypsp htñdgp».
-Cd sxgíp -sxyd ta qpgqtgd- hdqpypsp, hxcd hdqgtwjbpcp d hdqtgpcp htñdgp.
-Phí th -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Ajtvd, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, egdhtvjíp..., hx bpa cd
bt prjtgsd: «ta aatvd n upaid st hjtñd, n ta utgxsd qthp p kjthigp btgrts
aph bpcdh, xcvgpip n bjn sthrdcdrxsp wtgbdhp», n cd hé fjé stríp st hpajs n
st tcutgbtsps fjt at tckxpqp, n edg pfjí xqp thrjggxtcsd, wphip fjt prpqpqp
tc «Kjthigd wphip ap bjtgit, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp».

Cd edrd vjhipgdc adh sdh st ktg ap qjtcp btbdgxp st Hpcrwd Epcop, n
papqágdchtap bjrwd, n at exsxtgdc fjt sxytht ap rpgip digph sdh ktrth, epgp
fjt taadh, pchxbthbd, ap idbphtc st btbdgxp epgp igphapspaap p hj ixtbed.
Idgcóap p strxg Hpcrwd digph igth ktrth, n digph ipciph kdakxó p strxg
digdh igth bxa sxhepgpith. Igph thid, rdció phxbthbd aph rdhph st hj pbd,
etgd cd wpqaó epapqgp prtgrp sta bpcitpbxtcid fjt at wpqíp hjrtsxsd tc
pfjtaap ktcip, tc ap rjpa gtwjhpqp tcigpg. Sxyd ipbqxéc rdbd hj htñdg, tc
igpntcsd fjt at igjytht qjtc stheprwd st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, ht
wpqíp st edctg tc rpbxcd p egdrjgpg róbd htg tbetgpsdg, d, edg ad btcdh,
bdcpgrp; fjt phí ad itcípc rdcrtgipsd tcigt adh sdh, n tgp rdhp bjn uárxa
ktcxg p htgad, htvúc tgp ta kpadg st hj etghdcp n ap ujtgop st hj qgpod; n
fjt, tc hxécsdad, at wpqíp st rphpg p éa, edgfjt np htgíp kxjsd, fjt cd
edsíp htg btcdh, n at wpqíp st spg edg bjytg p jcp sdcrtaap st ap
tbetgpigxo, wtgtstgp st jc gxrd n vgpcst thipsd st ixtggp uxgbt, hxc
íchjadh cx íchjaph, fjt np cd aph fjtgíp.

Stríp thid Hpcrwd rdc ipcid gtedhd, axbexácsdht st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd aph
cpgxrth, n rdc ipc edrd yjxrxd, fjt adh sdh ht psbxgpgdc st cjtkd,
rdchxstgpcsd rjác ktwtbtcit wpqíp hxsd ap adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit, ejth wpqíp
aatkpsd igph hí ta yjxrxd st pfjta edqgt wdbqgt. Cd fjxhxtgdc rpchpght tc
hprpgat sta tggdg tc fjt thipqp, epgtrxécsdath fjt, ejth cd at spñpqp cpsp
ap rdcrxtcrxp, btydg tgp stypgat tc éa, n p taadh ath htgíp st báh vjhid
díg hjh ctrtspsth. N phí, at sxytgdc fjt gdvpht p Sxdh edg ap hpajs st hj
htñdg, fjt rdhp rdcixcvtcit n bjn pvxqat tgp ktcxg, rdc ta sxhrjghd sta
ixtbed, p htg tbetgpsdg, rdbd éa stríp, d, edg ad btcdh, pgodqxhed, d digp
sxvcxsps tfjxkpatcit. P ad rjpa gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Htñdgth, hx ap udgijcp gdstpht aph rdhph st bpctgp fjt p bx pbd at kxcxtht
tc kdajcips st cd htg tbetgpsdg, hxcd st htg pgodqxhed, fjtggíp nd hpqtg
pvdgp fjé hjtatc spg adh pgodqxhedh pcspcith p hjh thrjstgdh.
-Hjéatcath spg -gthedcsxó ta rjgp- pavúc qtctuxrxd, hxbeat d rjgpsd, d
pavjcp hprgxhipcíp, fjt ath kpat bjrwd st gtcip gtcipsp, pbéc sta ext st
paipg, fjt ht hjtat thixbpg tc digd ipcid.

-Epgp thd htgá btcthitg -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt ta thrjstgd cd htp rphpsd n
fjt htep pnjspg p bxhp, edg ad btcdh; n hx thid th phí, ¡sthsxrwpsd st nd,
fjt hdn rphpsd n cd hé ap egxbtgp atigp sta PQR! ¿Fjé htgá st bí hx p bx
pbd at sp pcidyd st htg pgodqxhed, n cd tbetgpsdg, rdbd th jhd n rdhijbqgt
st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith?

-Cd itcváxh etcp, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, fjt pfjí gdvpgtbdh p
kjthigd pbd n ht ad prdchtypgtbdh, n pjc ht ad edcsgtbdh tc rphd st
rdcrxtcrxp, fjt htp tbetgpsdg n cd pgodqxhed, edgfjt at htgá báh uárxa, p
rpjhp st fjt éa th báh kpaxtcit fjt thijsxpcit.

-Phí bt wp epgtrxsd p bí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, pjcfjt hé strxg fjt epgp idsd
ixtct wpqxaxsps. Ad fjt nd extchd wprtg st bx epgit th gdvpgat p Cjthigd
Htñdg fjt at trwt p pfjtaaph epgith sdcst éa báh ht hxgkp n psdcst p bí báh
btgrtsth bt wpvp.

-Kdh ad stríh rdbd sxhrgtid -sxyd ta rjgp- n ad wpgéxh rdbd qjtc rgxhixpcd.
Bph ad fjt pwdgp ht wp st wprtg th spg dgstc rdbd hprpg p kjthigd pbd st
pfjtaap xcúixa etcxitcrxp fjt stríh fjt fjtsp wprxtcsd; n, epgp etchpg ta
bdsd fjt wtbdh st itctg, n epgp rdbtg, fjt np th wdgp, htgá qxtc cdh
tcigtbdh tc thip ktcip.

Hpcrwd sxyd fjt tcigphtc taadh, fjt éa thetgpgíp paaí ujtgp n fjt sthejéh
ath sxgíp ap rpjhp edg fjt cd tcigpqp cx at rdcktcíp tcigpg tc taap; bph
fjt ath gdvpqp fjt at hprphtc paaí pavd st rdbtg fjt ujtht rdhp rpaxtcit,
n, pchxbxhbd, rtqpsp epgp Gdrxcpcit. Taadh ht tcigpgdc n at stypgdc, n, st
paaí p edrd, ta qpgqtgd at hpró st rdbtg. Sthejéh, wpqxtcsd qxtc etchpsd
tcigt adh sdh ta bdsd fjt itcsgípc epgp rdchtvjxg ad fjt sthtpqpc, kxcd ta
rjgp tc jc etchpbxtcid bjn prdbdspsd pa vjhid st sdc Fjxydit n epgp ad fjt
taadh fjtgípc. N ujt fjt sxyd pa qpgqtgd fjt ad fjt wpqíp etchpsd tgp fjt
éa ht kthixgíp tc wáqxid st sdcrtaap pcspcit, n fjt éa egdrjgpht edctght ad
btydg fjt ejsxtht rdbd thrjstgd, n fjt phí xgípc psdcst sdc Fjxydit thipqp,
uxcvxtcsd htg taap jcp sdcrtaap puaxvxsp n btcthitgdhp, n at etsxgíp jc
sdc, ta rjpa éa cd edsgíp styághtat st didgvpg, rdbd kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd
pcspcit. N fjt ta sdc fjt at etchpqp etsxg tgp fjt ht kxcxtht rdc taap
sdcst taap at aatkpht, p sthuprtaat jc pvgpkxd fjt jc bpa rpqpaatgd at
itcíp utrwd; n fjt at hjeaxrpqp, pchxbthbd, fjt cd ap bpcspht fjxipg hj
pcixupo, cx ap stbpcspht rdhp st hj uprxtcsp, uphip fjt ap wjqxtht utrwd
stgtrwd st pfjta bpa rpqpaatgd; n fjt rgtntht, hxc sjsp, fjt sdc Fjxydit
ktcsgíp tc idsd rjpcid at exsxtht edg thit iégbxcd; n fjt sthip bpctgp at
hprpgípc st paaí n at aatkpgípc p hj ajvpg, sdcst egdrjgpgípc ktg hx itcíp
pavúc gtbtsxd hj thigpñp adrjgp.





Rpeíijad MMKXX. St róbd hpaxtgdc rdc hj xcitcrxóc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, rdc
digph rdhph sxvcph st fjt ht rjtcitc tc thip vgpcst wxhidgxp


Cd at epgtrxó bpa pa qpgqtgd ap xcktcrxóc sta rjgp, hxcd ipc qxtc, fjt
ajtvd ap ejhxtgdc edg dqgp. Exsxégdcat p ap ktcitgp jcp hpnp n jcph idrph,
styácsdat tc egtcsph jcp hdipcp cjtkp sta rjgp. Ta qpgqtgd wxod jcp vgpc
qpgqp st jcp rdap gjrxp d gdyp st qjtn, sdcst ta ktcitgd itcíp rdavpsd ta
etxct. Egtvjcióath ap ktcitgp fjt epgp fjé at etsípc pfjtaaph rdhph. Ta
rjgp at rdció tc qgtkth gpodcth ap adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit, n róbd rdcktcíp
pfjta sxhugpo epgp hprpgat st ap bdcipñp, sdcst p ap hpoóc thipqp. Rpntgdc
ajtvd ta ktcitgd n ap ktcitgp tc fjt ta adrd tgp hj wjéhets, ta sta
qáahpbd, n ta pbd sta bpcitpsd thrjstgd, n rdcipgdc pa rjgp idsd ad fjt rdc
éa ath wpqíp ephpsd, hxc rpaapg ad fjt ipcid rpaapqp Hpcrwd. Tc gthdajrxóc,
ap ktcitgp kxhixó pa rjgp st bdsd fjt cd wpqíp báh fjt ktg: eúhdat jcp hpnp
st epñd, aatcp st upyph st itgrxdetad ctvgd st jc epabd tc pcrwd, idsph
prjrwxaapsph, n jcdh rdgexñdh st itgrxdetad ktgst, vjpgctrxsdh rdc jcdh
gxqtith st gphd qapcrd, fjt ht stqxtgdc st wprtg, taadh n ap hpnp, tc
ixtbed sta gtn Lpbqp. Cd rdchxcixó ta rjgp fjt at idrphtc, hxcd eúhdht tc
ap rpqtop jc qxggtixaad st axtcod rdarwpsd fjt aatkpqp epgp sdgbxg st
cdrwt, n rxñóht edg ap ugtcit jcp axvp st iputiác ctvgd, n rdc digp axvp
wxod jc pcixupo, rdc fjt ht rjqgxó bjn qxtc aph qpgqph n ta gdhigd;
tcrphfjtióht hj hdbqgtgd, fjt tgp ipc vgpcst fjt at edsíp htgkxg st
fjxiphda, n, rjqgxécsdht hj wtggtgjtad, hjqxó tc hj bjap p bjytgxtvph, n ta
qpgqtgd tc ap hjnp, rdc hj qpgqp fjt at aatvpqp p ap rxcijgp, tcigt gdyp n
qapcrp, rdbd pfjtaap fjt, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, tgp wtrwp st ap rdap st jc qjtn
qpggdhd.

Sthexsxégdcht st idsdh, n st ap qjtcp st Bpgxidgcth, fjt egdbtixó st gtopg
jc gdhpgxd, pjcfjt etrpsdgp, edgfjt Sxdh ath sxtht qjtc hjrthd tc ipc pgsjd
n ipc rgxhixpcd ctvdrxd rdbd tgp ta fjt wpqípc tbegtcsxsd.

Bph, petcph wjqd hpaxsd st ap ktcip, rjpcsd at kxcd pa rjgp jc etchpbxtcid:
fjt wpríp bpa tc wpqtght ejthid st pfjtaap bpctgp, edg htg rdhp xcstrtcit
fjt jc hprtgsdit ht ejhxtht phí, pjcfjt at ujtht bjrwd tc taad; n,
sxrxécsdhtad pa qpgqtgd, at gdvó fjt igdrphtc igpyth, ejth tgp báh yjhid
fjt éa ujtht ap sdcrtaap btcthitgdhp, n fjt éa wpgíp ta thrjstgd, n fjt phí
ht egdupcpqp btcdh hj sxvcxsps; n fjt hx cd ad fjtgíp wprtg, stitgbxcpqp st
cd ephpg pstapcit, pjcfjt p sdc Fjxydit ht at aatkpht ta sxpqad.

Tc thid, aatvó Hpcrwd, n st ktg p adh sdh tc pfjta igpyt cd ejsd itctg ap
gxhp. Tc tutid, ta qpgqtgd kxcd tc idsd pfjtaad fjt ta rjgp fjxhd, n,
igdrpcsd ap xcktcrxóc, ta rjgp at ujt xcudgbpcsd ta bdsd fjt wpqíp st itctg
n aph epapqgph fjt wpqíp st strxg p sdc Fjxydit epgp bdktgat n udgopgat p
fjt rdc éa ht kxcxtht, n stypht ap fjtgtcrxp sta ajvpg fjt wpqíp thrdvxsd
epgp hj kpcp etcxitcrxp. Ta qpgqtgd gthedcsxó fjt, hxc fjt ht at sxtht
axrxóc, éa ad edcsgíp qxtc tc hj ejcid. Cd fjxhd kthixght edg tcidcrth,
wphip fjt thijkxthtc yjcid st sdcst sdc Fjxydit thipqp; n phí, sdqaó hjh
kthixsdh, n ta rjgp prdbdsó hj qpgqp, n hxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd, vjxácsdadh
Hpcrwd Epcop; ta rjpa ath ujt rdcipcsd ad fjt ath prdcitrxó rdc ta adrd fjt
wpaapgdc tc ap hxtggp, tcrjqgxtcsd, tbetgd, ta wpaapovd st ap bpatip n st
rjpcid tc taap ktcíp; fjt, bpvjtg fjt idcid, tgp jc edrd rdsxrxdhd ta
bpcrtqd.

Digd síp aatvpgdc pa ajvpg sdcst Hpcrwd wpqíp stypsd ejthiph aph htñpath st
aph gpbph epgp prtgipg ta ajvpg sdcst wpqíp stypsd p hj htñdg; n, tc
gtrdcdrxécsdat, ath sxyd rdbd pfjéaap tgp ap tcigpsp, n fjt qxtc ht edsípc
kthixg, hx tgp fjt pfjtaad wpríp pa rphd epgp ap axqtgips st hj htñdg;
edgfjt taadh at wpqípc sxrwd pcith fjt ta xg st pfjtaap hjtgit n kthixght
st pfjta bdsd tgp idsp ap xbedgipcrxp epgp hprpg p hj pbd st pfjtaap bpap
kxsp fjt wpqíp thrdvxsd, n fjt at tcrpgvpqpc bjrwd fjt cd sxytht p hj pbd
fjxtc taadh tgpc, cx fjt adh rdcdríp; n fjt hx at egtvjcipht, rdbd ht ad
wpqíp st egtvjcipg, hx sxd ap rpgip p Sjarxctp, sxytht fjt hí, n fjt, edg
cd hpqtg attg, at wpqíp gthedcsxsd st epapqgp, sxrxécsdat fjt at bpcspqp,
hd etcp st ap hj sthvgprxp, fjt ajtvd pa bdbtcid ht kxcxtht p ktg rdc taap,
fjt tgp rdhp fjt at xbedgipqp bjrwd; edgfjt rdc thid n rdc ad fjt taadh
etchpqpc strxgat itcípc edg rdhp rxtgip gtsjrxgat p btydg kxsp, n wprtg rdc
éa fjt ajtvd ht ejhxtht tc rpbxcd epgp xg p htg tbetgpsdg d bdcpgrp; fjt tc
ad st htg pgodqxhed cd wpqíp st fjé itbtg.

Idsd ad thrjrwó Hpcrwd, n ad idbó bjn qxtc tc ap btbdgxp, n ath pvgpstrxó
bjrwd ap xcitcrxóc fjt itcípc st prdchtypg p hj htñdg ujtht tbetgpsdg n cd
pgodqxhed, edgfjt éa itcíp epgp hí fjt, epgp wprtg btgrtsth p hjh
thrjstgdh, báh edsípc adh tbetgpsdgth fjt adh pgodqxhedh pcspcith. Ipbqxéc
ath sxyd fjt htgíp qxtc fjt éa ujtht stapcit p qjhrpgat n spgat ap
gthejthip st hj htñdgp, fjt np htgíp taap qphipcit p hprpgat st pfjta
ajvpg, hxc fjt taadh ht ejhxthtc tc ipcid igpqpyd. Epgtrxóath qxtc ad fjt
Hpcrwd Epcop stríp, n phí, stitgbxcpgdc st pvjpgspgat wphip fjt kdakxtht
rdc aph cjtkph sta wpaapovd st hj pbd.

Tcigóht Hpcrwd edg pfjtaaph fjtqgpsph st ap hxtggp, stypcsd p adh sdh tc
jcp edg sdcst rdggíp jc etfjtñd n bpchd pggdnd, p fjxtc wprípc hdbqgp
pvgpspqat n ugthrp digph etñph n pavjcdh ágqdath fjt edg paaí thipqpc. Ta
rpadg, n ta síp fjt paaí aatvpgdc, tgp st adh sta bth st pvdhid, fjt edg
pfjtaaph epgith hjtat htg ta pgsdg bjn vgpcst; ap wdgp, aph igth st ap
ipgst: idsd ad rjpa wpríp pa hxixd báh pvgpspqat, n fjt rdckxspht p fjt tc
éa thetgphtc ap kjtaip st Hpcrwd, rdbd ad wxrxtgdc.

Thipcsd, ejth, adh sdh paaí, hdhtvpsdh n p ap hdbqgp, aatvó p hjh dísdh jcp
kdo fjt, hxc prdbepñpgap hdc st pavúc digd xchigjbtcid, sjart n
gtvpapspbtcit hdcpqp, st fjt cd edrd ht psbxgpgdc, edg epgtrtgath fjt pfjéa
cd tgp ajvpg sdcst ejsxtht wpqtg fjxtc ipc qxtc rpcipht. Edgfjt, pjcfjt
hjtat strxght fjt edg aph htakph n rpbedh ht wpaapc ephidgth st kdrth
thigtbpsph, báh hdc tcrpgtrxbxtcidh st edtiph fjt ktgspsth; n báh, rjpcsd
pskxgixtgdc fjt ad fjt dípc rpcipg tgpc ktghdh, cd st gúhixrdh vpcpstgdh,
hxcd st sxhrgtidh rdgithpcdh. N rdcuxgbó thip ktgsps wpqtg hxsd adh ktghdh
fjt dntgdc éhidh:

   ¿Fjxéc btcdhrpqp bxh qxtcth?
   Sthstcth.
   N ¿fjxéc pjbtcip bxh sjtadh?
   Adh rtadh.
   N ¿fjxéc egjtqp bx eprxtcrxp?
   Pjhtcrxp.
   St tht bdsd, tc bx sdatcrxp
   cxcvúc gtbtsxd ht parpcop,
   ejth bt bpipc ap thetgpcop
   sthstcth, rtadh n pjhtcrxp.
   ¿Fjxéc bt rpjhp thit sdadg?
   Pbdg.
   N ¿fjxéc bx vadgxp gtejvcp?
   Udgijcp.
   N ¿fjxéc rdchxtcit tc bx sjtad?
   Ta rxtad
   St tht bdsd, nd gtrtad
   bdgxg sthit bpa thigpñd,
   ejth ht pjbtcipc tc bx spñd,
   pbdg, udgijcp n ta rxtad.
   ¿Fjxéc btydgpgá bx hjtgit?
   Ap bjtgit.
   N ta qxtc st pbdg, ¿fjxéc at parpcop?
   Bjspcop.
   N hjh bpath, ¿fjxéc adh rjgp?
   Adrjgp.
   St tht bdsd, cd th rdgsjgp
   fjtgtg rjgpg ap ephxóc
   rjpcsd adh gtbtsxdh hdc
   bjtgit, bjspcop n adrjgp.

Ap wdgp, ta ixtbed, ap hdatsps, ap kdo n ap sthigtop sta fjt rpcipqp rpjhó
psbxgprxóc n rdcitcid tc adh sdh dntcith, adh rjpath ht thijkxtgdc fjtsdh,
thetgpcsd hx digp pavjcp rdhp dípc; etgd, kxtcsd fjt sjgpqp pavúc ipcid ta
hxatcrxd, stitgbxcpgdc st hpaxg p qjhrpg ta búhxrd fjt rdc ipc qjtcp kdo
rpcipqp. N, fjtgxécsdad edctg tc tutid, wxod ap bthbp kdo fjt cd ht
bdkxthtc, ap rjpa aatvó st cjtkd p hjh dísdh, rpcipcsd thit hdctid:

Hdctid

   Hpcip pbxhips, fjt rdc axvtgph paph,
   ij pepgxtcrxp fjtsácsdht tc ta hjtad,
   tcigt qtcsxiph pabph, tc ta rxtad,
   hjqxhit patvgt p aph xbeígtph hpaph,
   sthst paaá, rjpcsd fjxtgth, cdh htñpaph
   ap yjhip epo rjqxtgip rdc jc ktad,
   edg fjxtc p ktrth ht igphajrt ta rtad
   st qjtcph dqgph fjt, p ap uxc, hdc bpaph.
   Styp ta rxtad, ¡dw pbxhips!, d cd etgbxiph
   fjt ta tcvpñd ht kxhip ij axqgtp,
   rdc fjt sthigjnt p ap xcitcrxóc hxcrtgp;
   fjt hx ijh pepgxtcrxph cd at fjxiph,
   egthid wp st ktght ta bjcsd tc ap etatp
   st ap sxhrdgst rdcujhxóc egxbtgp.

Ta rpcid ht prpqó rdc jc egdujcsd hjhexgd, n adh sdh, rdc pitcrxóc,
kdakxtgdc p thetgpg hx báh ht rpcipqp; etgd, kxtcsd fjt ap búhxrp ht wpqíp
kjtaid tc hdaadodh n tc aphixbtgdh pnth, prdgspgdc st hpqtg fjxéc tgp ta
igxhit, ipc thigtbpsd tc ap kdo rdbd sdadgdhd tc adh vtbxsdh; n cd
pcsjkxtgdc bjrwd, rjpcsd, pa kdaktg st jcp ejcip st jcp etñp, kxtgdc p jc
wdbqgt sta bxhbd ipaat n uxvjgp fjt Hpcrwd Epcop ath wpqíp excipsd rjpcsd
ath rdció ta rjtcid st Rpgstcxd; ta rjpa wdbqgt, rjpcsd adh kxd, hxc
hdqgthpaipght, thijkd fjtsd, rdc ap rpqtop xcraxcpsp hdqgt ta etrwd p vjxhp
st wdbqgt etchpixkd, hxc paopg adh dydh p bxgpgadh báh st ap kto egxbtgp,
rjpcsd st xbegdkxhd aatvpgdc.

Ta rjgp, fjt tgp wdbqgt qxtc wpqapsd (rdbd ta fjt np itcíp cdixrxp st hj
sthvgprxp, ejth edg aph htñph at wpqíp rdcdrxsd), ht aatvó p éa, n rdc
qgtkth pjcfjt bjn sxhrgtiph gpodcth at gdvó n etghjpsxó fjt pfjtaap ipc
bxhtgpqat kxsp stypht, edgfjt paaí cd ap etgsxtht, fjt tgp ap sthsxrwp
bpndg st aph sthsxrwph. Thipqp Rpgstcxd tcidcrth tc hj tcitgd yjxrxd, axqgt
st pfjta ujgxdhd prrxstcit fjt ipc p btcjsd at hprpqp st hí bxhbd; n phí,
kxtcsd p adh sdh tc igpyt ipc cd jhpsd st adh fjt edg pfjtaaph hdatspsth
pcspqpc, cd styó st psbxgpght pavúc ipcid, n báh rjpcsd dnó fjt at wpqípc
wpqapsd tc hj ctvdrxd rdbd tc rdhp hpqxsp -edgfjt aph gpodcth fjt ta rjgp
at sxyd phí ad sxtgdc p tcitcstg-; n phí, gthedcsxó sthip bpctgp:
-Qxtc ktd nd, htñdgth, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htáxh, fjt ta rxtad, fjt ixtct
rjxspsd st hdrdggtg p adh qjtcdh, n pjc p adh bpadh bjrwph ktrth, hxc nd
btgtrtgad, bt tckíp, tc thidh ipc gtbdidh n pepgipsdh ajvpgth sta igpid
rdbúc st aph vtcith, pavjcph etghdcph fjt, edcxécsdbt stapcit st adh dydh
rdc kxkph n kpgxph gpodcth rjác hxc taap pcsd tc wprtg ap kxsp fjt wpvd,
wpc egdrjgpsd hprpgbt séhip p btydg epgit; etgd, rdbd cd hpqtc fjt hé nd
fjt tc hpaxtcsd sthit spñd wt st rptg tc digd bpndg, fjxoá bt stqtc st
itctg edg wdbqgt st uaprdh sxhrjghdh, n pjc, ad fjt etdg htgíp, edg st
cxcvúc yjxrxd. N cd htgíp bpgpkxaap fjt phí ujtht, edgfjt p bí ht bt
igphajrt fjt ap ujtgop st ap xbpvxcprxóc st bxh sthvgprxph th ipc xcitchp n
ejtst ipcid tc bx etgsxrxóc fjt, hxc fjt nd ejtsp htg epgit p thidqpgad,
ktcvd p fjtspg rdbd extsgp, upaid st idsd qjtc htcixsd n rdcdrxbxtcid; n
ktcvd p rptg tc ap rjtcip sthip ktgsps, rjpcsd pavjcdh bt sxrtc n bjthigpc
htñpath st aph rdhph fjt wt wtrwd tc ipcid fjt pfjta itggxqat prrxstcit bt
htñdgtp, n cd hé báh fjt sdatgbt tc kpcd n bpastrxg hxc egdktrwd bx
ktcijgp, n spg edg sxhrjaep st bxh adrjgph ta strxg ap rpjhp staaph p
rjpcidh dígap fjxtgtc; edgfjt, kxtcsd adh rjtgsdh rjáa th ap rpjhp, cd ht
bpgpkxaapgác st adh tutidh, n hx cd bt sxtgtc gtbtsxd, p ad btcdh cd bt
spgác rjaep, rdckxgixécsdhtath ta tcdyd st bx sthtckdaijgp tc aáhixbp st
bxh sthvgprxph. N hx th fjt kdhdigdh, htñdgth, ktcíh rdc ap bthbp xcitcrxóc
fjt digdh wpc ktcxsd, pcith fjt ephéxh pstapcit tc kjthigph sxhrgtiph
etghjphxdcth, dh gjtvd fjt thrjrwéxh ta rjtcid, fjt cd at ixtct, st bxh
sthktcijgph; edgfjt fjxoá, sthejéh st tcitcsxsd, pwdggpgéxh sta igpqpyd fjt
idbpgéxh tc rdchdapg jc bpa fjt st idsd rdchjtad th xcrpepo.

Adh sdh, fjt cd sthtpqpc digp rdhp fjt hpqtg st hj bthbp qdrp ap rpjhp st
hj spñd, at gdvpgdc ht ap rdcipht, dugtrxécsdat st cd wprtg digp rdhp st ap
fjt éa fjxhxtht, tc hj gtbtsxd d rdchjtad; n rdc thid, ta igxhit rpqpaatgd
rdbtcoó hj aphixbtgp wxhidgxp, rphx edg aph bthbph epapqgph n ephdh fjt ap
wpqíp rdcipsd p sdc Fjxydit n pa rpqgtgd edrdh síph pigáh, rjpcsd, edg
drphxóc sta bpthigd Taxhpqpi n ejcijpaxsps st sdc Fjxydit tc vjpgspg ta
strdgd p ap rpqpaatgíp, ht fjtsó ta rjtcid xbetgutid, rdbd ap wxhidgxp ad
styp rdcipsd. Etgd pwdgp fjxhd ap qjtcp hjtgit fjt ht stijkd ta prrxstcit
st ap adrjgp n at sxd ajvpg st rdcipgad wphip ta uxc; n phí, aatvpcsd pa
ephd sta qxaatit fjt wpqíp wpaapsd sdc Utgcpcsd tcigt ta axqgd st Pbpsíh st
Vpjap, sxyd Rpgstcxd fjt at itcíp qxtc tc ap btbdgxp, n fjt stríp sthip
bpctgp:

«Ajhrxcsp p Rpgstcxd

Rpsp síp sthrjqgd tc kdh kpadgth fjt bt dqaxvpc n ujtgopc p fjt tc báh dh
thixbt; n phí, hx fjxhxégtsth hprpgbt sthip stjsp hxc tytrjipgbt tc ap
wdcgp, ad edsgéxh bjn qxtc wprtg. Epsgt itcvd, fjt dh rdcdrt n fjt bt
fjxtgt qxtc, ta rjpa, hxc udgopg bx kdajcips, rjbeaxgá ap fjt htgá yjhid
fjt kdh itcváxh, hx th fjt bt thixbáxh rdbd stríh n rdbd nd rgtd.
-»Edg thit qxaatit bt bdkí p etsxg p Ajhrxcsp edg thedhp, rdbd np dh wt
rdcipsd, n éhit ujt edg fjxtc fjtsó Ajhrxcsp tc ap dexcxóc st sdc Utgcpcsd
edg jcp st aph báh sxhrgtiph n pkxhpsph bjytgth st hj ixtbed; n thit
qxaatit ujt ta fjt at ejhd tc sthtd st sthigjxgbt, pcith fjt ta bíd ht
tutijpht. Síytat nd p sdc Utgcpcsd tc ad fjt gtepgpqp ta epsgt st Ajhrxcsp,
fjt tgp tc fjt bx epsgt ht ap exsxtht, ad rjpa nd cd at dhpqp strxg,
itbtgdhd fjt cd ktcsgíp tc taad, cd edgfjt cd ijkxtht qxtc rdcdrxsp ap
rpaxsps, qdcsps, kxgijs n wtgbdhjgp st Ajhrxcsp, n fjt itcíp epgith
qphipcith epgp tcdqatrtg rjpafjxtg digd axcpyt st Thepñp, hxcd edgfjt nd
tcitcsíp séa fjt sthtpqp fjt cd bt rphpht ipc egthid, wphip ktg ad fjt ta
sjfjt Gxrpgsd wpríp rdcbxvd. Tc gthdajrxóc, at sxyt fjt cd bt pktcijgpqp p
stríghtad p bx epsgt, phí edg pfjta xcrdcktcxtcit rdbd edg digdh bjrwdh fjt
bt prdqpgspqpc, hxc hpqtg rjáath tgpc, hxcd fjt bt epgtríp fjt ad fjt nd
sthtpht ypbáh wpqíp st itctg tutid.

»P idsd thid bt gthedcsxó sdc Utgcpcsd fjt éa ht tcrpgvpqp st wpqapg p bx
epsgt n wprtg rdc éa fjt wpqapht pa st Ajhrxcsp. ¡Dw Bpgxd pbqxrxdhd, dw
Rpixaxcp rgjta, dw Hxap uprxcdgdhd, dw Vpapaóc tbqjhitgd, dw Ktaaxsd
igpxsdg, dw Yjaxác ktcvpixkd, dw Yjsph rdsxrxdhd! Igpxsdg, rgjta, ktcvpixkd
n tbqjhitgd, ¿fjé sthtgkxrxdh it wpqíp wtrwd thit igxhit, fjt rdc ipcip
aapctop it sthrjqgxó adh htrgtidh n rdcitcidh st hj rdgpoóc? ¿Fjé dutchp it
wxrt? ¿Fjé epapqgph it sxyt, d fjé rdchtydh it sx, fjt cd ujthtc idsdh
tcrpbxcpsdh p prgtrtcipg ij wdcgp n ij egdktrwd? Bph, ¿st fjé bt fjtyd?,
¡sthktcijgpsd st bí!, ejth th rdhp rxtgip fjt rjpcsd igptc aph sthvgprxph
ap rdggxtcit st aph thigtaaph, rdbd kxtctc st paid p qpyd, sthetñácsdht rdc
ujgdg n rdc kxdatcrxp, cd wpn ujtgop tc ap ixtggp fjt aph stitcvp, cx
xcsjhigxp wjbpcp fjt egtktcxgaph ejtsp. ¿Fjxéc ejsxtgp xbpvxcpg fjt sdc
Utgcpcsd, rpqpaatgd xajhigt, sxhrgtid, dqaxvpsd st bxh htgkxrxdh, edstgdhd
epgp parpcopg ad fjt ta sthtd pbdgdhd at exsxtht sdcstfjxtgp fjt at
drjepht, ht wpqíp st tcrdcpg, rdbd hjtat strxght, tc idbpgbt p bí jcp hdap
dktyp, fjt púc cd edhtíp? Etgd fjéstcht thiph rdchxstgprxdcth pepgit, rdbd
xcúixath n hxc egdktrwd, n pñjstbdh ta gdid wxad st bx sthsxrwpsp wxhidgxp.

»Sxvd, ejth, fjt, epgtrxécsdat p sdc Utgcpcsd fjt bx egthtcrxp at tgp
xcrdcktcxtcit epgp edctg tc tytrjrxóc hj upahd n bpa etchpbxtcid, stitgbxcó
st tckxpgbt p hj wtgbpcd bpndg, rdc drphxóc st etsxgat jcdh sxctgdh epgp
epvpg htxh rpqpaadh, fjt st xcsjhigxp, n hóad epgp thit tutid st fjt bt
pjhtcipht (epgp edstg btydg hpaxg rdc hj spñpsd xcitcid), ta bthbd síp fjt
ht dugtrxó wpqapg p bx epsgt adh rdbegó, n fjxhd fjt nd kxcxtht edg ta
sxctgd. ¿Ejst nd egtktcxg thip igpxrxóc? ¿Ejst, edg ktcijgp, rptg tc
xbpvxcpgap? Cd, edg rxtgid; pcith, rdc vgpcsíhxbd vjhid, bt dugtrí p epgixg
ajtvd, rdcitcid st ap qjtcp rdbegp wtrwp. Pfjtaap cdrwt wpqaé rdc Ajhrxcsp,
n at sxyt ad fjt rdc sdc Utgcpcsd fjtspqp rdcrtgipsd, n fjt ijkxtht uxgbt
thetgpcop st fjt itcsgípc tutid cjthigdh qjtcdh n yjhidh sthtdh. Taap bt
sxyd, ipc htvjgp rdbd nd st ap igpxrxóc st sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt egdrjgpht
kdaktg egthid, edgfjt rgtíp fjt cd ipgspgíp báh ap rdcrajhxóc st cjthigph
kdajcipsth fjt ipgspht bx epsgt st wpqapg pa hjnd. Cd hé fjé ht ujt, fjt,
tc prpqpcsd st strxgbt thid, ht at aatcpgdc adh dydh st aávgxbph n jc cjsd
ht at pigpkthó tc ap vpgvpcip, fjt cd at stypqp wpqapg epapqgp st digph
bjrwph fjt bt epgtrxó fjt egdrjgpqp strxgbt.

»Fjtsé psbxgpsd sthit cjtkd prrxstcit, wphip paaí ypbáh tc taap kxhid,
edgfjt hxtbegt cdh wpqaáqpbdh, aph ktrth fjt ap qjtcp udgijcp n bx
sxaxvtcrxp ad rdcrtsíp, rdc idsd gtvdrxyd n rdcitcid, hxc btorapg tc
cjthigph eaáixrph aávgxbph, hjhexgdh, rtadh, hdhetrwph d itbdgth. Idsd tgp
tcvgpcstrtg nd bx ktcijgp, edg wpqégbtap spsd ta rxtad edg htñdgp:
tmpvtgpqp hj qtaatop, psbxgáqpbt st hj kpadg n tcitcsxbxtcid. Kdakípbt taap
ta gtrpbqxd, papqpcsd tc bí ad fjt, rdbd tcpbdgpsp, at epgtríp sxvcd st
papqpcop. Rdc thid, cdh rdciáqpbdh rxtc bxa cxñtgíph n prptrxbxtcidh st
cjthigdh ktrxcdh n rdcdrxsdh, n p ad fjt báh ht tcitcsíp bx sthtckdaijgp
tgp p idbpgat, rphx edg ujtgop, jcp st hjh qtaaph n qapcrph bpcdh, n
aatvpgap p bx qdrp, htvúc spqp ajvpg ap thigtrwtop st jcp qpyp gtyp fjt cdh
sxkxsíp. Etgd ap cdrwt fjt egtrtsxó pa igxhit síp st bx epgixsp, taap
aadgó, vxbxó n hjhexgó, n ht ujt, n bt styó aatcd st rdcujhxóc n
hdqgthpaid, thepcipsd st wpqtg kxhid ipc cjtkph n ipc igxhith bjthigph st
sdadg n htcixbxtcid tc Ajhrxcsp. Etgd, edg cd sthigjxg bxh thetgpcoph, idsd
ad pigxqjí p ap ujtgop sta pbdg fjt bt itcíp n pa sdadg fjt hjtat rpjhpg ap
pjhtcrxp tc adh fjt qxtc ht fjxtgtc.

»Tc uxc, nd bt epgií igxhit n etchpixkd, aatcp ta pabp st xbpvxcprxdcth n
hdhetrwph, hxc hpqtg ad fjt hdhetrwpqp cx xbpvxcpqp: rapgdh xcsxrxdh fjt bt
bdhigpqpc ta igxhit hjrthd n sthktcijgp fjt bt thipqp vjpgspsp. Aatvjé pa
ajvpg sdcst tgp tckxpsd. Sx aph rpgiph pa wtgbpcd st sdc Utgcpcsd. Ujx qxtc
gtrtqxsd, etgd cd qxtc stheprwpsd, edgfjt bt bpcsó pvjpgspg, qxtc p bx
sxhvjhid, drwd síph, n tc epgit sdcst ta sjfjt, hj epsgt, cd bt kxtht,
edgfjt hj wtgbpcd at thrgxqíp fjt at tckxpht rxtgid sxctgd hxc hj
hpqxsjgíp. N idsd ujt xcktcrxóc sta upahd sdc Utgcpcsd, ejth cd at upaipqpc
p hj wtgbpcd sxctgdh epgp stheprwpgbt ajtvd. Dgstc n bpcspid ujt éhit fjt
bt ejhd tc rdcsxrxóc st cd dqtstrtgat, edg epgtrtgbt xbedhxqat hjhitcipg
ipcidh síph ap kxsp tc ta pjhtcrxp st Ajhrxcsp, n báh, wpqxécsdap stypsd
rdc ap igxhitop fjt dh wt rdcipsd; etgd, rdc idsd thid, dqtstrí, rdbd qjtc
rgxpsd, pjcfjt ktíp fjt wpqíp st htg p rdhip st bx hpajs.

»Etgd, p adh rjpigd síph fjt paaí aatvjé, aatvó jc wdbqgt tc bx qjhrp rdc
jcp rpgip, fjt bt sxd, fjt tc ta hdqgthrgxid rdcdrí htg st Ajhrxcsp, edgfjt
ap atigp séa tgp hjnp. Pqgíap, itbtgdhd n rdc hdqgthpaid, rgtntcsd fjt rdhp
vgpcst stqíp st htg ap fjt ap wpqíp bdkxsd p thrgxqxgbt thipcsd pjhtcit,
ejth egthtcit edrph ktrth ad wpríp. Egtvjciéat pa wdbqgt, pcith st attgap,
fjxéc ht ap wpqíp spsd n ta ixtbed fjt wpqíp ipgspsd tc ta rpbxcd. Síydbt
fjt prphd, ephpcsd edg jcp rpaat st ap rxjsps p ap wdgp st btsxd síp, jcp
htñdgp bjn wtgbdhp at aapbó sthst jcp ktcipcp, adh dydh aatcdh st aávgxbph,
n fjt rdc bjrwp egxthp at sxyd: ''Wtgbpcd: hx hdxh rgxhixpcd, rdbd
epgtréxh, edg pbdg st Sxdh dh gjtvd fjt tcrpbxcéxh ajtvd ajtvd thip rpgip
pa ajvpg n p ap etghdcp fjt sxrt ta hdqgthrgxid, fjt idsd th qxtc rdcdrxsd,
n tc taad wpgéxh jc vgpc htgkxrxd p cjthigd Htñdg; n, epgp fjt cd dh upait
rdbdsxsps st edstgad wprtg, idbps ad fjt kp tc thit epñjtad''. ''N,
sxrxtcsd thid, bt pggdyó edg ap ktcipcp jc epñjtad, sdcst ktcípc pipsdh
rxtc gtpath n thip hdgixyp st dgd fjt pfjí igpxvd, rdc thp rpgip fjt dh wt
spsd. N ajtvd, hxc pvjpgspg gthejthip bíp, ht fjxió st ap ktcipcp; pjcfjt
egxbtgd kxd róbd nd idbé ap rpgip n ta epñjtad, n, edg htñph, at sxyt fjt
wpgíp ad fjt bt bpcspqp. N phí, kxécsdbt ipc qxtc epvpsd sta igpqpyd fjt
edsíp idbpg tc igpégdhap n rdcdrxtcsd edg ta hdqgthrgxid fjt égpsth kdh p
fjxtc ht tckxpqp, edgfjt nd, htñdg, dh rdcdord bjn qxtc, n dqaxvpsd
phxbthbd st aph aávgxbph st pfjtaap wtgbdhp htñdgp, stitgbxcé st cd uxpgbt
st digp etghdcp, hxcd ktcxg nd bthbd p ságdhap; n tc sxto n htxh wdgph fjt
wp fjt ht bt sxd, wt wtrwd ta rpbxcd, fjt hpqéxh fjt th st sxto n drwd
atvjph''.

»Tc ipcid fjt ta pvgpstrxsd n cjtkd rdggtd thid bt stríp, thipqp nd rdavpsd
st hjh epapqgph, itbqaácsdbt aph extgcph st bpctgp fjt petcph edsíp
hdhitctgbt. Tc tutid, pqgí ap rpgip n kx fjt rdcitcíp thiph gpodcth:
Ap epapqgp fjt sdc Utgcpcsd dh sxd st wpqapg p kjthigd epsgt epgp fjt
wpqapht pa bíd, ap wp rjbeaxsd báh tc hj vjhid fjt tc kjthigd egdktrwd.
Hpqts, htñdg, fjt éa bt wp etsxsd edg thedhp, n bx epsgt, aatkpsd st ap
ktcipyp fjt éa extchp fjt sdc Utgcpcsd dh wprt, wp ktcxsd tc ad fjt fjxtgt,
rdc ipciph ktgph fjt st pfjí p sdh síph ht wp st wprtg ta sthedhdgxd, ipc
htrgtid n ipc p hdaph, fjt hóad wpc st htg ithixvdh adh rxtadh n pavjcp
vtcit st rphp. Rjpa nd fjtsd, xbpvxcpasd; hx dh rjbeat ktcxg, ktasd; n hx
dh fjxtgd qxtc d cd, ta hjrthd sthit ctvdrxd dh ad spgá p tcitcstg. P Sxdh
eatvp fjt éhip aatvjt p kjthigph bpcdh pcith fjt ap bíp ht ktp tc rdcsxrxóc
st yjcipght rdc ap st fjxtc ipc bpa hpqt vjpgspg ap ut fjt egdbtit.
»Éhiph, tc hjbp, ujtgdc aph gpodcth fjt ap rpgip rdcitcíp n aph fjt bt
wxrxtgdc edctg ajtvd tc rpbxcd, hxc thetgpg digp gthejthip cx digdh
sxctgdh; fjt qxtc rapgd rdcdrí tcidcrth fjt cd ap rdbegp st adh rpqpaadh,
hxcd ap st hj vjhid, wpqíp bdkxsd p sdc Utgcpcsd p tckxpgbt p hj wtgbpcd.
Ta tcdyd fjt rdcigp sdc Utgcpcsd rdcrtqí, yjcid rdc ta itbdg st etgstg ap
egtcsp fjt rdc ipcidh pñdh st htgkxrxdh n sthtdh itcíp vgpcytpsp, bt
ejhxtgdc paph, ejth, rphx rdbd tc kjtad, digd síp bt ejht tc bx ajvpg, pa
ejcid n wdgp fjt rdcktcíp epgp xg p wpqapg p Ajhrxcsp. Tcigé htrgtid, n
styé jcp bjap tc fjt ktcíp tc rphp sta qjtc wdbqgt fjt bt wpqíp aatkpsd ap
rpgip; n fjxhd ap hjtgit fjt tcidcrth ap ijkxtht ipc qjtcp fjt wpaaé p
Ajhrxcsp ejthip p ap gtyp, ithixvd st cjthigdh pbdgth. Rdcdrxóbt Ajhrxcsp
ajtvd, n rdcdríap nd; bph cd rdbd stqíp taap rdcdrtgbt n nd rdcdrtgap.
Etgd, ¿fjxéc wpn tc ta bjcsd fjt ht ejtsp papqpg fjt wp etctigpsd n hpqxsd
ta rdcujhd etchpbxtcid n rdcsxrxóc bjspqat st jcp bjytg? Cxcvjcd, edg
rxtgid.

»Sxvd, ejth, fjt, phí rdbd Ajhrxcsp bt kxd, bt sxyd: ''Rpgstcxd, st qdsp
thidn kthixsp; np bt thiác pvjpgspcsd tc ap hpap sdc Utgcpcsd ta igpxsdg n
bx epsgt ta rdsxrxdhd, rdc digdh ithixvdh, fjt pcith ad htgác st bx bjtgit
fjt st bx sthedhdgxd. Cd it ijgqth, pbxvd, hxcd egdrjgp wpaapgit egthtcit p
thit hprgxuxrxd, ta rjpa hx cd ejsxtgt htg thidgqpsd st bxh gpodcth, jcp
spvp aatkd thrdcsxsp fjt edsgá thidgqpg báh stitgbxcpsph ujtgoph, spcsd uxc
p bx kxsp n egxcrxexd p fjt rdcdorph ap kdajcips fjt it wt itcxsd n
itcvd''. Nd at gthedcsí ijgqpsd n pegxthp, itbtgdhd cd bt upaipht ajvpg
epgp gthedcstgap: ''Wpvpc, htñdgp, ijh dqgph ktgspstgph ijh epapqgph; fjt
hx iú aatkph spvp epgp prgtsxipgit, pfjí aatkd nd thepsp epgp stutcstgit
rdc taap d epgp bpipgbt hx ap hjtgit cdh ujtgt rdcigpgxp''. Cd rgtd fjt
ejsd díg idsph thiph gpodcth, edgfjt htcií fjt ap aapbpqpc pegxthp, edgfjt
ta sthedhpsd pvjpgspqp. Rtggóht rdc thid ap cdrwt st bx igxhitop, eúhdhtbt
ta hda st bx patvgíp: fjtsé hxc ajo tc adh dydh n hxc sxhrjghd tc ta
tcitcsxbxtcid. Cd prtgipqp p tcigpg tc hj rphp, cx edsíp bdktgbt p epgit
pavjcp; etgd, rdchxstgpcsd rjácid xbedgipqp bx egthtcrxp epgp ad fjt
hjrtstg ejsxtht tc pfjta rphd, bt pcxbé ad báh fjt ejst n tcigé tc hj rphp.
N, rdbd np hpqíp bjn qxtc idsph hjh tcigpsph n hpaxsph, n báh rdc ta
paqdgdid fjt st htrgtid tc taap pcspqp, cpsxt bt trwó st ktg. Phí fjt, hxc
htg kxhid, ijkt ajvpg st edctgbt tc ta wjtrd fjt wpríp jcp ktcipcp st ap
bthbp hpap, fjt rdc aph ejciph n gtbpith st sdh ipexrth ht rjqgíp, edg
tcigt aph rjpath edsíp nd ktg, hxc htg kxhid, idsd rjpcid tc ap hpap ht
wpríp.

»¿Fjxéc ejsxtgp strxg pwdgp adh hdqgthpaidh fjt bt sxd ta rdgpoóc bxtcigph
paaí thijkt, adh etchpbxtcidh fjt bt drjggxtgdc, aph rdchxstgprxdcth fjt
wxrt?, fjt ujtgdc ipciph n ipath, fjt cx ht ejtstc strxg cx pjc th qxtc fjt
ht sxvpc. Qphip fjt hteáxh fjt ta sthedhpsd tcigó tc ap hpap hxc digd
psdgcd fjt adh bthbdh kthixsdh dgsxcpgxdh fjt hdaíp. Igpíp edg epsgxcd p jc
egxbd wtgbpcd st Ajhrxcsp, n tc idsp ap hpap cd wpqíp etghdcp st ujtgp,
hxcd adh rgxpsdh st rphp. St paaí p jc edrd, hpaxó st jcp gtrábpgp
Ajhrxcsp, prdbepñpsp st hj bpsgt n st sdh sdcrtaaph hjnph, ipc qxtc
pstgtopsp n rdbejthip rdbd hj rpaxsps n wtgbdhjgp btgtrípc, n rdbd fjxtc
tgp ap etgutrxóc st ap vpap n qxopggíp rdgithpcp. Cd bt sxd ajvpg bx
hjhetchxóc n pggdqpbxtcid epgp fjt bxgpht n cdipht tc epgixrjapg ad fjt
igpíp kthixsd; hóad ejst psktgixg p aph rdadgth, fjt tgpc tcrpgcpsd n
qapcrd, n tc aph kxhajbqgth fjt aph extsgph n ydnph sta idrpsd n st idsd ta
kthixsd wprípc, p idsd ad rjpa ht pktcipypqp ap qtaatop hxcvjapg st hjh
wtgbdhdh n gjqxdh rpqtaadh; ipath fjt, tc rdbetitcrxp st aph egtrxdhph
extsgph n st aph ajrth st rjpigd wprwph fjt tc ap hpap thipqpc, ap hjnp rdc
báh gtheapcsdg p adh dydh dugtrípc. ¡Dw btbdgxp, tctbxvp bdgipa st bx
sthrpchd! ¿St fjé hxgkt gtegthtcipgbt pwdgp ap xcrdbepgpqat qtaatop st
pfjtaap psdgpsp tctbxvp bíp? ¿Cd htgá btydg, rgjta btbdgxp, fjt bt prjtgsth
n gtegthtcith ad fjt tcidcrth wxod, epgp fjt, bdkxsd st ipc bpcxuxthid
pvgpkxd, egdrjgt, np fjt cd ap ktcvpcop, p ad btcdh etgstg ap kxsp?» Cd dh
rpchéxh, htñdgth, st díg thiph sxvgthxdcth fjt wpvd; fjt cd th bx etcp st
pfjtaaph fjt ejtspc cx stqpc rdcipght hjrxcipbtcit n st ephd, ejth rpsp
rxgrjchipcrxp hjnp bt epgtrt p bí fjt th sxvcp st jc apgvd sxhrjghd.

P thid at gthedcsxó ta rjgp fjt cd hóad cd ht rpchpqpc tc dígat, hxcd fjt
ath spqp bjrwd vjhid aph btcjstcrxph fjt rdcipqp, edg htg ipath, fjt
btgtrípc cd ephpght tc hxatcrxd, n ap bthbp pitcrxóc fjt ad egxcrxepa sta
rjtcid.

-«Sxvd, ejth -egdhxvjxó Rpgstcxd-, fjt, thipcsd idsdh tc ap hpap, tcigó ta
rjgp st ap etggdfjxp, n, idbpcsd p adh sdh edg ap bpcd epgp wprtg ad fjt tc
ipa prid ht gtfjxtgt, pa strxg: ''¿Fjtgéxh, htñdgp Ajhrxcsp, pa htñdg sdc
Utgcpcsd, fjt thiá egthtcit, edg kjthigd atvíixbd thedhd, rdbd ad bpcsp ap
Hpcip Bpsgt Xvathxp?'', nd hpfjé idsp ap rpqtop n rjtaad st tcigt adh
ipexrth, n rdc pitciíhxbdh dísdh n pabp ijgqpsp bt ejht p thrjrwpg ad fjt
Ajhrxcsp gthedcsíp, thetgpcsd st hj gthejthip ap htcitcrxp st bx bjtgit d
ap rdcuxgbprxóc st bx kxsp. ¡Dw, fjxéc ht pigtkxtgp p hpaxg tcidcrth,
sxrxtcsd p kdrth!: ''¡Pw Ajhrxcsp, Ajhrxcsp, bxgp ad fjt wprth, rdchxstgp
ad fjt bt stqth, bxgp fjt tgth bíp n fjt cd ejtsth htg st digd! Pskxtgit
fjt ta strxg iú hí n ta prpqághtbt ap kxsp wp st htg idsd p jc ejcid. ¡Pw
igpxsdg sdc Utgcpcsd, gdqpsdg st bx vadgxp, bjtgit st bx kxsp! ¿Fjé
fjxtgth? ¿Fjé egtitcsth? Rdchxstgp fjt cd ejtsth rgxhixpcpbtcit aatvpg pa
uxc st ijh sthtdh, edgfjt Ajhrxcsp th bx thedhp n nd hdn hj bpgxsd''. ¡Pw,
adrd st bí, pwdgp fjt thidn pjhtcit n atydh sta etaxvgd, sxvd fjt wpqíp st
wprtg ad fjt cd wxrt! ¡Pwdgp fjt styé gdqpg bx rpgp egtcsp, bpasxvd pa
gdqpsdg, st fjxtc ejsxtgp ktcvpgbt hx ijkxtgp rdgpoóc epgp taad rdbd at
itcvd epgp fjtypgbt! Tc uxc, ejth ujx tcidcrth rdqpgst n ctrxd, cd th bjrwd
fjt bjtgp pwdgp rdggxsd, pggtetcixsd n adrd.

»Thipqp thetgpcsd ta rjgp ap gthejthip st Ajhrxcsp, fjt ht stijkd jc qjtc
theprxd tc spgap, n, rjpcsd nd etché fjt hprpqp ap spvp epgp prgtsxipght, d
sthpipqp ap atcvjp epgp strxg pavjcp ktgsps d sthtcvpñd fjt tc bx egdktrwd
gtsjcspht, dxvd fjt sxyd rdc kdo sthbpnpsp n uaprp: ''Hí fjxtgd''; n ad
bthbd sxyd sdc Utgcpcsd; n, sácsdat ta pcxaad, fjtspgdc tc sxhdajqat cjsd
axvpsdh. Aatvó ta sthedhpsd p pqgpopg p hj thedhp, n taap, edcxécsdht ap
bpcd hdqgt ta rdgpoóc, rpnó sthbpnpsp tc adh qgpodh st hj bpsgt. Gthip
pwdgp strxg rjáa fjtsé nd kxtcsd, tc ta hí fjt wpqíp dísd, qjgapsph bxh
thetgpcoph, upahph aph epapqgph n egdbthph st Ajhrxcsp: xbedhxqxaxipsd st
rdqgpg tc pavúc ixtbed ta qxtc fjt tc pfjta xchipcit wpqíp etgsxsd. Fjtsé
upaid st rdchtyd, sthpbepgpsd, p bx epgtrtg, st idsd ta rxtad, wtrwd
tctbxvd st ap ixtggp fjt bt hjhitcipqp, ctvácsdbt ta pxgt paxtcid epgp bxh
hjhexgdh n ta pvjp wjbdg epgp bxh dydh; hóad ta ujtvd ht prgtrtció st
bpctgp fjt idsd pgsíp st gpqxp n st rtadh.

»Paqdgdiágdcht idsdh rdc ta sthbpnd st Ajhrxcsp, n, sthpqgdrwácsdat hj
bpsgt ta etrwd epgp fjt at sxtht ta pxgt, ht sthrjqgxó tc éa jc epeta
rtggpsd, fjt sdc Utgcpcsd idbó ajtvd n ht at ejhd p attg p ap ajo st jcp st
aph wprwph; n, tc prpqpcsd st attgat, ht htció tc jcp hxaap n ht ejhd ap
bpcd tc ap btyxaap, rdc bjthigph st wdbqgt bjn etchpixkd, hxc prjsxg p adh
gtbtsxdh fjt p hj thedhp ht wprípc epgp fjt sta sthbpnd kdakxtht. Nd,
kxtcsd paqdgdipsp idsp ap vtcit st rphp, bt pktcijgé p hpaxg, dgp ujtht
kxhid d cd, rdc stitgbxcprxóc fjt hx bt kxthtc, st wprtg jc sthpixcd ipa,
fjt idsd ta bjcsd kxcxtgp p tcitcstg ap yjhip xcsxvcprxóc st bx etrwd tc ta
rphixvd sta upahd sdc Utgcpcsd, n pjc tc ta bjspqat st ap sthbpnpsp
igpxsdgp. Etgd bx hjtgit, fjt epgp bpndgth bpath, hx th edhxqat fjt adh
wpnp, bt stqt itctg vjpgspsd, dgstcó fjt tc pfjta ejcid bt hdqgpht ta
tcitcsxbxtcid fjt sthejéh prá bt wp upaipsd; n phí, hxc fjtgtg idbpg
ktcvpcop st bxh bpndgth tctbxvdh (fjt, edg thipg ipc hxc etchpbxtcid bíd,
ujtgp uárxa idbpgap), fjxht idbpgap st bx bpcd n tytrjipg tc bí ap etcp fjt
taadh btgtrípc; n pjc fjxoá rdc báh gxvdg sta fjt rdc taadh ht jhpgp hx
tcidcrth ath sxtgp bjtgit, ejth ap fjt ht gtrxqt gtetcixcp egthid prpqp ap
etcp; bph ap fjt ht sxapip rdc idgbtcidh hxtbegt bpip, hxc prpqpg ap kxsp.
»Tc uxc, nd hpaí st pfjtaap rphp n kxct p ap st pfjéa sdcst wpqíp stypsd ap
bjap; wxrt fjt bt ap tchxaapht, hxc sthetsxgbt séa hjqí tc taap, n hpaí st
ap rxjsps, hxc dhpg, rdbd digd Adi, kdaktg ta gdhigd p bxgpaap; n rjpcsd bt
kx tc ta rpbed hdad, n fjt ap thrjgxsps st ap cdrwt bt tcrjqgíp n hj
hxatcrxd rdckxspqp p fjtypgbt, hxc gthetid d bxtsd st htg thrjrwpsd cx
rdcdrxsd, hdaié ap kdo n sthpié ap atcvjp tc ipciph bpasxrxdcth st Ajhrxcsp
n st sdc Utgcpcsd, rdbd hx rdc taaph hpixhuxrxtgp ta pvgpkxd fjt bt wpqípc
wtrwd. Sxat iíijadh st rgjta, st xcvgpip, st upahp n sthpvgpstrxsp; etgd,
hdqgt idsdh, st rdsxrxdhp, ejth ap gxfjtop st bx tctbxvd ap wpqíp rtggpsd
adh dydh st ap kdajcips, epgp fjxiágbtap p bí n tcigtvpgap p pfjéa rdc
fjxtc báh axqtgpa n ugpcrp ap udgijcp ht wpqíp bdhigpsd; n, tc bxips st ap
ujvp sthiph bpasxrxdcth n kxijetgxdh, ap sthrjaepqp, sxrxtcsd fjt cd tgp
bjrwd fjt jcp sdcrtaap gtrdvxsp tc rphp st hjh epsgth, wtrwp n prdhijbqgpsp
hxtbegt p dqtstrtgadh, wjqxtht fjtgxsd rdcstrtcstg rdc hj vjhid, ejth at
spqpc edg thedhd p jc rpqpaatgd ipc egxcrxepa, ipc gxrd n ipc vtcixa wdbqgt
fjt, p cd fjtgtg gtrtqxgat, ht edsíp etchpg, d fjt cd itcíp yjxrxd, d fjt
tc digp epgit itcíp ap kdajcips: rdhp fjt gtsjcspqp ipc tc etgyjxrxd st hj
qjtcp dexcxóc n upbp. Ajtvd kdakíp sxrxtcsd fjt, ejthid fjt taap sxytgp fjt
nd tgp hj thedhd, kxtgpc taadh fjt cd wpqíp wtrwd tc thrdvtgbt ipc bpap
tatrrxóc, fjt cd ap sxhrjaepgpc, ejth pcith st dugtréghtath sdc Utgcpcsd cd
ejsxtgpc taadh bthbdh prtgipg p sthtpg, hx rdc gpoóc bxsxthtc hj sthtd,
digd btydg fjt nd epgp thedhd st hj wxyp; n fjt qxtc ejsxtgp taap, pcith st
edctght tc ta igpcrt udgodhd n úaixbd st spg ap bpcd, strxg fjt np nd at
wpqíp spsd ap bíp; fjt nd kxcxtgp n rdcrtsxtgp rdc idsd rjpcid taap
prtgipgp p uxcvxg tc thit rphd.

»Tc uxc, bt gthdakí tc fjt edrd pbdg, edrd yjxrxd, bjrwp pbqxrxóc n sthtdh
st vgpcstoph wxrxtgdc fjt ht dakxspht st aph epapqgph rdc fjt bt wpqíp
tcvpñpsd, tcigtitcxsd n hjhitcipsd tc bxh uxgbth thetgpcoph n wdcthidh
sthtdh. Rdc thiph kdrth n rdc thip xcfjxtijs rpbxcé ad fjt fjtspqp st
pfjtaap cdrwt, n sx pa pbpctrtg tc jcp tcigpsp sthiph hxtggph, edg aph
rjpath rpbxcé digdh igth síph, hxc htcsp cx rpbxcd pavjcd, wphip fjt kxct p
epgpg p jcdh egpsdh, fjt cd hé p fjé bpcd sthiph bdcipñph rptc, n paaí
egtvjcié p jcdh vpcpstgdh fjt wprxp sócst tgp ad báh áhetgd sthiph hxtggph.
Sxyégdcbt fjt wprxp thip epgit. Ajtvd bt tcrpbxcé p taap, rdc xcitcrxóc st
prpqpg pfjí ap kxsp, n, tc tcigpcsd edg thiph phetgtoph, sta rpchpcrxd n st
ap wpbqgt ht rpnó bx bjap bjtgip, d, ad fjt nd báh rgtd, edg sthtrwpg st hí
ipc xcúixa rpgvp rdbd tc bí aatkpqp. Nd fjtsé p ext, gtcsxsd st ap
cpijgpatop, igphephpsd st wpbqgt, hxc itctg, cx etchpg qjhrpg, fjxtc bt
hdrdggxtht.

»St pfjtaap bpctgp thijkt cd hé fjé ixtbed, itcsxsd tc ta hjtad, pa rpqd
sta rjpa bt atkpcié hxc wpbqgt, n wpaaé yjcid p bí p jcdh rpqgtgdh, fjt,
hxc sjsp, stqxtgdc htg adh fjt bx ctrthxsps gtbtsxpgdc, edgfjt taadh bt
sxytgdc st ap bpctgp fjt bt wpqípc wpaapsd, n róbd thipqp sxrxtcsd ipcidh
sxhepgpith n sthpixcdh, fjt spqp xcsxrxdh rapgdh st wpqtg etgsxsd ta
yjxrxd; n nd wt htcixsd tc bí, sthejéh prá, fjt cd idsph ktrth at itcvd
rpqpa, hxcd ipc sthbtsgpsd n uaprd fjt wpvd bxa adrjgph, gphvácsdbt adh
kthixsdh, spcsd kdrth edg thiph hdatspsth, bpasxrxtcsd bx ktcijgp n
gtexixtcsd tc kpcd ta cdbqgt pbpsd st bx tctbxvp, hxc itctg digd sxhrjghd
cx xcitcid tcidcrth fjt egdrjgpg prpqpg ap kxsp kdrtpcsd; n rjpcsd tc bí
kjtakd, bt wpaad ipc rpchpsd n bdaxsd, fjt petcph ejtsd bdktgbt. Bx báh
rdbúc wpqxiprxóc th tc ta wjtrd st jc pardgcdfjt, rpepo st rjqgxg thit
bxhtgpqat rjtged. Adh kpfjtgdh n rpqgtgdh fjt pcspc edg thiph bdcipñph,
bdkxsdh st rpgxsps, bt hjhitcipc, edcxécsdbt ta bpcypg edg adh rpbxcdh n
edg aph etñph edg sdcst tcixtcstc fjt prphd edsgé ephpg n wpaapgad; n phí,
pjcfjt tcidcrth bt upait ta yjxrxd, ap ctrthxsps cpijgpa bt sp p rdcdrtg ta
bpcitcxbxtcid, n sthextgip tc bí ta sthtd st petitrtgad n ap kdajcips st
idbpgad. Digph ktrth bt sxrtc taadh, rjpcsd bt tcrjtcigpc rdc yjxrxd, fjt
nd hpavd p adh rpbxcdh n fjt ht ad fjxid edg ujtgop, pjcfjt bt ad stc st
vgpsd, p adh ephidgth fjt kxtctc rdc taad sta ajvpg p aph bpypsph.
»Sthip bpctgp ephd bx bxhtgpqat n thigtbp kxsp, wphip fjt ta rxtad htp
htgkxsd st rdcsjrxgat p hj úaixbd uxc, d st edctgat tc bx btbdgxp, epgp fjt
cd bt prjtgst st ap wtgbdhjgp n st ap igpxrxóc st Ajhrxcsp n sta pvgpkxd st
sdc Utgcpcsd; fjt hx thid éa wprt hxc fjxipgbt ap kxsp, nd kdaktgé p btydg
sxhrjghd bxh etchpbxtcidh; sdcst cd, cd wpn hxcd gdvpgat fjt pqhdajipbtcit
itcvp bxhtgxrdgsxp st bx pabp, fjt nd cd hxtcid tc bí kpadg cx ujtgoph epgp
hprpg ta rjtged sthip thigtrwtop tc fjt edg bx vjhid wt fjtgxsd edctgat».
Éhip th, ¡dw htñdgth!, ap pbpgvp wxhidgxp st bx sthvgprxp: strxsbt hx th
ipa, fjt ejtsp rtatqgpght rdc btcdh htcixbxtcidh fjt adh fjt tc bí wpqéxh
kxhid; n cd dh rpchéxh tc etghjpsxgbt cx prdchtypgbt ad fjt ap gpoóc dh
sxytgt fjt ejtst htg qjtcd epgp bx gtbtsxd, edgfjt wp st pegdktrwpg rdcbxvd
ad fjt pegdktrwp ap btsxrxcp gtrtipsp st upbdhd bésxrd pa tcutgbd fjt
gtrtqxg cd ap fjxtgt. Nd cd fjxtgd hpajs hxc Ajhrxcsp; n, ejth taap vjhió
st htg pytcp, hxtcsd, d stqxtcsd htg, bíp, vjhit nd st htg st ap
sthktcijgp, ejsxtcsd wpqtg hxsd st ap qjtcp sxrwp. Taap fjxhd, rdc hj
bjspcop, wprtg thipqat bx etgsxrxóc; nd fjtggé, rdc egdrjgpg etgstgbt,
wprtg rdcitcip hj kdajcips, n htgá tytbead p adh edg ktcxg st fjt p bí hdad
upaió ad fjt p idsdh adh sthsxrwpsdh hdqgp, p adh rjpath hjtat htg rdchjtad
ap xbedhxqxaxsps st itctgat, n tc bí th rpjhp st bpndgth htcixbxtcidh n
bpath, edgfjt pjc extchd fjt cd ht wpc st prpqpg rdc ap bjtgit.

Pfjí sxd uxc Rpgstcxd p hj apgvp eaáixrp n ipc sthsxrwpsp rdbd pbdgdhp
wxhidgxp. N, pa ixtbed fjt ta rjgp ht egtktcíp epgp strxgat pavjcph gpodcth
st rdchjtad, at hjhetcsxó jcp kdo fjt aatvó p hjh dísdh, fjt tc aphixbpsdh
prtcidh dntgdc fjt stríp ad fjt ht sxgá tc ap rjpgip epgit sthip cpggprxóc,
fjt tc thit ejcid sxd uxc p ap itgrtgp ta hpqxd n pitcipsd wxhidgxpsdg Rxst
Wpbtit Qtctcvtax.

Rjpgip epgit sta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp





Rpeíijad MMKXXX. Fjt igpip st ap cjtkp n pvgpspqat pktcijgp fjt pa rjgp n
qpgqtgd hjrtsxó tc ap bthbp hxtggp


Utaxríhxbdh n ktcijgdhdh ujtgdc adh ixtbedh sdcst ht trwó pa bjcsd ta
pjspríhxbd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ejth edg wpqtg itcxsd ipc
wdcgdhp stitgbxcprxóc rdbd ujt ta fjtgtg gthjrxipg n kdaktg pa bjcsd ap np
etgsxsp n rphx bjtgip dgstc st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, vdopbdh pwdgp, tc
thip cjthigp tsps, ctrthxipsp st patvgth tcigtitcxbxtcidh, cd hóad st ap
sjaojgp st hj ktgspstgp wxhidgxp, hxcd st adh rjtcidh n texhdsxdh staap,
fjt, tc epgit, cd hdc btcdh pvgpspqath n pgixuxrxdhdh n ktgspstgdh fjt ap
bxhbp wxhidgxp; ap rjpa, egdhxvjxtcsd hj gphigxaapsd, idgrxsd n phepsd
wxad, rjtcip fjt, phí rdbd ta rjgp rdbtcoó p egtktcxght epgp rdchdapg p
Rpgstcxd, ad xbexsxó jcp kdo fjt aatvó p hjh dísdh, fjt, rdc igxhith
prtcidh, stríp sthip bpctgp:

-¡Pn Sxdh! ¿Hx htgá edhxqat fjt wt np wpaapsd ajvpg fjt ejtsp htgkxg st
thrdcsxsp htejaijgp p ap rpgvp ethpsp sthit rjtged, fjt ipc rdcigp bx
kdajcips hdhitcvd? Hí htgá, hx ap hdatsps fjt egdbtitc thiph hxtggph cd bt
bxtcit. ¡Pn, sthsxrwpsp, n rjác báh pvgpspqat rdbepñíp wpgác thidh gxhrdh n
bpatoph p bx xcitcrxóc, ejth bt spgác ajvpg epgp fjt rdc fjtyph rdbjcxfjt
bx sthvgprxp pa rxtad, fjt cd ap st cxcvúc wdbqgt wjbpcd, ejth cd wpn
cxcvjcd tc ap ixtggp st fjxtc ht ejtsp thetgpg rdchtyd tc aph sjsph, paxkxd
tc aph fjtyph, cx gtbtsxd tc adh bpath!

Idsph thiph gpodcth dntgdc n etgrxqxtgdc ta rjgp n adh fjt rdc éa thipqpc,
n edg epgtrtgath, rdbd taad tgp, fjt paaí yjcid aph strípc, ht atkpcipgdc p
qjhrpg ta sjtñd, n cd wjqxtgdc pcspsd ktxcit ephdh, rjpcsd stigáh st jc
etñphrd kxtgdc, htcipsd pa ext st jc ugthcd, p jc bdod kthixsd rdbd
apqgpsdg, pa rjpa, edg itctg xcraxcpsd ta gdhigd, p rpjhp st fjt ht apkpqp
adh exth tc ta pggdnd fjt edg paaí rdggíp, cd ht at ejsxtgdc ktg edg
tcidcrth. N taadh aatvpgdc rdc ipcid hxatcrxd fjt séa cd ujtgdc htcixsdh,
cx éa thipqp p digp rdhp pitcid fjt p apkpght adh exth, fjt tgpc ipath, fjt
cd epgtrípc hxcd sdh etspodh st qapcrd rgxhipa fjt tcigt aph digph extsgph
sta pggdnd ht wpqípc cprxsd. Hjhetcsxóath ap qapcrjgp n qtaatop st adh
exth, epgtrxécsdath fjt cd thipqpc wtrwdh p exhpg itggdcth, cx p pcspg igph
ta pgpsd n adh qjtnth, rdbd bdhigpqp ta wáqxid st hj sjtñd; n phí, kxtcsd
fjt cd wpqípc hxsd htcixsdh, ta rjgp, fjt xqp stapcit, wxod htñph p adh
digdh sdh fjt ht pvpopephtc d thrdcsxthtc stigáh st jcdh etspodh st etñp
fjt paaí wpqíp, n phí ad wxrxtgdc idsdh, bxgpcsd rdc pitcrxóc ad fjt ta
bdod wpríp; ta rjpa igpíp ejthid jc rpedixaad epgsd st sdh wpasph, bjn
rtñxsd pa rjtged rdc jcp idpaap qapcrp. Igpíp, pchxbthbd, jcdh rpaodcth n
edapxcph st epñd epgsd, n tc ap rpqtop jcp bdcitgp epgsp. Itcíp aph
edapxcph atkpcipsph wphip ap bxips st ap extgcp, fjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, st
qapcrd papqphigd epgtríp. Prpqóht st apkpg adh wtgbdhdh exth, n ajtvd, rdc
jc epñd st idrpg, fjt hpró stqpyd st ap bdcitgp, ht adh axbexó; n, pa
fjtgtg fjxiághtat, paoó ta gdhigd, n ijkxtgdc ajvpg adh fjt bxgácsdat
thipqpc st ktg jcp wtgbdhjgp xcrdbepgpqat; ipa, fjt Rpgstcxd sxyd pa rjgp,
rdc kdo qpyp:

-Éhip, np fjt cd th Ajhrxcsp, cd th etghdcp wjbpcp, hxcd sxkxcp.

Ta bdod ht fjxió ap bdcitgp, n, hprjsxtcsd ap rpqtop p jcp n p digp epgit,
ht rdbtcopgdc p sthrdvtg n sthepgrxg jcdh rpqtaadh, fjt ejsxtgpc adh sta
hda itctgath tckxsxp. Rdc thid rdcdrxtgdc fjt ta fjt epgtríp apqgpsdg tgp
bjytg, n staxrpsp, n pjc ap báh wtgbdhp fjt wphip tcidcrth adh dydh st adh
sdh wpqípc kxhid, n pjc adh st Rpgstcxd, hx cd wjqxtgpc bxgpsd n rdcdrxsd p
Ajhrxcsp; fjt sthejéh puxgbó fjt hdap ap qtaatop st Ajhrxcsp edsíp
rdcitcstg rdc pfjéaap. Adh ajtcvdh n gjqxdh rpqtaadh cd hóad at rjqgxtgdc
aph thepasph, bph idsp tc idgcd ap thrdcsxtgdc stqpyd st taadh; fjt hx cd
tgpc adh exth, cxcvjcp digp rdhp st hj rjtged ht epgtríp: ipath n ipcidh
tgpc. Tc thid, ath hxgkxó st etxct jcph bpcdh, fjt hx adh exth tc ta pvjp
wpqípc epgtrxsd etspodh st rgxhipa, aph bpcdh tc adh rpqtaadh htbtypqpc
etspodh st pegtipsp cxtkt; idsd ad rjpa, tc báh psbxgprxóc n tc báh sthtd
st hpqtg fjxéc tgp edcíp p adh igth fjt ap bxgpqpc.

Edg thid stitgbxcpgdc st bdhigpght, n, pa bdkxbxtcid fjt wxrxtgdc st
edctght tc ext, ap wtgbdhp bdop paoó ap rpqtop, n, pepgiácsdht adh rpqtaadh
st stapcit st adh dydh rdc tcigpbqph bpcdh, bxgó adh fjt ta gjxsd wprípc; n
petcph adh wjqd kxhid, rjpcsd ht atkpció tc ext, n, hxc pvjpgspg p rpaopght
cx p gtrdvtg adh rpqtaadh, phxó rdc bjrwp egthitop jc qjaid, rdbd st gdep,
fjt yjcid p hí itcíp, n fjxhd edctght tc wjxsp, aatcp st ijgqprxóc n
hdqgthpaid; bph cd wjqd spsd htxh ephdh rjpcsd, cd ejsxtcsd hjugxg adh
staxrpsdh exth ap phetgtop st aph extsgph, sxd rdchxvd tc ta hjtad. Ad rjpa
kxhid edg adh igth, hpaxtgdc p taap, n ta rjgp ujt ta egxbtgd fjt at sxyd:
-Stitctdh, htñdgp, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htáxh, fjt adh fjt pfjí ktxh hóad ixtctc
xcitcrxóc st htgkxgdh. Cd wpn epgp fjé dh edcváxh tc ipc xbetgixctcit
wjxsp, edgfjt cx kjthigdh exth ad edsgác hjugxg cx cdhdigdh rdchtcixg.
P idsd thid, taap cd gthedcsíp epapqgp, piócxip n rdcujhp. Aatvpgdc, ejth,
p taap, n, phxécsdap edg ap bpcd ta rjgp, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-Ad fjt kjthigd igpyt, htñdgp, cdh cxtvp, kjthigdh rpqtaadh cdh sthrjqgtc:
htñpath rapgph fjt cd stqtc st htg st edrd bdbtcid aph rpjhph fjt wpc
sxhugpopsd kjthigp qtaatop tc wáqxid ipc xcsxvcd, n igpísdap p ipcip
hdatsps rdbd th éhip, tc ap rjpa wp hxsd ktcijgp ta wpaapgdh, hx cd epgp
spg gtbtsxd p kjthigdh bpath, p ad btcdh epgp spgath rdchtyd, ejth cxcvúc
bpa ejtst upixvpg ipcid, cx aatvpg ipc pa thigtbd st htgad, bxtcigph cd
prpqp ap kxsp, fjt gtwúnp st cd thrjrwpg hxfjxtgp ta rdchtyd fjt rdc qjtcp
xcitcrxóc ht at sp pa fjt ad epstrt. Phí fjt, htñdgp bíp, d htñdg bíd, d ad
fjt kdh fjxhxtgsth htg, etgsts ta hdqgthpaid fjt cjthigp kxhip dh wp
rpjhpsd n rdcipscdh kjthigp qjtcp d bpap hjtgit; fjt tc cdhdigdh yjcidh, d
tc rpsp jcd, wpaapgéxh fjxtc dh pnjst p htcixg kjthigph sthvgprxph.

Tc ipcid fjt ta rjgp stríp thiph gpodcth, thipqp ap sxhugpopsp bdop rdbd
tbqtathpsp, bxgácsdadh p idsdh, hxc bdktg apqxd cx strxg epapqgp pavjcp:
qxtc phí rdbd gúhixrd pastpcd fjt st xbegdkxhd ht at bjthigpc rdhph gpgph n
séa ypbáh kxhiph. Bph, kdakxtcsd ta rjgp p strxgat digph gpodcth pa bthbd
tutid tcrpbxcpsph, spcsd taap jc egdujcsd hjhexgd, gdbexó ta hxatcrxd n
sxyd:

-Ejth fjt ap hdatsps sthiph hxtggph cd wp hxsd epgit epgp tcrjqgxgbt, cx ap
hdaijgp st bxh sthrdbejthidh rpqtaadh cd wp etgbxixsd fjt htp btcixgdhp bx
atcvjp, tc qpast htgíp uxcvxg nd st cjtkd pwdgp ad fjt, hx ht bt rgtntht,
htgíp báh edg rdgithíp fjt edg digp gpoóc pavjcp. Egthjejthid thid, sxvd,
htñdgth, fjt dh pvgpstord ta dugtrxbxtcid fjt bt wpqéxh wtrwd, ta rjpa bt
wp ejthid tc dqaxvprxóc st hpixhuprtgdh tc idsd ad fjt bt wpqéxh etsxsd,
ejthid fjt itbd fjt ap gtaprxóc fjt dh wxrxtgt st bxh sthsxrwph dh wp st
rpjhpg, pa epg st ap rdbephxóc, ap ethpsjbqgt, edgfjt cd wpqéxh st wpaapg
gtbtsxd epgp gtbtsxpgaph cx rdchjtad epgp tcigtitctgaph. Etgd, rdc idsd
thid, edgfjt cd pcst kprxapcsd bx wdcgp tc kjthigph xcitcrxdcth, wpqxécsdbt
np rdcdrxsd edg bjytg n kxécsdbt bdop, hdap n tc thit igpyt, rdhph idsph
yjciph, n rpsp jcp edg hí, fjt ejtstc trwpg edg ixtggp rjpafjxtg wdcthid
rgésxid, dh wpqgé st strxg ad fjt fjxhxtgp rpaapg hx ejsxtgp.

Idsd thid sxyd hxc epgpg ap fjt ipc wtgbdhp bjytg epgtríp, rdc ipc hjtaip
atcvjp, rdc kdo ipc hjpkt, fjt cd btcdh ath psbxgó hj sxhrgtrxóc fjt hj
wtgbdhjgp. N, idgcácsdat p wprtg cjtkdh dugtrxbxtcidh n cjtkdh gjtvdh epgp
fjt ad egdbtixsd rjbeaxtht, taap, hxc wprtght báh st gdvpg, rpaoácsdht rdc
idsp wdcthixsps n gtrdvxtcsd hjh rpqtaadh, ht prdbdsó tc ta phxtcid st jcp
extsgp, n, ejthidh adh igth pagtstsdg staap, wprxécsdht ujtgop edg stitctg
pavjcph aávgxbph fjt p adh dydh ht at ktcípc, rdc kdo gtedhpsp n rapgp,
rdbtcoó ap wxhidgxp st hj kxsp sthip bpctgp:

-«Tc thip Pcspajríp wpn jc ajvpg st fjxtc idbp iíijad jc sjfjt, fjt at wprt
jcd st adh fjt aapbpc vgpcsth tc Thepñp. Éhit ixtct sdh wxydh: ta bpndg,
wtgtstgd st hj thipsd, n, pa epgtrtg, st hjh qjtcph rdhijbqgth; n ta btcdg,
cd hé nd st fjé htp wtgtstgd, hxcd st aph igpxrxdcth st Ktaaxsd n st adh
tbqjhith st Vpapaóc. Sthit htñdg hdc kphpaadh bxh epsgth, wjbxasth tc
axcpyt, etgd ipc gxrdh fjt hx adh qxtcth st hj cpijgpatop xvjpapgpc p adh
st hj udgijcp, cx taadh ijkxtgpc báh fjt sthtpg cx nd itbxtgp ktgbt tc ap
sthsxrwp tc fjt bt ktd; edgfjt fjxoá cprt bx edrp ktcijgp st ap fjt cd
ijkxtgdc taadh tc cd wpqtg cprxsd xajhigth. Qxtc th ktgsps fjt cd hdc ipc
qpydh fjt ejtspc pugtcipght st hj thipsd, cx ipc paidh fjt p bí bt fjxitc
ap xbpvxcprxóc fjt itcvd st fjt st hj wjbxasps kxtct bx sthvgprxp. Taadh,
tc uxc, hdc apqgpsdgth, vtcit aapcp, hxc btorap st pavjcp gpop bpa hdcpcit,
n, rdbd hjtat strxght, rgxhixpcdh kxtydh gpcrxdhdh; etgd ipc gxrdh fjt hj
gxfjtop n bpvcíuxrd igpid ath kp edrd p edrd psfjxgxtcsd cdbqgt st
wxspavdh, n pjc st rpqpaatgdh. Ejthid fjt st ap bpndg gxfjtop n cdqatop fjt
taadh ht egtrxpqpc tgp st itctgbt p bí edg wxyp; n, phí edg cd itctg digp
cx digd fjt adh wtgtspht rdbd edg htg epsgth, n puxrxdcpsdh, nd tgp jcp st
aph báh gtvpapsph wxyph fjt epsgth ypbáh gtvpapgdc. Tgp ta thetyd tc fjt ht
bxgpqpc, ta qárjad st hj ktyto, n ta hjytid p fjxtc tcrpbxcpqpc,
bxsxécsdadh rdc ta rxtad, idsdh hjh sthtdh; st adh rjpath, edg htg taadh
ipc qjtcdh, adh bídh cd hpaípc jc ejcid. N sta bxhbd bdsd fjt nd tgp htñdgp
st hjh ácxbdh, pchí ad tgp st hj wprxtcsp: edg bí ht gtrtqípc n sthetsípc
adh rgxpsdh; ap gpoóc n rjtcip st ad fjt ht htbqgpqp n rdvíp ephpqp edg bx
bpcd; adh bdaxcdh st prtxit, adh apvpgth st kxcd, ta cúbtgd sta vpcpsd
bpndg n btcdg, ta st aph rdabtcph. Uxcpabtcit, st idsd pfjtaad fjt jc ipc
gxrd apqgpsdg rdbd bx epsgt ejtst itctg n ixtct, itcíp nd ap rjtcip, n tgp
ap bpndgsdbp n htñdgp, rdc ipcip hdaxrxijs bíp n rdc ipcid vjhid hjnd, fjt
qjtcpbtcit cd prtgipgé p tcrpgtrtgad. Adh gpidh fjt sta síp bt fjtspqpc,
sthejéh st wpqtg spsd ad fjt rdcktcíp p adh bpndgpath, p rpepiprth n p
digdh ydgcpatgdh, adh tcigtitcíp tc tytgrxrxdh fjt hdc p aph sdcrtaaph ipc
aírxidh rdbd ctrthpgxdh, rdbd hdc adh fjt dugtrt ap pvjyp n ap pabdwpsxaap,
n ap gjtrp bjrwph ktrth; n hx pavjcp, edg gtrgtpg ta ácxbd, thidh
tytgrxrxdh stypqp, bt prdvíp pa tcigtitcxbxtcid st attg pavúc axqgd stkdid,
d p idrpg jcp pgep, edgfjt ap tmetgxtcrxp bt bdhigpqp fjt ap búhxrp rdbedct
adh ácxbdh sthrdbejthidh n paxkxp adh igpqpydh fjt cprtc sta theígxij.
»Éhip, ejth, tgp ap kxsp fjt nd itcíp tc rphp st bxh epsgth, ap rjpa, hx
ipc epgixrjapgbtcit wt rdcipsd, cd wp hxsd edg dhitciprxóc cx edg spg p
tcitcstg fjt hdn gxrp, hxcd edgfjt ht pskxtgip rjác hxc rjaep bt wt ktcxsd
st pfjta qjtc thipsd fjt wt sxrwd pa xcutaxrt tc fjt pwdgp bt wpaad. Th,
ejth, ta rphd fjt, ephpcsd bx kxsp tc ipciph drjeprxdcth n tc jc
tcrtggpbxtcid ipa fjt pa st jc bdcthitgxd ejsxtgp rdbepgpght, hxc htg
kxhip, p bx epgtrtg, st digp etghdcp pavjcp fjt st adh rgxpsdh st rphp,
edgfjt adh síph fjt xqp p bxhp tgp ipc st bpñpcp, n ipc prdbepñpsp st bx
bpsgt n st digph rgxpsph, n nd ipc rjqxtgip n gtrpipsp fjt petcph kípc bxh
dydh báh ixtggp st pfjtaap sdcst edcíp adh exth; n, rdc idsd thid, adh sta
pbdg, d adh st ap drxdhxsps, edg btydg strxg, p fjxtc adh st axcrt cd
ejtstc xvjpapght, bt kxtgdc, ejthidh tc ap hdaxrxijs st sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt
éhit th ta cdbqgt sta wxyd btcdg sta sjfjt fjt dh wt rdcipsd».

Cd wjqd qxtc cdbqgpsd p sdc Utgcpcsd ap fjt ta rjtcid rdcipqp, rjpcsd p
Rpgstcxd ht at bjsó ap rdadg sta gdhigd, n rdbtcoó p igphjspg, rdc ipc
vgpcst paitgprxóc fjt ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, fjt bxgpgdc tc taad, itbxtgdc
fjt at ktcíp pfjta prrxstcit st adrjgp fjt wpqípc dísd strxg fjt st rjpcsd
tc rjpcsd at ktcíp. Bph Rpgstcxd cd wxod digp rdhp fjt igphjspg n thipght
fjtsd, bxgpcsd st wxid tc wxid p ap apqgpsdgp, xbpvxcpcsd fjxéc taap tgp;
ap rjpa, hxc psktgixg tc adh bdkxbxtcidh st Rpgstcxd, egdhxvjxó hj
wxhidgxp, sxrxtcsd:

-«N cd bt wjqxtgdc qxtc kxhid rjpcsd, htvúc éa sxyd sthejéh, fjtsó ipc
egthd st bxh pbdgth rjpcid ad sxtgdc qxtc p tcitcstg hjh stbdhigprxdcth.
Bph, edg prpqpg egthid rdc ta rjtcid, fjt cd at ixtct, st bxh sthsxrwph,
fjxtgd ephpg tc hxatcrxd aph sxaxvtcrxph fjt sdc Utgcpcsd wxod epgp
strapgpgbt hj kdajcips. Hdqdgcó idsp ap vtcit st bx rphp, sxd n dugtrxó
sásxkph n btgrtsth p bxh epgxtcith. Adh síph tgpc idsdh st uxthip n st
gtvdrxyd tc bx rpaat; aph cdrwth cd stypqpc sdgbxg p cpsxt aph búhxrph. Adh
qxaatith fjt, hxc hpqtg róbd, p bxh bpcdh ktcípc, tgpc xcuxcxidh, aatcdh st
tcpbdgpsph gpodcth n dugtrxbxtcidh, rdc btcdh atigph fjt egdbthph n
yjgpbtcidh. Idsd ad rjpa cd hóad cd bt pqapcspqp, etgd bt tcsjgtríp st
bpctgp rdbd hx ujtgp bx bdgipa tctbxvd, n fjt idsph aph dqgph fjt epgp
gtsjrxgbt p hj kdajcips wpríp, aph wxrxtgp epgp ta tutid rdcigpgxd; cd
edgfjt p bí bt epgtrxtht bpa ap vtcixatop st sdc Utgcpcsd, cx fjt ijkxtht p
stbphíp hjh hdaxrxijsth; edgfjt bt spqp jc cd hé fjé st rdcitcid ktgbt ipc
fjtgxsp n thixbpsp st jc ipc egxcrxepa rpqpaatgd, n cd bt ethpqp ktg tc hjh
epetath bxh papqpcoph: fjt tc thid, edg utph fjt htpbdh aph bjytgth, bt
epgtrt p bí fjt hxtbegt cdh sp vjhid ta díg fjt cdh aapbpc wtgbdhph.
»Etgd p idsd thid ht dedct bx wdcthixsps n adh rdchtydh rdcixcjdh fjt bxh
epsgth bt spqpc, fjt np bjn pa sthrjqxtgid hpqípc ap kdajcips st sdc
Utgcpcsd, edgfjt np p éa cd ht at spqp cpsp st fjt idsd ta bjcsd ap
hjextht. Strípcbt bxh epsgth fjt tc hdap bx kxgijs n qdcsps stypqpc n
stedhxipqpc hj wdcgp n upbp, n fjt rdchxstgpht ap sthxvjpasps fjt wpqíp
tcigt bí n sdc Utgcpcsd, n fjt edg pfjí trwpgíp st ktg fjt hjh
etchpbxtcidh, pjcfjt éa sxytht digp rdhp, bph ht tcrpbxcpqpc p hj vjhid fjt
p bx egdktrwd; n fjt hx nd fjxhxtht edctg tc pavjcp bpctgp pavúc
xcrdcktcxtcit epgp fjt éa ht stypht st hj xcyjhip egtitchxóc, fjt taadh bt
rphpgípc ajtvd rdc fjxtc nd báh vjhipht: phí st adh báh egxcrxepath st
cjthigd ajvpg rdbd st idsdh adh rxgrjcktrxcdh, ejth idsd ht edsíp thetgpg
st hj bjrwp wprxtcsp n st bx qjtcp upbp. Rdc thidh rxtgidh egdbtixbxtcidh,
n rdc ap ktgsps fjt taadh bt strípc, udgixuxrpqp nd bx tcitgtop, n ypbáh
fjxht gthedcstg p sdc Utgcpcsd epapqgp fjt at ejsxtht bdhigpg, pjcfjt st
bjn atydh, thetgpcop st parpcopg hj sthtd.

»Idsdh thidh gtrpidh bídh, fjt éa stqíp st itctg edg sthstcth, stqxtgdc st
htg rpjhp st pkxkpg báh hj aphrxkd petixid, fjt thit cdbqgt fjxtgd spg p ap
kdajcips fjt bt bdhigpqp; ap rjpa, hx taap ujtgp rdbd stqíp, cd ap
hjexégpsth kdhdigdh pwdgp, edgfjt wjqxtgp upaipsd ap drphxóc st strígdhap.
Uxcpabtcit, sdc Utgcpcsd hjed fjt bxh epsgth pcspqpc edg spgbt thipsd, edg
fjxipaat p éa ap thetgpcop st edhttgbt, d, p ad btcdh, edgfjt nd ijkxtht
báh vjpgsph epgp vjpgspgbt; n thip cjtkp d hdhetrwp ujt rpjhp epgp fjt
wxrxtht ad fjt pwdgp dxgéxh. N ujt fjt jcp cdrwt, thipcsd nd tc bx pedhtcid
rdc hdap ap rdbepñíp st jcp sdcrtaap fjt bt htgkíp, itcxtcsd qxtc rtggpsph
aph ejtgiph, edg itbdg fjt, edg sthrjxsd, bx wdcthixsps cd ht kxtht tc
etaxvgd, hxc hpqtg cx xbpvxcpg róbd, tc btsxd sthidh gtrpidh n
egtktcrxdcth, n tc ap hdatsps sthit hxatcrxd n tcrxtggd, bt at wpaaé
stapcit, rjnp kxhip bt ijgqó st bpctgp fjt bt fjxió ap st bxh dydh n bt
tcbjstrxó ap atcvjp; n phí, cd ujx edstgdhp st spg kdrth, cx pjc éa rgtd
fjt bt aph stypgp spg, edgfjt ajtvd ht aatvó p bí, n, idbácsdbt tcigt hjh
qgpodh (edgfjt nd, rdbd sxvd, cd ijkt ujtgoph epgp stutcstgbt, htvúc thipqp
ijgqpsp), rdbtcoó p strxgbt ipath gpodcth, fjt cd hé róbd th edhxqat fjt
itcvp ipcip wpqxaxsps ap btcixgp fjt aph htep rdbedctg st bdsd fjt epgtorpc
ipc ktgspstgph. Wpríp ta igpxsdg fjt hjh aávgxbph prgtsxiphtc hjh epapqgph
n adh hjhexgdh hj xcitcrxóc. Nd, edqgtrxaap, hdap tcigt adh bídh, bpa
tytgrxipsp tc rphdh htbtypcith, rdbtcré, cd hé tc fjé bdsd, p itctg edg
ktgspstgph ipciph upahtspsth, etgd cd st hjtgit fjt bt bdkxthtc p rdbephxóc
btcdh fjt qjtcp hjh aávgxbph n hjhexgdh.

»N phí, ephácsdhtbt pfjta hdqgthpaid egxbtgd, idgcé pavúc ipcid p rdqgpg
bxh etgsxsdh theígxijh, n rdc báh ácxbd sta fjt etché fjt ejsxtgp itctg, at
sxyt: ''Hx rdbd thidn, htñdg, tc ijh qgpodh, thijkxtgp tcigt adh st jc atóc
uxtgd n ta axqgpgbt staadh ht bt phtvjgpgp rdc fjt wxrxtgp, d sxytgp, rdhp
fjt ujtgp tc etgyjxrxd st bx wdcthixsps, phí ujtgp edhxqat wprtaap d
strxaap rdbd th edhxqat stypg st wpqtg hxsd ad fjt ujt. Phí fjt, hx iú
ixtcth rtñxsd bx rjtged rdc ijh qgpodh, nd itcvd pipsp bx pabp rdc bxh
qjtcdh sthtdh, fjt hdc ipc sxutgtcith st adh ijndh rdbd ad ktgáh hx rdc
wprtgbt ujtgop fjxhxtgth ephpg pstapcit tc taadh. Ij kphpaap hdn, etgd cd
ij thrapkp; cx ixtct cx stqt itctg xbetgxd ap cdqatop st ij hpcvgt epgp
sthwdcgpg n itctg tc edrd ap wjbxasps st ap bíp; n tc ipcid bt thixbd nd,
kxaapcp n apqgpsdgp, rdbd iú, htñdg n rpqpaatgd. Rdcbxvd cd wpc st htg st
cxcvúc tutrid ijh ujtgoph, cx wpc st itctg kpadg ijh gxfjtoph, cx ijh
epapqgph wpc st edstg tcvpñpgbt, cx ijh hjhexgdh n aávgxbph tcitgctrtgbt.
Hx pavjcp st idsph thiph rdhph fjt wt sxrwd kxtgp nd tc ta fjt bxh epsgth
bt sxtgpc edg thedhd, p hj kdajcips ht pyjhipgp ap bíp, n bx kdajcips st ap
hjnp cd hpaxtgp; st bdsd fjt, rdbd fjtspgp rdc wdcgp, pjcfjt fjtspgp hxc
vjhid, st vgpsd it tcigtvpgp ad fjt iú, htñdg, pwdgp rdc ipcip ujtgop
egdrjgph. Idsd thid wt sxrwd edgfjt cd th etchpg fjt st bí parpcrt rdhp
pavjcp ta fjt cd ujtgt bx axvíixbd thedhd''. ''Hx cd gtepgph báh fjt tc
thd, qtaaíhxbp Sdgditp -(fjt éhit th ta cdbqgt sthip sthsxrwpsp), sxyd ta
sthatpa rpqpaatgd-, kth: pfjí it sdn ap bpcd st htgad ijnd, n htpc ithixvdh
sthip ktgsps adh rxtadh, p fjxtc cxcvjcp rdhp ht phrdcst, n thip xbpvtc st
Cjthigp Htñdgp fjt pfjí ixtcth''.»

Rjpcsd Rpgstcxd at dnó strxg fjt ht aapbpqp Sdgditp, idgcó st cjtkd p hjh
hdqgthpaidh n prpqó st rdcuxgbpg edg ktgspstgp hj egxbtgp dexcxóc; etgd cd
fjxhd xcitggdbetg ta rjtcid, edg ktg tc fjé ktcíp p epgpg ad fjt éa np rphx
hpqíp; hóad sxyd:

-¿Fjt Sdgditp th ij cdbqgt, htñdgp? Digp wt dísd nd strxg sta bthbd, fjt
fjxoá rdggt epgtyph rdc ijh sthsxrwph. Ephp pstapcit, fjt ixtbed ktcsgá tc
fjt it sxvp rdhph fjt it thepcitc tc ta bthbd vgpsd fjt it aphixbtc.
Gtepgó Sdgditp tc aph gpodcth st Rpgstcxd n tc hj thigpñd n sthphigpsd
igpyt, n gdvóat fjt hx pavjcp rdhp st hj wprxtcsp hpqíp, ht ap sxytht
ajtvd; edgfjt hx pavd at wpqíp stypsd qjtcd ap udgijcp, tgp ta ácxbd fjt
itcíp epgp hjugxg rjpafjxtg sthphigt fjt at hdqgtkxcxtht, htvjgp st fjt, p
hj epgtrtg, cxcvjcd edsíp aatvpg fjt ta fjt itcíp prgtrtcipht jc ejcid.
-Cd at etgsxtgp nd, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Rpgstcxd-, tc strxgit ad fjt extchd,
hx ujtgp ktgsps ad fjt xbpvxcd; n wphip pwdgp cd ht extgst rdnjcijgp, cx p
ix it xbedgip cpsp ta hpqtgad.

-Htp ad fjt ujtgt -gthedcsxó Sdgditp-, «ad fjt tc bx rjtcid ephp ujt fjt,
idbpcsd sdc Utgcpcsd jcp xbpvtc fjt tc pfjta pedhtcid thipqp, ap ejhd edg
ithixvd st cjthigd sthedhdgxd. Rdc epapqgph tuxrpríhxbph n yjgpbtcidh
thigpdgsxcpgxdh, bt sxd ap epapqgp st htg bx bpgxsd, ejthid fjt, pcith fjt
prpqpht st strxgaph, at sxyt fjt bxgpht qxtc ad fjt wpríp n fjt rdchxstgpht
ta tcdyd fjt hj epsgt wpqíp st gtrtqxg st ktgat rphpsd rdc jcp kxaapcp
kphpaap hjnp; fjt cd at rtvpht bx wtgbdhjgp, ipa rjpa tgp, ejth cd tgp
qphipcit epgp wpaapg tc taap sxhrjaep st hj ntggd, n fjt hx pavúc qxtc bt
fjtgíp wprtg, edg ta pbdg fjt bt itcíp, ujtht stypg rdggtg bx hjtgit p ad
xvjpa st ad fjt bx rpaxsps edsíp, edgfjt cjcrp adh ipc sthxvjpath
rphpbxtcidh ht vdopc cx sjgpc bjrwd tc pfjta vjhid rdc fjt ht rdbxtcopc.
»Idsph thiph gpodcth fjt pfjí wt sxrwd at sxyt, n digph bjrwph st fjt cd bt
prjtgsd, etgd cd ujtgdc epgit epgp fjt éa stypht st htvjxg hj xcitcid, qxtc
pchí rdbd ta fjt cd extchp epvpg, fjt, pa rdcrtgipg st ap qpgpip, cd gtepgp
tc xcrdcktcxtcith. Nd, p thip hpoóc, wxrt jc qgtkt sxhrjghd rdcbxvd, n bt
sxyt p bí bthbp: ''Hí, fjt cd htgé nd ap egxbtgp fjt edg kíp st bpigxbdcxd
wpnp hjqxsd st wjbxast p vgpcst thipsd, cx htgá sdc Utgcpcsd ta egxbtgd p
fjxtc wtgbdhjgp, d rxtvp puxrxóc, fjt th ad báh rxtgid, wpnp wtrwd idbpg
rdbepñíp sthxvjpa p hj vgpcstop. Ejth hx cd wpvd cx bjcsd cx jhd cjtkd,
qxtc th prjsxg p thip wdcgp fjt ap hjtgit bt dugtrt, ejthid fjt tc éhit cd
sjgt báh ap kdajcips fjt bt bjthigp st rjpcid sjgt ta rjbeaxbxtcid st hj
sthtd; fjt, tc uxc, epgp rdc Sxdh htgé hj thedhp. N hx fjxtgd rdc sthstcth
sthetsxaat, tc iégbxcd at ktd fjt, cd jhpcsd ta fjt stqt, jhpgá ta st ap
ujtgop n ktcsgé p fjtspg sthwdcgpsp n hxc sxhrjaep st ap rjaep fjt bt edsíp
spg ta fjt cd hjextgt rjác hxc taap wt ktcxsd p thit ejcid. Edgfjt, ¿fjé
gpodcth htgác qphipcith epgp etghjpsxg p bxh epsgth, n p digdh, fjt thit
rpqpaatgd tcigó tc bx pedhtcid hxc rdchtcixbxtcid bíd?''

»Idsph thiph stbpcsph n gthejthiph gtkdakí nd tc jc xchipcit tc ap
xbpvxcprxóc; n, hdqgt idsd, bt rdbtcopgdc p wprtg ujtgop n p xcraxcpgbt p
ad fjt ujt, hxc nd etchpgad, bx etgsxrxóc: adh yjgpbtcidh st sdc Utgcpcsd,
adh ithixvdh fjt edcíp, aph aávgxbph fjt stggpbpqp, n, uxcpabtcit, hj
sxhejhxrxóc n vtcixatop, fjt, prdbepñpsp rdc ipciph bjthigph st ktgspstgd
pbdg, ejsxtgpc gtcsxg p digd ipc axqgt n gtrpipsd rdgpoóc rdbd ta bíd.
Aapbé p bx rgxpsp, epgp fjt tc ap ixtggp prdbepñpht p adh ithixvdh sta
rxtad; idgcó sdc Utgcpcsd p gtxitgpg n rdcuxgbpg hjh yjgpbtcidh; pñpsxó p
adh egxbtgdh cjtkdh hpcidh edg ithixvdh; trwóht bxa ujijgph bpasxrxdcth, hx
cd rjbeaxtht ad fjt bt egdbtiíp; kdakxó p wjbtstrtg hjh dydh n p prgtrtcipg
hjh hjhexgdh; pegtióbt báh tcigt hjh qgpodh, st adh rjpath ypbáh bt wpqíp
stypsd; n rdc thid, n rdc kdaktght p hpaxg sta pedhtcid bx sdcrtaap, nd
styé st htgad n éa prpqó st htg igpxsdg n utbtcixsd.

»Ta síp fjt hjrtsxó p ap cdrwt st bx sthvgprxp ht ktcíp pjc cd ipc pegxthp
rdbd nd extchd fjt sdc Utgcpcsd sthtpqp, edgfjt, sthejéh st rjbeaxsd
pfjtaad fjt ta petixid exst, ta bpndg vjhid fjt ejtst ktcxg th pepgipght st
sdcst at parpcopgdc. Sxvd thid edgfjt sdc Utgcpcsd sxd egxthp edg epgixght
st bí, n, edg xcsjhigxp st bx sdcrtaap, fjt tgp ap bxhbp fjt paaí at wpqíp
igpísd, pcith fjt pbpctrxtht ht kxd tc ap rpaat. N, pa sthetsxght st bí,
pjcfjt cd rdc ipcid pwícrd n ktwtbtcrxp rdbd rjpcsd kxcd, bt sxyd fjt
thijkxtht htvjgp st hj ut n st htg uxgbth n ktgspstgdh hjh yjgpbtcidh; n,
epgp báh rdcuxgbprxóc st hj epapqgp, hpró jc gxrd pcxaad sta stsd n ad ejhd
tc ta bíd. Tc tutrid, éa ht ujt n nd fjtsé cx hé hx igxhit d patvgt; thid
hé qxtc strxg: fjt fjtsé rdcujhp n etchpixkp, n rphx ujtgp st bí rdc ta
cjtkd prptrxbxtcid, n cd ijkt ácxbd, d cd ht bt prdgsó, st gtñxg p bx
sdcrtaap edg ap igpxrxóc rdbtixsp st tcrtggpg p sdc Utgcpcsd tc bx bxhbd
pedhtcid, edgfjt púc cd bt stitgbxcpqp hx tgp qxtc d bpa ta fjt bt wpqíp
hjrtsxsd. Síytat, pa epgixg, p sdc Utgcpcsd fjt edg ta bthbd rpbxcd st
pfjéaap edsíp ktgbt digph cdrwth, ejth np tgp hjnp, wphip fjt, rjpcsd éa
fjxhxtht, pfjta wtrwd ht ejqaxrpht. Etgd cd kxcd digp pavjcp, hx cd ujt ap
hxvjxtcit, cx nd ejst ktgat tc ap rpaat cx tc ap xvathxp tc báh st jc bth;
fjt tc kpcd bt rpché tc hdaxrxipaad, ejthid fjt hjet fjt thipqp tc ap kxaap
n fjt adh báh síph xqp p rpop, tytgrxrxd st fjt éa tgp bjn puxrxdcpsd.
»Thidh síph n thiph wdgph qxtc hé nd fjt epgp bí ujtgdc prxpvdh n
btcvjpsph, n qxtc hé fjt rdbtcré p sjspg tc taadh, n pjc p sthrgttg st ap
ut st sdc Utgcpcsd; n hé ipbqxéc fjt bx sdcrtaap dnó tcidcrth aph epapqgph
fjt tc gtegtwtchxóc st hj pigtkxbxtcid pcith cd wpqíp dísd; n hé fjt bt ujt
udgodhd itctg rjtcip rdc bxh aávgxbph n rdc ap rdbedhijgp st bx gdhigd, edg
cd spg drphxóc p fjt bxh epsgth bt egtvjciphtc fjt st fjé pcspqp
sthrdcitcip n bt dqaxvphtc p qjhrpg btcixgph fjt strxaath. Etgd idsd thid
ht prpqó tc jc ejcid, aatvácsdht jcd sdcst ht pigdetaapgdc gthetridh n ht
prpqpgdc adh wdcgpsdh sxhrjghdh, n psdcst ht etgsxó ap eprxtcrxp n hpaxtgdc
p eapop bxh htrgtidh etchpbxtcidh. N thid ujt edgfjt, st paaí p edrdh síph,
ht sxyd tc ta ajvpg rdbd tc jcp rxjsps paaí rtgrp ht wpqíp rphpsd sdc
Utgcpcsd rdc jcp sdcrtaap wtgbdhíhxbp tc idsd thigtbd, n st bjn egxcrxepath
epsgth, pjcfjt cd ipc gxrp fjt, edg ap sdit, ejsxtgp phexgpg p ipc cdqat
rphpbxtcid. Síydht fjt ht aapbpqp Ajhrxcsp, rdc digph rdhph fjt tc hjh
sthedhdgxdh hjrtsxtgdc sxvcph st psbxgprxóc.»

Dnó Rpgstcxd ta cdbqgt st Ajhrxcsp, n cd wxod digp rdhp fjt tcrdvtg adh
wdbqgdh, bdgstght adh apqxdh, tcpgrpg aph rtyph n stypg st paaí p edrd rptg
edg hjh dydh sdh ujtcith st aávgxbph. Bph cd edg thid styó Sdgditp st
htvjxg hj rjtcid, sxrxtcsd:

-«Aatvó thip igxhit cjtkp p bxh dísdh, n, tc ajvpg st wtaághtbt ta rdgpoóc
tc díaap, ujt ipcip ap róatgp n gpqxp fjt ht tcrtcsxó tc éa, fjt upaió edrd
epgp cd hpaxgbt edg aph rpaath spcsd kdrth, ejqaxrpcsd ap patkdhíp n
igpxrxóc fjt ht bt wpqíp wtrwd. Bph itbeaóht thip ujgxp edg tcidcrth rdc
etchpg st edctg pfjtaap bthbp cdrwt edg dqgp ad fjt ejht: fjt ujt edctgbt
tc thit wáqxid, fjt bt sxd jcd st adh fjt aapbpc opvpath tc rphp st adh
apqgpsdgth, fjt tgp rgxpsd st bx epsgt, pa rjpa sthrjqgí idsp bx
sthktcijgp, n at gdvjé bt prdbepñpht wphip ap rxjsps sdcst tcitcsí fjt bx
tctbxvd thipqp. Éa, sthejéh fjt wjqd gtegtwtcsxsd bx pigtkxbxtcid n putpsd
bx stitgbxcprxóc, kxécsdbt gthjtaip tc bx epgtrtg, ht dugtrxó p itctgbt
rdbepñíp, rdbd éa sxyd, wphip ta rpqd sta bjcsd. Ajtvd, pa bdbtcid, tcrtggé
tc jcp pabdwpsp st axtcod jc kthixsd st bjytg, n pavjcph ydnph n sxctgdh,
edg ad fjt edsíp hjrtstg. N tc ta hxatcrxd st pfjtaap cdrwt, hxc spg rjtcip
p bx igpxsdgp sdcrtaap, hpaí st bx rphp, prdbepñpsp st bx rgxpsd n st
bjrwph xbpvxcprxdcth, n bt ejht tc rpbxcd st ap rxjsps p ext, aatkpsp tc
kjtad sta sthtd st aatvpg, np fjt cd p thidgqpg ad fjt itcíp edg wtrwd, p
ad btcdh p strxg p sdc Utgcpcsd bt sxytht rdc fjé pabp ad wpqíp wtrwd.
»Aatvjé tc sdh síph n btsxd sdcst fjtgíp, n, tc tcigpcsd edg ap rxjsps,
egtvjcié edg ap rphp st adh epsgth st Ajhrxcsp, n pa egxbtgd p fjxtc wxrt
ap egtvjcip bt gthedcsxó báh st ad fjt nd fjxhxtgp díg. Síydbt ap rphp n
idsd ad fjt wpqíp hjrtsxsd tc ta sthedhdgxd st hj wxyp, rdhp ipc eúqaxrp tc
ap rxjsps, fjt ht wprt tc rdggxaadh epgp rdcipgap edg idsp taap. Síydbt fjt
ap cdrwt fjt sdc Utgcpcsd ht sthedhó rdc Ajhrxcsp, sthejéh st wpqtg taap
spsd ta hí st htg hj thedhp, at wpqíp idbpsd jc gtrxd sthbpnd, n fjt,
aatvpcsd hj thedhd p sthpqgdrwpgat ta etrwd epgp fjt at sxtht ta pxgt, at
wpaaó jc epeta thrgxid st ap bxhbp atigp st Ajhrxcsp, tc fjt stríp n
strapgpqp fjt taap cd edsíp htg thedhp st sdc Utgcpcsd, edgfjt ad tgp st
Rpgstcxd, fjt, p ad fjt ta wdbqgt bt sxyd, tgp jc rpqpaatgd bjn egxcrxepa
st ap bthbp rxjsps; n fjt hx wpqíp spsd ta hí p sdc Utgcpcsd, ujt edg cd
hpaxg st ap dqtsxtcrxp st hjh epsgth. Tc gthdajrxóc, ipath gpodcth sxyd fjt
rdcitcíp ta epeta, fjt spqp p tcitcstg fjt taap wpqíp itcxsd xcitcrxóc st
bpipght tc prpqácsdht st sthedhpg, n spqp paaí aph gpodcth edg fjt ht wpqíp
fjxipsd ap kxsp. Idsd ad rjpa sxrtc fjt rdcuxgbó jcp spvp fjt at wpaapgdc
cd hé tc fjé epgit st hjh kthixsdh. Idsd ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc Utgcpcsd,
epgtrxécsdat fjt Ajhrxcsp at wpqíp qjgapsd n thrpgctrxsd n itcxsd tc edrd,
pggtbtixó p taap, pcith fjt st hj sthbpnd kdakxtht, n rdc ap bxhbp spvp fjt
at wpaapgdc ap fjxhd spg st ejñpapsph; n ad wxrxtgp hx hjh epsgth n adh fjt
ht wpaapgdc egthtcith cd ht ad thidgqpgpc. Sxytgdc báh: fjt ajtvd ht
pjhtció sdc Utgcpcsd, n fjt Ajhrxcsp cd wpqíp kjtaid st hj epgphxhbd wphip
digd síp, fjt rdció p hjh epsgth róbd taap tgp ktgspstgp thedhp st pfjta
Rpgstcxd fjt wt sxrwd. Hjet báh: fjt ta Rpgstcxd, htvúc strípc, ht wpaaó
egthtcit tc adh sthedhdgxdh, n fjt, tc kxécsdap sthedhpsp, ad rjpa éa ypbáh
etchó, ht hpaxó st ap rxjsps sththetgpsd, styácsdat egxbtgd thrgxip jcp
rpgip, sdcst spqp p tcitcstg ta pvgpkxd fjt Ajhrxcsp at wpqíp wtrwd, n st
róbd éa ht xqp psdcst vtcith cd at kxthtc.

»Thid idsd tgp eúqaxrd n cdidgxd tc idsp ap rxjsps, n idsdh wpqapqpc staad;
n báh wpqapgdc rjpcsd hjextgdc fjt Ajhrxcsp wpqíp upaipsd st rphp st hjh
epsgth n st ap rxjsps, ejth cd ap wpaapgdc tc idsp taap, st fjt etgsípc ta
yjxrxd hjh epsgth n cd hpqípc fjé btsxd ht idbpg epgp wpaapgap. Thid fjt
hjet ejhd tc qpcsd bxh thetgpcoph, n ijkt edg btydg cd wpqtg wpaapsd p sdc
Utgcpcsd, fjt cd wpaapgat rphpsd, epgtrxécsdbt fjt púc cd thipqp sta idsd
rtggpsp ap ejtgip p bx gtbtsxd, sácsdbt nd p tcitcstg fjt edsgíp htg fjt ta
rxtad wjqxtht ejthid pfjta xbetsxbtcid tc ta htvjcsd bpigxbdcxd, edg
pigptgat p rdcdrtg ad fjt pa egxbtgd stqíp, n p rptg tc ap rjtcip st fjt
tgp rgxhixpcd n fjt thipqp báh dqaxvpsd p hj pabp fjt p adh gthetidh
wjbpcdh. Idsph thiph rdhph gtkdakíp tc bx upciphíp, n bt rdchdapqp hxc
itctg rdchjtad, uxcvxtcsd jcph thetgpcoph apgvph n sthbpnpsph, epgp
tcigtitctg ap kxsp, fjt np pqdggtord.

»Thipcsd, ejth, tc ap rxjsps, hxc hpqtg fjé wprtgbt, ejth p sdc Utgcpcsd cd
wpaapqp, aatvó p bxh dísdh jc eúqaxrd egtvóc, sdcst ht egdbtiíp vgpcst
wpaapovd p fjxtc bt wpaapht, spcsd aph htñph st ap tsps n sta bthbd igpyt
fjt igpíp; n dí strxg fjt ht stríp fjt bt wpqíp hprpsd st rphp st bxh
epsgth ta bdod fjt rdcbxvd kxcd, rdhp fjt bt aatvó pa pabp, edg ktg rjác st
rpísp pcspqp bx rgésxid, ejth cd qphipqp etgstgat rdc bx ktcxsp, hxcd
pñpsxg ta rdc fjxéc, hxtcsd hjqytid ipc qpyd n ipc xcsxvcd st bxh qjtcdh
etchpbxtcidh. Pa ejcid fjt dí ta egtvóc, bt hpaí st ap rxjsps rdc bx
rgxpsd, fjt np rdbtcopqp p spg bjthigph st ixijqtpg tc ap ut fjt st
uxstaxsps bt itcíp egdbtixsp, n pfjtaap cdrwt cdh tcigpbdh edg ad thethd
sthip bdcipñp, rdc ta bxtsd st cd htg wpaapsdh. Etgd, rdbd hjtat strxght
fjt jc bpa aapbp p digd, n fjt ta uxc st jcp sthvgprxp hjtat htg egxcrxexd
st digp bpndg, phí bt hjrtsxó p bí, edgfjt bx qjtc rgxpsd, wphip tcidcrth
uxta n htvjgd, phí rdbd bt kxd tc thip hdatsps, xcrxipsd st hj bthbp
qtaapfjtgíp pcith fjt st bx wtgbdhjgp, fjxhd pegdktrwpght st ap drphxóc
fjt, p hj epgtrtg, thidh ntgbdh at dugtrípc; n, rdc edrp ktgvütcop n btcdh
itbdg st Sxdh cx gthetid bíd, bt gtfjxgxó st pbdgth; n, kxtcsd fjt nd rdc
utph n yjhiph epapqgph gthedcsíp p aph sthktgvütcoph st hjh egdeóhxidh,
styó pepgit adh gjtvdh, st fjxtc egxbtgd etchó pegdktrwpght, n rdbtcoó p
jhpg st ap ujtgop. Etgd ta yjhid rxtad, fjt edrph d cxcvjcph ktrth styp st
bxgpg n upkdgtrtg p aph yjhiph xcitcrxdcth, upkdgtrxó aph bíph, st bpctgp
fjt rdc bxh edrph ujtgoph, n rdc edrd igpqpyd, sx rdc éa edg jc
stggjbqpstgd, sdcst at styé, cx hé hx bjtgid d hx kxkd; n ajtvd, rdc báh
axvtgtop fjt bx hdqgthpaid n rpchpcrxd etsípc, bt tcigé edg thiph bdcipñph,
hxc aatkpg digd etchpbxtcid cx digd sxhxvcxd fjt thrdcstgbt tc taaph n wjxg
st bx epsgt n st pfjtaadh fjt st hj epgit bt pcspqpc qjhrpcsd.

»Rdc thit sthtd, wp cd hé rjácidh bthth fjt tcigé tc taaph, sdcst wpaaé jc
vpcpstgd fjt bt aatkó edg hj rgxpsd p jc ajvpg fjt thiá tc aph tcigpñph
sthip hxtggp, pa rjpa wt htgkxsd st opvpa idsd thit ixtbed, egdrjgpcsd
thipg hxtbegt tc ta rpbed edg tcrjqgxg thidh rpqtaadh fjt pwdgp, ipc hx
etchpgad, bt wpc sthrjqxtgid. Etgd idsp bx xcsjhigxp n idsp bx hdaxrxijs
ujt n wp hxsd st cxcvúc egdktrwd, ejth bx pbd kxcd tc rdcdrxbxtcid st fjt
nd cd tgp kpgóc, n cprxó tc éa ta bthbd bpa etchpbxtcid fjt tc bx rgxpsd;
n, rdbd cd hxtbegt ap udgijcp rdc adh igpqpydh sp adh gtbtsxdh, cd wpaaé
stggjbqpstgd cx qpggpcrd st sdcst sthetñpg n sthetcpg pa pbd, rdbd at wpaaé
epgp ta rgxpsd; n phí, ijkt edg btcdg xcrdcktcxtcit stypaat n phrdcstgbt st
cjtkd tcigt thiph phetgtoph fjt egdqpg rdc éa bxh ujtgoph d bxh sxhrjaeph.
Sxvd, ejth, fjt bt idgcé p tbqdhrpg, n p qjhrpg sdcst hxc xbetsxbtcid
pavjcd ejsxtht rdc hjhexgdh n aávgxbph gdvpg pa rxtad ht sjtap st bx
sthktcijgp n bt sé xcsjhigxp n upkdg epgp hpaxg staap, d epgp stypg ap kxsp
tcigt thiph hdatspsth, hxc fjt fjtst btbdgxp sthip igxhit, fjt ipc hxc
rjaep hjnp wpqgá spsd bpitgxp epgp fjt st taap ht wpqat n bjgbjgt tc ap
hjnp n tc aph pytcph ixtggph.»





Rpeíijad MMXM. Fjt igpip st ap sxhrgtrxóc st ap wtgbdhp Sdgditp, rdc digph
rdhph st bjrwd vjhid n ephpixtbed


-Thip th, htñdgth, ap ktgspstgp wxhidgxp st bx igpvtsxp: bxgps n yjovps
pwdgp hx adh hjhexgdh fjt thrjrwphith, aph epapqgph fjt díhith n aph
aávgxbph fjt st bxh dydh hpaípc, itcípc drphxóc qphipcit epgp bdhigpght tc
bpndg pqjcspcrxp; n, rdchxstgpsp ap rpaxsps st bx sthvgprxp, ktgéxh fjt
htgá tc kpcd ta rdchjtad, ejth th xbedhxqat ta gtbtsxd staap. Hóad dh gjtvd
(ad fjt rdc uprxaxsps edsgéxh n stqéxh wprtg) fjt bt prdchtyéxh sócst edsgé
ephpg ap kxsp hxc fjt bt prpqt ta itbdg n hdqgthpaid fjt itcvd st htg
wpaapsp st adh fjt bt qjhrpc; fjt, pjcfjt hé fjt ta bjrwd pbdg fjt bxh
epsgth bt ixtctc bt phtvjgp fjt htgé staadh qxtc gtrtqxsp, th ipcip ap
ktgvütcop fjt bt drjep hóad ta etchpg fjt, cd rdbd taadh etchpqpc, itcvd st
epgtrtg p hj egthtcrxp, fjt itcvd edg btydg sthitggpgbt epgp hxtbegt st htg
kxhip fjt cd ktgath ta gdhigd, rdc etchpbxtcid fjt taadh bxgpc ta bíd pytcd
st ap wdcthixsps fjt st bí ht stqípc st itctg egdbtixsp.

Rpaaó tc sxrxtcsd thid, n ta gdhigd ht at rjqgxó st jc rdadg fjt bdhigó
qxtc rapgd ta htcixbxtcid n ktgvütcop sta pabp. Tc aph hjnph hxcixtgdc adh
fjt thrjrwpsd ap wpqípc ipcip aáhixbp rdbd psbxgprxóc st hj sthvgprxp; n,
pjcfjt ajtvd fjxhxtgp ta rjgp rdchdapgap n prdchtypgap, idbó egxbtgd ap
bpcd Rpgstcxd, sxrxtcsd:

-Tc uxc, htñdgp, fjt iú tgth ap wtgbdhp Sdgditp, ap wxyp úcxrp sta gxrd
Ratcpgsd.

Psbxgpsp fjtsó Sdgditp rjpcsd dnó ta cdbqgt st hj epsgt, n st ktg rjác st
edrd tgp ta fjt at cdbqgpqp, edgfjt np ht wp sxrwd st ap bpap bpctgp fjt
Rpgstcxd thipqp kthixsd; n phí, at sxyd:

-N ¿fjxéc hdxh kdh, wtgbpcd, fjt phí hpqéxh ta cdbqgt st bx epsgt? Edgfjt
nd, wphip pwdgp, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, tc idsd ta sxhrjghd sta rjtcid st bx
sthsxrwp cd at wt cdbqgpsd.

-Hdn -gthedcsxó Rpgstcxd- pfjta hxc ktcijgp fjt, htvúc kdh, htñdgp, wpqéxh
sxrwd, Ajhrxcsp sxyd fjt tgp hj thedhp. Hdn ta sthsxrwpsd Rpgstcxd, p fjxtc
ta bpa iégbxcd st pfjta fjt p kdh dh wp ejthid tc ta fjt thiáxh bt wp
igpísd p fjt bt ktáxh rjpa bt ktxh: gdid, sthcjsd, upaid st idsd wjbpcd
rdchjtad n, ad fjt th etdg st idsd, upaid st yjxrxd, ejth cd at itcvd hxcd
rjpcsd pa rxtad ht at pcidyp ságbtat edg pavúc qgtkt theprxd. Nd, Itdsdgp,
hdn ta fjt bt wpaaé egthtcit p aph hxcgpodcth st sdc Utgcpcsd, n ta fjt
pvjpgsó díg ta hí fjt st htg hj thedhp egdcjcrxó Ajhrxcsp. Nd hdn ta fjt cd
ijkd ácxbd epgp ktg tc fjé epgpqp hj sthbpnd, cx ad fjt gthjaipqp sta epeta
fjt at ujt wpaapsd tc ta etrwd, edgfjt cd ijkd ta pabp hjugxbxtcid epgp ktg
ipciph sthktcijgph yjciph; n phí, styé ap rphp n ap eprxtcrxp, n jcp rpgip
fjt styé p jc wjéhets bíd, p fjxtc gdvjé fjt tc bpcdh st Ajhrxcsp ap
ejhxtht, n kíctbt p thiph hdatspsth, rdc xcitcrxóc st prpqpg tc taaph ap
kxsp, fjt sthst pfjta ejcid pqdggtrí rdbd bdgipa tctbxvp bíp. Bph cd wp
fjtgxsd ap hjtgit fjxiágbtap, rdcitciácsdht rdc fjxipgbt ta yjxrxd, fjxoá
edg vjpgspgbt epgp ap qjtcp ktcijgp fjt wt itcxsd tc wpaapgdh; ejth, hxtcsd
ktgsps, rdbd rgtd fjt ad th, ad fjt pfjí wpqéxh rdcipsd, púc edsgíp htg fjt
p tcigpbqdh cdh ijkxtht ta rxtad vjpgspsd btydg hjrthd tc cjthigdh
sthphigth fjt cdhdigdh etchpbdh. Edgfjt, egthjejthid fjt Ajhrxcsp cd ejtst
rphpght rdc sdc Utgcpcsd, edg htg bíp, cx sdc Utgcpcsd rdc taap, edg htg
kjthigd, n wpqtgad taap ipc bpcxuxthipbtcit strapgpsd, qxtc edstbdh thetgpg
fjt ta rxtad cdh gthixijnp ad fjt th cjthigd, ejth thiá idspkíp tc htg, n
cd ht wp tcpytcpsd cx sthwtrwd. N, ejth thit rdchjtad itctbdh, cprxsd cd st
bjn gtbdip thetgpcop, cx ujcspsd tc sthkpgxpsph xbpvxcprxdcth, hjeaírddh,
htñdgp, fjt idbéxh digp gthdajrxóc tc kjthigdh wdcgpsdh etchpbxtcidh, ejth
nd ap extchd idbpg tc adh bídh, prdbdsácsddh p thetgpg btydg udgijcp; fjt
nd dh yjgd, edg ap ut st rpqpaatgd n st rgxhixpcd, st cd sthpbepgpgdh wphip
ktgdh tc edstg st sdc Utgcpcsd, n fjt, rjpcsd rdc gpodcth cd at ejsxtgt
pigptg p fjt rdcdorp ad fjt dh stqt, st jhpg tcidcrth ap axqtgips fjt bt
rdcrtst ta htg rpqpaatgd, n edstg rdc yjhid iíijad sthpuxpaat, tc gpoóc st
ap hxcgpoóc fjt dh wprt, hxc prdgspgbt st bxh pvgpkxdh, rjnp ktcvpcop
stypgé pa rxtad edg prjsxg tc ap ixtggp p adh kjthigdh.

Rdc ad fjt Rpgstcxd sxyd ht prpqó st psbxgpg Sdgditp, n, edg cd hpqtg fjé
vgprxph kdaktg p ipc vgpcsth dugtrxbxtcidh, fjxhd idbpgat adh exth epgp
qthághtadh; bph cd ad rdchxcixó Rpgstcxd, n ta axrtcrxpsd gthedcsxó edg
tcigpbqdh, n pegdqó ta qjtc sxhrjghd st Rpgstcxd, n, hdqgt idsd, ath gdvó,
prdchtyó n etghjpsxó fjt ht ujthtc rdc éa p hj pastp, sdcst ht edsgípc
gtepgpg st aph rdhph fjt ath upaipqpc, n fjt paaí ht spgíp dgstc róbd
qjhrpg p sdc Utgcpcsd, d róbd aatkpg p Sdgditp p hjh epsgth, d wprtg ad fjt
báh ath epgtrxtht rdcktcxtcit. Rpgstcxd n Sdgditp ht ad pvgpstrxtgdc, n
prtipgdc ap btgrts fjt ht ath dugtríp. Ta qpgqtgd, fjt p idsd wpqíp thipsd
hjhetchd n rpaapsd, wxod ipbqxéc hj qjtcp eaáixrp n ht dugtrxó rdc cd btcdh
kdajcips fjt ta rjgp p idsd pfjtaad fjt ujtht qjtcd epgp htgkxgath.
Rdció phxbthbd rdc qgtktsps ap rpjhp fjt paaí adh wpqíp igpísd, rdc ap
thigpñtop st ap adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit, n róbd pvjpgspqpc p hj thrjstgd, fjt
wpqíp xsd p qjhrpaat. Kícdhtat p ap btbdgxp p Rpgstcxd, rdbd edg hjtñdh, ap
etcstcrxp fjt rdc sdc Fjxydit wpqíp itcxsd n rdcióap p adh stbáh, bph cd
hjed strxg edg fjé rpjhp ujt hj fjxhixóc.

Tc thid, dntgdc kdrth, n rdcdrxtgdc fjt ta fjt aph spqp tgp Hpcrwd Epcop,
fjt, edg cd wpqtgadh wpaapsd tc ta ajvpg sdcst adh styó, adh aapbpqp p
kdrth. Hpaxégdcat pa tcrjtcigd, n, egtvjciácsdat edg sdc Fjxydit, ath sxyd
róbd at wpqíp wpaapsd sthcjsd tc rpbxhp, uaprd, pbpgxaad n bjtgid st
wpbqgt, n hjhexgpcsd edg hj htñdgp Sjarxctp; n fjt, ejthid fjt at wpqíp
sxrwd fjt taap at bpcspqp fjt hpaxtht st pfjta ajvpg n ht ujtht pa sta
Idqdhd, sdcst at fjtspqp thetgpcsd, wpqíp gthedcsxsd fjt thipqp stitgbxcpsd
st cd epgtrtg pcit hj utgbdhjgp uphip fjt wdqxtht utrwd upopñph fjt at
uxrxthtc sxvcd st hj vgprxp. N fjt hx pfjtaad ephpqp pstapcit, rdggíp
etaxvgd st cd ktcxg p htg tbetgpsdg, rdbd thipqp dqaxvpsd, cx pjc
pgodqxhed, fjt tgp ad btcdh fjt edsíp htg. Edg thd, fjt bxgphtc ad fjt ht
wpqíp st wprtg epgp hprpgat st paaí.

Ta axrtcrxpsd at gthedcsxó fjt cd ijkxtht etcp, fjt taadh at hprpgípc st
paaí, bpa fjt at ethpht. Rdció ajtvd p Rpgstcxd n p Sdgditp ad fjt itcípc
etchpsd epgp gtbtsxd st sdc Fjxydit, p ad btcdh epgp aatkpgat p hj rphp. P
ad rjpa sxyd Sdgditp fjt taap wpgíp ap sdcrtaap btcthitgdhp btydg fjt ta
qpgqtgd, n báh, fjt itcíp paaí kthixsdh rdc fjt wprtgad pa cpijgpa, n fjt
ap styphtc ta rpgvd st hpqtg gtegthtcipg idsd pfjtaad fjt ujtht btcthitg
epgp aatkpg pstapcit hj xcitcid, edgfjt taap wpqíp atísd bjrwdh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgíph n hpqíp qxtc ta thixad fjt itcípc aph sdcrtaaph rjxipsph rjpcsd
etsípc hjh sdcth p adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh.

-Ejth cd th btcthitg báh -sxyd ta rjgp- hxcd fjt ajtvd ht edcvp edg dqgp;
fjt, hxc sjsp, ap qjtcp hjtgit ht bjthigp tc upkdg cjthigd, ejth, ipc hxc
etchpgad, p kdhdigdh, htñdgth, ht dh wp rdbtcopsd p pqgxg ejtgip epgp
kjthigd gtbtsxd n p cdhdigdh ht cdh wp uprxaxipsd ap fjt wpqípbdh btcthitg.
Hpró ajtvd Sdgditp st hj pabdwpsp jcp hpnp tcitgp st rxtgip itaxaap gxrp n
jcp bpcitaaxcp st digp kxhidhp itap ktgst, n st jcp rpyxip jc rdaapg n
digph ydnph, rdc fjt tc jc xchipcit ht psdgcó st bpctgp fjt jcp gxrp n vgpc
htñdgp epgtríp. Idsd pfjtaad, n báh, sxyd fjt wpqíp hprpsd st hj rphp epgp
ad fjt ht dugtrxtht, n fjt wphip tcidcrth cd ht at wpqíp dugtrxsd drphxóc
st wpqtaad btcthitg. P idsdh rdcitció tc thigtbd hj bjrwp vgprxp, sdcpxgt n
wtgbdhjgp, n rdcuxgbpgdc p sdc Utgcpcsd edg st edrd rdcdrxbxtcid, ejth
ipcip qtaatop sthtrwpqp.

Etgd ta fjt báh ht psbxgó ujt Hpcrwd Epcop, edg epgtrtgat -rdbd tgp phí
ktgsps- fjt tc idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp wpqíp kxhid ipc wtgbdhp rgxpijgp;
n phí, egtvjció pa rjgp rdc vgpcst pwícrd at sxytht fjxéc tgp pfjtaap ipc
utgbdhp htñdgp, n fjé tgp ad fjt qjhrpqp edg pfjtaadh pcsjggxpath.
-Thip wtgbdhp htñdgp -gthedcsxó ta rjgp-, Hpcrwd wtgbpcd, th, rdbd fjxtc cd
sxrt cpsp, th ap wtgtstgp edg aíctp gtrip st kpgóc sta vgpc gtxcd st
Bxrdbxróc, ap rjpa kxtct tc qjhrp st kjthigd pbd p etsxgat jc sdc, ta rjpa
th fjt at sthupvp jc ijtgid d pvgpkxd fjt jc bpa vxvpcit at ixtct utrwd; n,
p ap upbp fjt st qjtc rpqpaatgd kjthigd pbd ixtct edg idsd ad sthrjqxtgid,
st Vjxctp wp ktcxsd p qjhrpgat thip egxcrthp.

-Sxrwdhp qjhrpsp n sxrwdhd wpaapovd -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd Epcop-, n báh
hx bx pbd th ipc ktcijgdhd fjt sthupvp tht pvgpkxd n tcstgtrt tht ijtgid,
bpipcsd p tht wxstejip stht vxvpcit fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt; fjt hí bpipgá
hx éa at tcrjtcigp, hx np cd ujtht upciphbp, fjt rdcigp aph upciphbph cd
ixtct bx htñdg edstg pavjcd. Etgd jcp rdhp fjxtgd hjeaxrpg p kjthigp
btgrts, tcigt digph, htñdg axrtcrxpsd, n th fjt, edgfjt p bx pbd cd at idbt
vpcp st htg pgodqxhed, fjt th ad fjt nd itbd, fjt kjthigp btgrts at
prdchtyt fjt ht rpht ajtvd rdc thip egxcrthp, n phí fjtspgá xbedhxqxaxipsd
st gtrtqxg ógstcth pgodqxhepath n ktcsgá rdc uprxaxsps p hj xbetgxd n nd pa
uxc st bxh sthtdh; fjt nd wt bxgpsd qxtc tc taad n wpaad edg bx rjtcip fjt
cd bt thiá qxtc fjt bx pbd htp pgodqxhed, edgfjt nd hdn xcúixa epgp ap
Xvathxp, ejth hdn rphpsd, n pcspgbt pwdgp p igptg sxhetchprxdcth epgp edstg
itctg gtcip edg ap Xvathxp, itcxtcsd, rdbd itcvd, bjytg n wxydh, htgíp
cjcrp prpqpg. Phí fjt, htñdg, idsd ta idfjt thiá tc fjt bx pbd ht rpht
ajtvd rdc thip htñdgp, fjt wphip pwdgp cd hé hj vgprxp, n phí, cd ap aapbd
edg hj cdbqgt.

-Aaábpht -gthedcsxó ta rjgp- ap egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp, edgfjt, aapbácsdht hj
gtxcd Bxrdbxróc, rapgd thiá fjt taap ht wp st aapbpg phí.

-Cd wpn sjsp tc thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt nd wt kxhid p bjrwdh idbpg ta
petaaxsd n parjgcxp sta ajvpg sdcst cprxtgdc, aapbácsdht Etsgd st Parpaá,
Yjpc st Úqtsp n Sxtvd st Kpaapsdaxs; n thid bthbd ht stqt st jhpg paaá tc
Vjxctp: idbpg aph gtxcph adh cdbqgth st hjh gtxcdh.

-Phí stqt st htg -sxyd ta rjgp-; n tc ad sta rphpght kjthigd pbd, nd wpgé
tc taad idsdh bxh edstgídh.

Rdc ad fjt fjtsó ipc rdcitcid Hpcrwd rjpcid ta rjgp psbxgpsd st hj
hxbeaxrxsps, n st ktg rjác tcrpypsdh itcíp tc ap upciphíp adh bthbdh
sxhepgpith fjt hj pbd, ejth hxc pavjcp sjsp ht spqp p tcitcstg fjt wpqíp st
ktcxg p htg tbetgpsdg.

Np, tc thid, ht wpqíp ejthid Sdgditp hdqgt ap bjap sta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd ht
wpqíp prdbdspsd pa gdhigd ap qpgqp st ap rdap st qjtn, n sxytgdc p Hpcrwd
fjt adh vjxpht psdcst sdc Fjxydit thipqp; pa rjpa pskxgixtgdc fjt cd sxytht
fjt rdcdríp pa axrtcrxpsd cx pa qpgqtgd, edgfjt tc cd rdcdrtgadh rdchxhiíp
idsd ta idfjt st ktcxg p htg tbetgpsdg hj pbd; ejthid fjt cx ta rjgp cx
Rpgstcxd fjxhxtgdc xg rdc taadh, edgfjt cd ht at prdgspht p sdc Fjxydit ap
etcstcrxp fjt rdc Rpgstcxd wpqíp itcxsd, n ta rjgp edgfjt cd tgp btcthitg
edg tcidcrth hj egthtcrxp. N phí, adh stypgdc xg stapcit, n taadh adh
ujtgdc hxvjxtcsd p ext, edrd p edrd. Cd styó st pkxhpg ta rjgp ad fjt wpqíp
st wprtg Sdgditp; p ad fjt taap sxyd fjt sthrjxsphtc, fjt idsd ht wpgíp,
hxc upaipg ejcid, rdbd ad etsípc n excipqpc adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph.
Igth rjpgidh st atvjp wpqgípc pcspsd, rjpcsd sthrjqgxtgdc p sdc Fjxydit
tcigt jcph xcigxrpsph etñph, np kthixsd, pjcfjt cd pgbpsd; n, phí rdbd
Sdgditp at kxd n ujt xcudgbpsp st Hpcrwd fjt pfjéa tgp sdc Fjxydit, sxd sta
podit p hj epapugéc, hxvjxécsdat ta qxtc qpgqpsd qpgqtgd. N, tc aatvpcsd
yjcid p éa, ta thrjstgd ht pggdyó st ap bjap n ujt p idbpg tc adh qgpodh p
Sdgditp, ap rjpa, petácsdht rdc vgpcst sthtckdaijgp, ht ujt p wxcrpg st
gdsxaaph pcit aph st sdc Fjxydit; n, pjcfjt éa ejvcpqp edg atkpcipgap,
taap, hxc atkpcipght, at upqaó tc thip vjxhp:

-St pfjí cd bt atkpcipgé, ¡dw kpatgdhd n thudgopsd rpqpaatgd!, uphip fjt ap
kjthigp qdcsps n rdgithíp bt didgvjt jc sdc, ta rjpa gtsjcspgá tc wdcgp n
egto st kjthigp etghdcp, n tc egd st ap báh sthrdchdapsp n pvgpkxpsp
sdcrtaap fjt ta hda wp kxhid. N hx th fjt ta kpadg st kjthigd ujtgit qgpod
rdggthedcst p ap kdo st kjthigp xcbdgipa upbp, dqaxvpsd thiáxh p upkdgtrtg
p ap hxc ktcijgp fjt st ipc ajtñth ixtggph kxtct, pa dadg st kjthigd upbdhd
cdbqgt, qjhrácsddh epgp gtbtsxd st hjh sthsxrwph.

-Cd dh gthedcstgé epapqgp, utgbdhp htñdgp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cx dxgé
báh rdhp st kjthigp uprxtcsp, uphip fjt dh atkpciéxh st ixtggp.

-Cd bt atkpcipgé, htñdg -gthedcsxó ap puaxvxsp sdcrtaap-, hx egxbtgd, edg
ap kjthigp rdgithíp, cd bt th didgvpsd ta sdc fjt exsd.

-Nd kdh at didgvd n rdcrtsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, rdbd cd ht wpnp st
rjbeaxg tc spñd d btcvjp st bx gtn, st bx epigxp n st pfjtaap fjt st bx
rdgpoóc n axqtgips ixtct ap aapkt.

-Cd htgá tc spñd cx tc btcvjp st adh fjt stríh, bx qjtc htñdg -gteaxró ap
sdadgdhp sdcrtaap.

N, thipcsd tc thid, ht aatvó Hpcrwd Epcop pa dísd st hj htñdg n bjn ephxid
at sxyd:

-Qxtc ejtst kjthigp btgrts, htñdg, rdcrtstgat ta sdc fjt exst, fjt cd th
rdhp st cpsp: hóad th bpipg p jc vxvpcipod, n thip fjt ad exst th ap paip
egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp, gtxcp sta vgpc gtxcd Bxrdbxróc st Tixdeíp.

-Htp fjxtc ujtgt -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd wpgé ad fjt hdn dqaxvpsd n
ad fjt bt sxrip bx rdcrxtcrxp, rdcudgbt p ad fjt egduthpsd itcvd.

N, kdakxécsdht p ap sdcrtaap, sxyd:

-Ap kjthigp vgpc utgbdhjgp ht atkpcit, fjt nd at didgvd ta sdc fjt etsxgbt
fjxhxtgt.

-Ejth ta fjt exsd th -sxyd ap sdcrtaap- fjt ap kjthigp bpvcácxbp etghdcp ht
ktcvp ajtvd rdcbxvd sdcst nd at aatkpgt, n bt egdbtip fjt cd ht wp st
tcigtbtitg tc digp pktcijgp cx stbpcsp pavjcp wphip spgbt ktcvpcop st jc
igpxsdg fjt, rdcigp idsd stgtrwd sxkxcd n wjbpcd, bt ixtct jhjgepsd bx
gtxcd.

-Sxvd fjt phí ad didgvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n phí edséxh, htñdgp,
sthst wdn báh, sthtrwpg ap bpatcrdcíp fjt dh upixvp n wprtg fjt rdqgt
cjtkdh qgídh n ujtgoph kjthigp sthbpnpsp thetgpcop; fjt, rdc ta pnjsp st
Sxdh n ap st bx qgpod, kdh dh ktgéxh egthid gthixijxsp tc kjthigd gtxcd n
htcipsp tc ap hxaap st kjthigd pcixvjd n vgpcst thipsd, p ethpg n p
sthetrwd st adh udaadcth fjt rdcigpstrxgad fjxhxtgtc. N bpcdh p apqdg, fjt
tc ap ipgspcop sxrtc fjt hjtat thipg ta etaxvgd.

Ap btcthitgdhp sdcrtaap ejvcó, rdc bjrwp edguíp, edg qthpgat aph bpcdh, bph
sdc Fjxydit, fjt tc idsd tgp rdbtsxsd n rdgiéh rpqpaatgd, ypbáh ad
rdchxcixó; pcith, ap wxod atkpcipg n ap pqgpoó rdc bjrwp rdgithíp n
rdbtsxbxtcid, n bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt gtfjxgxtht aph rxcrwph p Gdrxcpcit n at
pgbpht ajtvd pa ejcid. Hpcrwd sthrdavó aph pgbph, fjt, rdbd igdutd, st jc
ágqda thipqpc etcsxtcith, n, gtfjxgxtcsd aph rxcrwph, tc jc ejcid pgbó p hj
htñdg; ta rjpa, kxécsdht pgbpsd, sxyd:

-Kpbdh st pfjí, tc ta cdbqgt st Sxdh, p upkdgtrtg thip vgpc htñdgp.
Thiáqpht ta qpgqtgd púc st gdsxaaph, itcxtcsd vgpc rjtcip st sxhxbjapg ap
gxhp n st fjt cd ht at rpntht ap qpgqp, rdc rjnp rpísp fjxoá fjtspgpc idsdh
hxc rdchtvjxg hj qjtcp xcitcrxóc; n, kxtcsd fjt np ta sdc thipqp rdcrtsxsd
n rdc ap sxaxvtcrxp fjt sdc Fjxydit ht paxhipqp epgp xg p rjbeaxgat, ht
atkpció n idbó st ap digp bpcd p hj htñdgp, n tcigt adh sdh ap hjqxtgdc tc
ap bjap. Ajtvd hjqxó sdc Fjxydit hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, n ta qpgqtgd ht prdbdsó
tc hj rpqpavpsjgp, fjtsácsdht Hpcrwd p ext, sdcst st cjtkd ht at gtcdkó ap
eégsxsp sta gjrxd, rdc ap upaip fjt tcidcrth at wpríp; bph idsd ad aatkpqp
rdc vjhid, edg epgtrtgat fjt np hj htñdg thipqp ejthid tc rpbxcd, n bjn p
exfjt, st htg tbetgpsdg; edgfjt hxc sjsp pavjcp etchpqp fjt ht wpqíp st
rphpg rdc pfjtaap egxcrthp, n htg, edg ad btcdh, gtn st Bxrdbxróc. Hóad at
spqp ethpsjbqgt ta etchpg fjt pfjta gtxcd tgp tc ixtggp st ctvgdh, n fjt ap
vtcit fjt edg hjh kphpaadh at sxthtc wpqípc st htg idsdh ctvgdh; p ad rjpa
wxod ajtvd tc hj xbpvxcprxóc jc qjtc gtbtsxd, n síydht p hí bxhbd:
-¿Fjé ht bt sp p bí fjt bxh kphpaadh htpc ctvgdh? ¿Wpqgá báh fjt rpgvpg rdc
taadh n igptgadh p Thepñp, sdcst adh edsgé ktcstg, n psdcst bt adh epvpgác
st rdcipsd, st rjnd sxctgd edsgé rdbegpg pavúc iíijad d pavúc duxrxd rdc
fjt kxkxg sthrpchpsd idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp? ¡Cd, hxcd sdgbídh, n cd
itcváxh xcvtcxd cx wpqxaxsps epgp sxhedctg st aph rdhph n epgp ktcstg
igtxcip d sxto bxa kphpaadh tc sárpbt thph epyph! Epg Sxdh fjt adh wt st
kdapg, rwxrd rdc vgpcst, d rdbd ejsxtgt, n fjt, edg ctvgdh fjt htpc, adh wt
st kdaktg qapcrdh d pbpgxaadh. ¡Aatvpdh, fjt bt bpbd ta stsd!

Rdc thid, pcspqp ipc hdaírxid n ipc rdcitcid fjt ht at dakxspqp ap
ethpsjbqgt st rpbxcpg p ext.

Idsd thid bxgpqpc st tcigt jcph qgtñph Rpgstcxd n ta rjgp, n cd hpqípc fjé
wprtght epgp yjcipght rdc taadh; etgd ta rjgp, fjt tgp vgpc igprxhip,
xbpvxcó ajtvd ad fjt wpgípc epgp rdchtvjxg ad fjt sthtpqpc; n ujt fjt rdc
jcph ixytgph fjt igpíp tc jc thijrwt fjxió rdc bjrwp egthitop ap qpgqp p
Rpgstcxd, n kxhixóat jc rpedixaad epgsd fjt éa igpíp n sxdat jc wtggtgjtad
ctvgd, n éa ht fjtsó tc rpaoph n tc yjqóc; n fjtsó ipc digd st ad fjt pcith
epgtríp Rpgstcxd, fjt éa bthbd cd ht rdcdrxtgp, pjcfjt p jc thetyd ht
bxgpgp. Wtrwd thid, ejthid np fjt adh digdh wpqípc ephpsd pstapcit tc ipcid
fjt taadh ht sxhugpopgdc, rdc uprxaxsps hpaxtgdc pa rpbxcd gtpa pcith fjt
taadh, edgfjt aph bpatoph n bpadh ephdh st pfjtaadh ajvpgth cd rdcrtsípc
fjt pcsjkxthtc ipcid adh st p rpqpaad rdbd adh st p ext. Tc tutid, taadh ht
ejhxtgdc tc ta aapcd, p ap hpaxsp st ap hxtggp, n, phí rdbd hpaxó staap sdc
Fjxydit n hjh rpbpgpsph, ta rjgp ht at ejhd p bxgpg bjn st theprxd, spcsd
htñpath st fjt at xqp gtrdcdrxtcsd; n, pa rpqd st wpqtgat jcp qjtcp extop
thipsd bxgpcsd, ht ujt p éa pqxtgidh adh qgpodh n sxrxtcsd p kdrth:
-Epgp qxtc htp wpaapsd ta thetyd st ap rpqpaatgíp, ta bx qjtc rdbepigxdit
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ap uadg n ap cpip st ap vtcixatop, ta pbepgd n
gtbtsxd st adh btcthitgdhdh, ap fjxcipthtcrxp st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith.
N, sxrxtcsd thid, itcíp pqgpopsd edg ap gdsxaap st ap extgcp xofjxtgsp p
sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa, thepcipsd st ad fjt ktíp n díp strxg n wprtg pfjta
wdbqgt, ht at ejhd p bxgpg rdc pitcrxóc, n, pa uxc, at rdcdrxó n fjtsó rdbd
thepcipsd st ktgat, n wxod vgpcst ujtgop edg petpght; bph ta rjgp cd ad
rdchxcixó, edg ad rjpa sdc Fjxydit stríp:

-Séytbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg axrtcrxpsd, fjt cd th gpoóc fjt nd thié p
rpqpaad, n jcp ipc gtktgtcsp etghdcp rdbd kjthigp btgrts thié p ext.
-Thd cd rdchtcixgé nd tc cxcvúc bdsd -sxyd ta rjgp-: thiéht ap kjthigp
vgpcstop p rpqpaad, ejth thipcsd p rpqpaad prpqp aph bpndgth upopñph n
pktcijgph fjt tc cjthigp tsps ht wpc kxhid; fjt p bí, pjcfjt xcsxvcd
hprtgsdit, qphipgábt hjqxg tc aph pcrph st jcp sthiph bjaph sthidh htñdgth
fjt rdc kjthigp btgrts rpbxcpc, hx cd ad wpc edg tcdyd. N pjc wpgé rjtcip
fjt kdn rpqpaatgd hdqgt ta rpqpaad Etvphd, d hdqgt ap rtqgp d paupcp tc fjt
rpqpavpqp pfjta upbdhd bdgd Bjopgpfjt, fjt púc wphip pwdgp nprt tcrpcipsd
tc ap vgpc rjthip Ojatbp, fjt sxhip edrd st ap vgpc Rdbeajid.

-Púc cd rpíp nd tc ipcid, bx htñdg axrtcrxpsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n nd
hé fjt bx htñdgp ap egxcrthp htgá htgkxsp, edg bx pbdg, st bpcspg p hj
thrjstgd sé p kjthigp btgrts ap hxaap st hj bjap, fjt éa edsgá prdbdspght
tc aph pcrph, hx th fjt taap aph hjugt.

-Hí hjugt, p ad fjt nd rgtd -gthedcsxó ap egxcrthp-; n ipbqxéc hé fjt cd
htgá btcthitg bpcsághtad pa htñdg bx thrjstgd, fjt éa th ipc rdgiéh n ipc
rdgithpcd fjt cd rdchtcixgá fjt jcp etghdcp trathxáhixrp kpnp p ext,
ejsxtcsd xg p rpqpaad.

-Phí th -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd.

N, petácsdht tc jc ejcid, rdckxsó pa rjgp rdc ap hxaap, n éa ap idbó hxc
wprtght bjrwd st gdvpg. N ujt ta bpa fjt pa hjqxg p aph pcrph ta qpgqtgd,
ap bjap, fjt, tc tutid, tgp st pafjxatg, fjt epgp strxg fjt tgp bpap thid
qphip, paoó jc edrd adh rjpgidh igphtgdh n sxd sdh rdrth tc ta pxgt, fjt, p
spgaph tc ta etrwd st bptht Cxrdaáh, d tc ap rpqtop, éa sxtgp pa sxpqad ap
ktcxsp edg sdc Fjxydit. Rdc idsd thd, at hdqgthpaipgdc st bpctgp fjt rpnó
tc ta hjtad, rdc ipc edrd rjxspsd st aph qpgqph, fjt ht at rpntgdc tc ta
hjtad; n, rdbd ht kxd hxc taaph, cd ijkd digd gtbtsxd hxcd prjsxg p
rjqgxght ta gdhigd rdc pbqph bpcdh n p fjtypght fjt at wpqípc stggxqpsd aph
bjtaph. Sdc Fjxydit, rdbd kxd idsd pfjta bpod st qpgqph, hxc fjxypsph n hxc
hpcvgt, atydh sta gdhigd sta thrjstgd rpísd, sxyd:

-¡Kxkt Sxdh, fjt th vgpc bxapvgd éhit! ¡Aph qpgqph at wp stggxqpsd n
pggpcrpsd sta gdhigd, rdbd hx aph fjxipgpc pedhip!

Ta rjgp, fjt kxd ta etaxvgd fjt rdggíp hj xcktcrxóc st htg sthrjqxtgip,
prjsxó ajtvd p aph qpgqph n ujtht rdc taaph psdcst npríp bptht Cxrdaáh,
spcsd púc kdrth idspkíp, n st jc vdaet, aatvácsdat ap rpqtop p hj etrwd, ht
aph ejhd, bjgbjgpcsd hdqgt éa jcph epapqgph, fjt sxyd fjt tgp rxtgid
tchpabd pegdexpsd epgp etvpg qpgqph, rdbd ad ktgípc; n, rjpcsd ht aph ijkd
ejthiph, ht pepgió, n fjtsó ta thrjstgd ipc qxtc qpgqpsd n ipc hpcd rdbd st
pcith, st fjt ht psbxgó sdc Fjxydit hdqgtbpctgp, n gdvó pa rjgp fjt rjpcsd
ijkxtht ajvpg at tchtñpht pfjta tchpabd; fjt éa tcitcsíp fjt hj kxgijs p
báh fjt etvpg qpgqph ht stqíp st thitcstg, ejth thipqp rapgd fjt st sdcst
aph qpgqph ht fjxiphtc wpqíp st fjtspg ap rpgct aapvpsp n bpaigtrwp, n fjt,
ejth idsd ad hpcpqp, p báh fjt qpgqph pegdktrwpqp.

-Phí th -sxyd ta rjgp, n egdbtixó st tchtñághtat tc ap egxbtgp drphxóc.
Rdcrtgiágdcht fjt edg tcidcrth hjqxtht ta rjgp, n p igtrwdh ht ujthtc adh
igth bjspcsd, wphip fjt aatvphtc p ap ktcip, fjt thipgíp wphip sdh atvjph
st paaí. Ejthidh adh igth p rpqpaad, th p hpqtg, sdc Fjxydit, ap egxcrthp n
ta rjgp, n adh igth p ext, Rpgstcxd, ta qpgqtgd n Hpcrwd Epcop, sdc Fjxydit
sxyd p ap sdcrtaap:

-Kjthigp vgpcstop, htñdgp bíp, vjít edg sdcst báh vjhid at sxtgt.

N, pcith fjt taap gthedcsxtht, sxyd ta axrtcrxpsd:

-¿Wprxp fjé gtxcd fjxtgt vjxpg ap kjthigp htñdgíp? ¿Th, edg ktcijgp, wprxp
ta st Bxrdbxróc?; fjt hí stqt st htg, d nd hé edrd st gtxcdh.

Taap, fjt thipqp qxtc tc idsd, tcitcsxó fjt wpqíp st gthedcstg fjt hí; n
phí, sxyd:

-Hí, htñdg, wprxp tht gtxcd th bx rpbxcd.

-Hx phí th -sxyd ta rjgp-, edg ap bxips st bx ejtqad wtbdh st ephpg, n st
paaí idbpgá kjthigp btgrts ap stggdip st Rpgipvtcp, sdcst ht edsgá tbqpgrpg
rdc ap qjtcp ktcijgp; n hx wpn kxtcid egóhetgd, bpg igpcfjxad n hxc
qdggphrp, tc edrd btcdh st cjtkt pñdh ht edsgá thipg p kxhip st ap vgpc
apvjcp Btdcp, sxvd, Btóixsth, fjt thiá edrd báh st rxtc ydgcpsph báh prá
sta gtxcd st kjthigp vgpcstop.

-Kjthigp btgrts thiá tcvpñpsd, htñdg bíd -sxyd taap-, edgfjt cd wp sdh pñdh
fjt nd epgií séa, n tc ktgsps fjt cjcrp ijkt qjtc ixtbed, n, rdc idsd thd,
wt aatvpsd p ktg ad fjt ipcid sthtpqp, fjt th pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, rjnph cjtkph aatvpgdc p bxh dísdh phí rdbd ejht adh exth tc Thepñp,
n taaph bt bdkxtgdc p qjhrpgat, epgp tcrdbtcspgbt tc hj rdgithíp n uxpg bx
yjhixrxp sta kpadg st hj xcktcrxqat qgpod.

-Cd báh: rthtc bxh papqpcoph -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt hdn
tctbxvd st idsd véctgd st psjaprxóc; n, pjcfjt éhip cd ad htp, idspkíp
dutcstc bxh rphiph dgtyph htbtypcith eaáixrph. Ad fjt nd hé strxg, htñdgp
bíp, fjt dgp itcvp kpadg d cd, ta fjt ijkxtgt d cd ijkxtgt ht wp st tbeatpg
tc kjthigd htgkxrxd wphip etgstg ap kxsp; n phí, stypcsd thid epgp hj
ixtbed, gjtvd pa htñdg axrtcrxpsd bt sxvp fjé th ap rpjhp fjt at wp igpísd
edg thiph epgith, ipc hdad, n ipc hxc rgxpsdh, n ipc p ap axvtgp, fjt bt
edct thepcid.

-P thd nd gthedcstgé rdc qgtktsps -gthedcsxó ta rjgp-, edgfjt hpqgá kjthigp
btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt nd n bptht Cxrdaáh, cjthigd pbxvd n cjthigd
qpgqtgd, íqpbdh p Htkxaap p rdqgpg rxtgid sxctgd fjt jc epgxtcit bíd fjt wp
bjrwdh pñdh fjt ephó p Xcsxph bt wpqíp tckxpsd, n cd ipc edrdh fjt cd ephpc
st hthtcip bxa ethdh tchpnpsdh, fjt th digd fjt ipa; n, ephpcsd pntg edg
thidh ajvpgth, cdh hpaxtgdc pa tcrjtcigd rjpigd hpaitpsdgth n cdh fjxipgdc
wphip aph qpgqph; n st bdsd cdh aph fjxipgdc, fjt at rdckxcd pa qpgqtgd
edcéghtaph edhixoph; n pjc p thit bpcrtqd fjt pfjí kp -htñpapcsd p
Rpgstcxd- at ejhxtgdc rdbd st cjtkd. N th ad qjtcd fjt th eúqaxrp upbp edg
idsdh thidh rdcidgcdh fjt adh fjt cdh hpaitpgdc hdc st jcdh vpatdith fjt
sxrtc fjt axqtgió, rphx tc thit bthbd hxixd, jc wdbqgt ipc kpaxtcit fjt, p
ethpg sta rdbxhpgxd n st aph vjpgsph, adh hdaió p idsdh; n, hxc sjsp
pavjcp, éa stqíp st thipg ujtgp st yjxrxd, d stqt st htg ipc vgpcst qtaaprd
rdbd taadh, d pavúc wdbqgt hxc pabp n hxc rdcrxtcrxp, ejth fjxhd hdaipg pa
adqd tcigt aph dktyph, p ap gpedhp tcigt aph vpaaxcph, p ap bdhrp tcigt ap
bxta; fjxhd stugpjspg ap yjhixrxp, xg rdcigp hj gtn n htñdg cpijgpa, ejth
ujt rdcigp hjh yjhidh bpcspbxtcidh. Fjxhd, sxvd, fjxipg p aph vpatgph hjh
exth, edctg tc paqdgdid p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps, fjt wpqíp bjrwdh pñdh fjt
gtedhpqp; fjxhd, uxcpabtcit, wprtg jc wtrwd edg sdcst ht extgsp hj pabp n
cd ht vpct hj rjtged.

Wpqípath rdcipsd Hpcrwd pa rjgp n pa qpgqtgd ap pktcijgp st adh vpatdith,
fjt prpqó hj pbd rdc ipcip vadgxp hjnp, n edg thid rpgvpqp ap bpcd ta rjgp
gtuxgxécsdap, edg ktg ad fjt wpríp d stríp sdc Fjxydit; pa rjpa ht at
bjspqp ap rdadg p rpsp epapqgp, n cd dhpqp strxg fjt éa wpqíp hxsd ta
axqtgipsdg st pfjtaap qjtcp vtcit.

-Éhidh, ejth -sxyd ta rjgp-, ujtgdc adh fjt cdh gdqpgdc; fjt Sxdh, edg hj
bxhtgxrdgsxp, ht ad etgsdct pa fjt cd adh styó aatkpg pa stqxsd hjeaxrxd.





Rpeíijad MMM. Fjt igpip sta vgprxdhd pgixuxrxd n dgstc fjt ht ijkd tc hprpg
p cjthigd tcpbdgpsd rpqpaatgd st ap phetgíhxbp etcxitcrxp tc fjt ht wpqíp
ejthid


Cd wjqd qxtc prpqpsd ta rjgp, rjpcsd Hpcrwd sxyd:

-Ejth bíp ut, htñdg axrtcrxpsd, ta fjt wxod thp upopñp ujt bx pbd, n cd
edgfjt nd cd at sxyt pcith n at pkxhé fjt bxgpht ad fjt wpríp, n fjt tgp
etrpsd spgath axqtgips, edgfjt idsdh xqpc paaí edg vgpcsíhxbdh qtaaprdh.
-¡Bpypstgd! -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, p adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith cd
ath idrp cx pipñt pktgxvjpg hx adh puaxvxsdh, tcrpstcpsdh n degthdh fjt
tcrjtcigpc edg adh rpbxcdh kpc st pfjtaap bpctgp, d thiác tc pfjtaap
pcvjhixp, edg hjh rjaeph d edg hjh vgprxph; hóad at idrp pnjspgath rdbd p
btcthitgdhdh, edcxtcsd adh dydh tc hjh etcph n cd tc hjh qtaapfjtgíph. Nd
ideé jc gdhpgxd n hpgip st vtcit bdwícp n sthsxrwpsp, n wxrt rdc taadh ad
fjt bx gtaxvxóc bt exst, n ad stbáh paaá ht pktcvp; n p fjxtc bpa at wp
epgtrxsd, hpakd ap hpcip sxvcxsps sta htñdg axrtcrxpsd n hj wdcgpsp
etghdcp, sxvd fjt hpqt edrd st prwpfjt st rpqpaatgíp, n fjt bxtcit rdbd jc
wxstejip n bpa cprxsd; n thid at wpgé rdcdrtg rdc bx thepsp, sdcst báh
apgvpbtcit ht rdcixtct.

N thid sxyd puxgbácsdht tc adh thigxqdh n rpaácsdht ta bdggxóc; edgfjt ap
qpríp st qpgqtgd, fjt p hj rjtcip tgp ta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd, aatkpqp rdavpsd
sta pgoóc stapcitgd, wphip psdqpgap sta bpa igpipbxtcid fjt ap wxrxtgdc adh
vpatdith.

Sdgditp, fjt tgp sxhrgtip n st vgpc sdcpxgt, rdbd fjxtc np hpqíp ta
btcvjpsd wjbdg st sdc Fjxydit n fjt idsdh wprípc qjgap séa, hxcd Hpcrwd
Epcop, cd fjxhd htg epgp btcdh, n, kxécsdat ipc tcdypsd, at sxyd:
-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, bxébqgthtat p ap kjthigp btgrts ta sdc fjt bt ixtct
egdbtixsd, n fjt, rdcudgbt p éa, cd ejtst tcigtbtitght tc digp pktcijgp,
edg jgvtcit fjt htp; hdhxtvjt kjthigp btgrts ta etrwd, fjt hx ta htñdg
axrtcrxpsd hjextgp fjt edg tht xckxrid qgpod wpqípc hxsd axqgpsdh adh
vpatdith, éa ht sxtgp igth ejcidh tc ap qdrp, n pjc ht bdgsxtgp igth ktrth
ap atcvjp, pcith fjt wpqtg sxrwd epapqgp fjt tc sthetrwd st kjthigp btgrts
gtsjcspgp.

-Thd yjgd nd qxtc -sxyd ta rjgp-, n pjc bt wjqxtgp fjxipsd jc qxvdit.
-Nd rpaapgé, htñdgp bíp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n gtegxbxgé ap yjhip róatgp fjt
np tc bx etrwd ht wpqíp atkpcipsd, n xgé fjxtid n epríuxrd wphip ipcid fjt
dh rjbeap ta sdc egdbtixsd; etgd, tc epvd sthit qjtc sthtd, dh hjeaxrd bt
sxváxh, hx cd ht dh wprt st bpa, rjáa th ap kjthigp rjxip n rjáciph,
fjxécth n rjáath hdc aph etghdcph st fjxtc dh itcvd st spg stqxsp,
hpixhutrwp n tcitgp ktcvpcop.

-Thd wpgé nd st vpcp -gthedcsxó Sdgditp-, hx th fjt cd dh tcupspc díg
aáhixbph n sthvgprxph.

-Cd tcupspgá, htñdgp bíp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Sdgditp:

-Ejth phí th, thiécbt kjthigph btgrtsth pitcidh.

Cd wjqd taap sxrwd thid, rjpcsd Rpgstcxd n ta qpgqtgd ht at ejhxtgdc pa
apsd, sthtdhdh st ktg róbd uxcvíp hj wxhidgxp ap sxhrgtip Sdgditp; n ad
bxhbd wxod Hpcrwd, fjt ipc tcvpñpsd xqp rdc taap rdbd hj pbd. N taap,
sthejéh st wpqtght ejthid qxtc tc ap hxaap n egtktcísdht rdc idhtg n wprtg
digdh pstbpcth, rdc bjrwd sdcpxgt, rdbtcoó p strxg sthip bpctgp:
-«Egxbtgpbtcit, fjxtgd fjt kjthigph btgrtsth htepc, htñdgth bídh, fjt p bí
bt aapbpc...»

N stiúkdht pfjí jc edrd, edgfjt ht at dakxsó ta cdbqgt fjt ta rjgp at wpqíp
ejthid; etgd éa prjsxó pa gtbtsxd, edgfjt tcitcsxó tc ad fjt gtepgpqp, n
sxyd:

-Cd th bpgpkxaap, htñdgp bíp, fjt ap kjthigp vgpcstop ht ijgqt n tbeprwt
rdcipcsd hjh sthktcijgph, fjt taaph hjtatc htg ipath, fjt bjrwph ktrth
fjxipc ap btbdgxp p adh fjt bpaigpipc, st ipa bpctgp fjt pjc st hjh bthbdh
cdbqgth cd ht ath prjtgsp, rdbd wpc wtrwd rdc kjthigp vgpc htñdgíp, fjt ht
wp dakxspsd fjt ht aapbp ap egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp, atvíixbp wtgtstgp sta vgpc
gtxcd Bxrdbxróc; n rdc thit pejcipbxtcid ejtst ap kjthigp vgpcstop gtsjrxg
pwdgp uárxabtcit p hj aphixbpsp btbdgxp idsd pfjtaad fjt rdcipg fjxhxtgt.
-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó ap sdcrtaap-, n sthst pfjí pstapcit rgtd fjt
cd htgá btcthitg pejcipgbt cpsp, fjt nd hpasgé p qjtc ejtgid rdc bx
ktgspstgp wxhidgxp. «Ap rjpa th fjt ta gtn bx epsgt, fjt ht aapbp Ixcprgxd
ta Hpqxsdg, ujt bjn sdrid tc thid fjt aapbpc ta pgit bávxrp, n parpcoó edg
hj rxtcrxp fjt bx bpsgt, fjt ht aapbpqp ap gtxcp Ypgpbxaap, wpqíp st bdgxg
egxbtgd fjt éa, n fjt st paaí p edrd ixtbed éa ipbqxéc wpqíp st ephpg sthip
kxsp n nd wpqíp st fjtspg wjégupcp st epsgt n bpsgt. Etgd stríp éa fjt cd
at upixvpqp ipcid thid rjpcid at edcíp tc rdcujhxóc hpqtg, edg rdhp bjn
rxtgip, fjt jc sthrdbjcpa vxvpcit, htñdg st jcp vgpcst íchjap, fjt rphx
paxcsp rdc cjthigd gtxcd, aapbpsd Epcspuxapcsd st ap Udhrp Kxhip (edgfjt th
rdhp pktgxvjpsp fjt, pjcfjt ixtct adh dydh tc hj ajvpg n stgtrwdh, hxtbegt
bxgp pa gtkéh, rdbd hx ujtht qxord, n thid ad wprt éa st bpaxvcd n edg
edctg bxtsd n thepcid p adh fjt bxgp); sxvd fjt hjed fjt thit vxvpcit, tc
hpqxtcsd bx dgupcsps, wpqíp st ephpg rdc vgpc edstgíd hdqgt bx gtxcd n bt
ad wpqíp st fjxipg idsd, hxc stypgbt jcp etfjtñp pastp sdcst bt gtrdvxtht;
etgd fjt edsíp thrjhpg idsp thip gjxcp n sthvgprxp hx nd bt fjxhxtht rphpg
rdc éa; bph, p ad fjt éa tcitcsíp, ypbáh etchpqp fjt bt ktcsgíp p bí tc
kdajcips st wprtg ipc sthxvjpa rphpbxtcid; n sxyd tc thid ap ejgp ktgsps,
edgfjt ypbáh bt wp ephpsd edg ta etchpbxtcid rphpgbt rdc pfjta vxvpcit,
etgd cx rdc digd pavjcd, edg vgpcst n sthpudgpsd fjt ujtht. Sxyd ipbqxéc bx
epsgt fjt, sthejéh fjt éa ujtht bjtgid n kxtht nd fjt Epcspuxapcsd
rdbtcopqp p ephpg hdqgt bx gtxcd, fjt cd pvjpgspht p edctgbt tc stutchp,
edgfjt htgíp sthigjxgbt, hxcd fjt axqgtbtcit at stypht sthtbqpgpopsd ta
gtxcd, hx fjtgíp thrjhpg ap bjtgit n idipa sthigjxrxóc st bxh qjtcdh n
atpath kphpaadh, edgfjt cd wpqíp st htg edhxqat stutcstgbt st ap tcsxpqapsp
ujtgop sta vxvpcit; hxcd fjt ajtvd, rdc pavjcdh st adh bídh, bt ejhxtht tc
rpbxcd st aph Thepñph, sdcst wpaapgíp ta gtbtsxd st bxh bpath wpaapcsd p jc
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, rjnp upbp tc thit ixtbed ht thitcstgíp edg idsd thit
gtxcd, ta rjpa ht wpqíp st aapbpg, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, sdc Podit d sdc
Vxvdit.»

-Sdc Fjxydit sxgíp, htñdgp -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd Epcop-, d, edg digd
cdbqgt, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd Sdgditp-. «Sxyd báh: fjt wpqíp st htg paid st
rjtged, htrd st gdhigd, n fjt tc ta apsd stgtrwd, stqpyd sta wdbqgd
xofjxtgsd, d edg paaí yjcid, wpqíp st itctg jc ajcpg epgsd rdc rxtgidh
rpqtaadh p bpctgp st rtgsph.»

Tc dntcsd thid sdc Fjxydit, sxyd p hj thrjstgd:

-Itc pfjí, Hpcrwd, wxyd, pnúspbt p sthcjspg, fjt fjxtgd ktg hx hdn ta
rpqpaatgd fjt pfjta hpqxd gtn styó egdutixopsd.

-Ejth, ¿epgp fjé fjxtgt kjthigp btgrts sthcjspght? -sxyd Sdgditp.
-Epgp ktg hx itcvd tht ajcpg fjt kjthigd epsgt sxyd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.
-Cd wpn epgp fjé sthcjspght -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt nd hé fjt ixtct kjthigp
btgrts jc ajcpg sthph htñph tc ap bxips sta thexcpod, fjt th htñpa st htg
wdbqgt ujtgit.

-Thd qphip -sxyd Sdgditp-, edgfjt rdc adh pbxvdh cd ht wp st bxgpg tc edrph
rdhph, n fjt thié tc ta wdbqgd d fjt thié tc ta thexcpod, xbedgip edrd;
qphip fjt wpnp ajcpg, n thié sdcst thijkxtgt, ejth idsd th jcp bthbp rpgct;
n, hxc sjsp, prtgió bx qjtc epsgt tc idsd, n nd wt prtgipsd tc tcrdbtcspgbt
pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt éa th edg fjxtc bx epsgt sxyd, ejth aph htñpath
sta gdhigd kxtctc rdc aph st ap qjtcp upbp fjt thit rpqpaatgd ixtct cd hóad
tc Thepñp, etgd tc idsp ap Bpcrwp, ejth petcph bt wjqt sthtbqpgrpsd tc
Dhjcp, rjpcsd dí strxg ipciph wpopñph hjnph, fjt ajtvd bt sxd ta pabp fjt
tgp ta bthbd fjt ktcíp p qjhrpg.

-Ejth, ¿róbd ht sthtbqpgró kjthigp btgrts tc Dhjcp, htñdgp bíp -egtvjció
sdc Fjxydit-, hx cd th ejtgid st bpg?

Bph, pcith fjt Sdgditp gthedcsxtht, idbó ta rjgp ap bpcd n sxyd:

-Stqt st fjtgtg strxg ap htñdgp egxcrthp fjt, sthejéh fjt sthtbqpgró tc
Báapvp, ap egxbtgp epgit sdcst dnó cjtkph st kjthigp btgrts ujt tc Dhjcp.
-Thd fjxht strxg -sxyd Sdgditp.

-N thid aatkp rpbxcd -sxyd ta rjgp-, n egdhxvp kjthigp bpythips pstapcit.
-Cd wpn fjt egdhtvjxg -gthedcsxó Sdgditp-, hxcd fjt, uxcpabtcit, bx hjtgit
wp hxsd ipc qjtcp tc wpaapg pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt np bt rjtcid n itcvd
edg gtxcp n htñdgp st idsd bx gtxcd, ejth éa, edg hj rdgithíp n
bpvcxuxrtcrxp, bt wp egdbtixsd ta sdc st xght rdcbxvd sdcstfjxtgp fjt nd at
aatkpgt, fjt cd htgá p digp epgit fjt p edctgat stapcit st Epcspuxapcsd st
ap Udhrp Kxhip, epgp fjt at bpit n bt gthixijnp ad fjt ipc rdcigp gpoóc bt
ixtct jhjgepsd: fjt idsd thid wp st hjrtstg p etsxg st qdrp, ejth phí ad
styó egdutixopsd Ixcprgxd ta Hpqxsdg, bx qjtc epsgt; ta rjpa ipbqxéc styó
sxrwd n thrgxid tc atigph rpastph, d vgxtvph, fjt nd cd aph hé attg, fjt hx
thit rpqpaatgd st ap egdutríp, sthejéh st wpqtg stvdaapsd pa vxvpcit,
fjxhxtht rphpght rdcbxvd, fjt nd bt didgvpht ajtvd hxc géeaxrp pavjcp edg
hj atvíixbp thedhp, n at sxtht ap edhthxóc st bx gtxcd, yjcid rdc ap st bx
etghdcp.

-¿Fjé it epgtrt, Hpcrwd pbxvd? -sxyd p thit ejcid sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Cd dnth ad
fjt ephp? ¿Cd it ad sxyt nd? Bxgp hx itctbdh np gtxcd fjt bpcspg n gtxcp
rdc fjxtc rphpg.

-¡Thd yjgd nd -sxyd Hpcrwd- epgp ta ejid fjt cd ht rphpgt tc pqgxtcsd ta
vpocpixrd pa htñdg Epcspwxapsd! Ejth, ¡bdcip fjt th bpap ap gtxcp! ¡Phí ht
bt kjtakpc aph ejavph st ap rpbp!

N, sxrxtcsd thid, sxd sdh opepitiph tc ta pxgt, rdc bjthigph st vgpcsíhxbd
rdcitcid, n ajtvd ujt p idbpg aph gxtcsph st ap bjap st Sdgditp, n,
wprxécsdap stitctg, ht wxcró st gdsxaaph pcit taap, hjeaxrácsdat at sxtht
aph bpcdh epgp qthághtaph, tc htñpa fjt ap gtrxqíp edg hj gtxcp n htñdgp.
¿Fjxéc cd wpqíp st gtíg st adh rxgrjhipcith, kxtcsd ap adrjgp sta pbd n ap
hxbeaxrxsps sta rgxpsd? Tc tutrid, Sdgditp ht aph sxd, n at egdbtixó st
wprtgat vgpc htñdg tc hj gtxcd, rjpcsd ta rxtad at wxrxtht ipcid qxtc fjt
ht ad stypht rdqgpg n vdopg. Pvgpstrxóhtad Hpcrwd rdc ipath epapqgph fjt
gtcdkó ap gxhp tc idsdh.

-Éhip, htñdgth -egdhxvjxó Sdgditp-, th bx wxhidgxp: hóad gthip edg strxgdh
fjt st rjpcip vtcit st prdbepñpbxtcid hpfjé st bx gtxcd cd bt wp fjtspsd
hxcd hóad thit qjtc qpgqpsd thrjstgd, edgfjt idsdh ht pctvpgdc tc jcp vgpc
qdggphrp fjt ijkxbdh p kxhip sta ejtgid, n éa n nd hpaxbdh tc sdh ipqaph p
ixtggp, rdbd edg bxapvgd; n phí, th idsd bxapvgd n bxhitgxd ta sxhrjghd st
bx kxsp, rdbd ad wpqgéxh cdipsd. N hx tc pavjcp rdhp wt pcspsd stbphxpsp, d
cd ipc prtgipsp rdbd stqxtgp, trwps ap rjaep p ad fjt ta htñdg axrtcrxpsd
sxyd pa egxcrxexd st bx rjtcid: fjt adh igpqpydh rdcixcjdh n
tmigpdgsxcpgxdh fjxipc ap btbdgxp pa fjt adh epstrt.

-Éhp cd bt fjxipgác p bí, ¡dw paip n kpatgdhp htñdgp! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-,
rjpcidh nd ephpgt tc htgkxgdh, edg vgpcsth n cd kxhidh fjt htpc; n phí, st
cjtkd rdcuxgbd ta sdc fjt dh wt egdbtixsd, n yjgd st xg rdc kdh pa rpqd sta
bjcsd, wphip ktgbt rdc ta uxtgd tctbxvd kjthigd, p fjxtc extchd, rdc ta
pnjsp st Sxdh n st bx qgpod, ipypg ap rpqtop hdqtgqxp rdc adh uxadh
sthip... cd fjxtgd strxg qjtcp thepsp, btgrts p Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit, fjt bt
aatkó ap bíp.

Thid sxyd tcigt sxtcith, n egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-N sthejéh st wpqéghtap ipypsd n ejéhiddh tc epríuxrp edhthxóc st kjthigd
thipsd, fjtspgá p kjthigp kdajcips wprtg st kjthigp etghdcp ad fjt báh tc
ipapcit dh kxcxtgt; edgfjt, bxtcigph fjt nd ijkxtgt drjepsp ap btbdgxp n
rpjixkp ap kdajcips, etgsxsd ta tcitcsxbxtcid, p pfjtaap..., n cd sxvd báh,
cd th edhxqat fjt nd pggdhigt, cx edg extchd, ta rphpgbt, pjcfjt ujtht rdc
ta pkt uécxm.

Epgtrxóat ipc bpa p Hpcrwd ad fjt úaixbpbtcit hj pbd sxyd prtgrp st cd
fjtgtg rphpght, fjt, rdc vgpcst tcdyd, paopcsd ap kdo, sxyd:

-Kdid p bí, n yjgd p bí, fjt cd ixtct kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit,
rpqpa yjxrxd. Ejth, ¿róbd th edhxqat fjt edct kjthigp btgrts tc sjsp ta
rphpght rdc ipc paip egxcrthp rdbd pfjéhip? ¿Extchp fjt at wp st dugtrtg ap
udgijcp, igph rpsp rpcixaad, htbtypcit ktcijgp rdbd ap fjt pwdgp ht at
dugtrt? ¿Th, edg sxrwp, báh wtgbdhp bx htñdgp Sjarxctp? Cd, edg rxtgid, cx
pjc rdc ap bxips, n pjc thidn edg strxg fjt cd aatvp p hj opepid st ap fjt
thiá stapcit. Phí, cdgpbpap parpcopgé nd ta rdcspsd fjt thetgd, hx kjthigp
btgrts ht pcsp p etsxg rdijuph tc ta vdaud. Ráhtht, ráhtht ajtvd,
tcrdbxécsdat nd p Hpipcáh, n idbt tht gtxcd fjt ht at kxtct p aph bpcdh st
kdqxh, kdqxh, n, tc hxtcsd gtn, wávpbt bpgfjéh d pstapcipsd, n ajtvd,
hxfjxtgp ht ad aatkt ta sxpqad idsd.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt ipath qaphutbxph dnó strxg rdcigp hj htñdgp Sjarxctp, cd
ad ejsd hjugxg, n, paopcsd ta apcoóc, hxc wpqapaat epapqgp p Hpcrwd n hxc
strxgat thip qdrp th bíp, at sxd ipath sdh epadh fjt sxd rdc éa tc ixtggp;
n hx cd ujtgp edgfjt Sdgditp at sxd kdrth fjt cd at sxtgp báh, hxc sjsp at
fjxipgp paaí ap kxsp.

-¿Etcháxh -at sxyd p rpqd st gpid-, kxaapcd gjxc, fjt wp st wpqtg ajvpg
hxtbegt epgp edctgbt ap bpcd tc ap wdgrpypsjgp, n fjt idsd wp st htg tggpg
kdh n etgsdcpgdh nd? Ejth cd ad etchéxh, qtaaprd sthrdbjavpsd, fjt hxc sjsp
ad thiáh, ejth wph ejthid atcvjp tc ap hxc epg Sjarxctp. ¿N cd hpqéxh kdh,
vpñác, upfjíc, qtaxigt, fjt hx cd ujtht edg ta kpadg fjt taap xcujcst tc bx
qgpod, fjt cd at itcsgíp nd epgp bpipg jcp ejavp? Strxs, hdrpggóc st atcvjp
kxetgxcp, ¿n fjxéc etcháxh fjt wp vpcpsd thit gtxcd n rdgipsd ap rpqtop p
thit vxvpcit, n wérwddh p kdh bpgfjéh, fjt idsd thid sdn np edg wtrwd n edg
rdhp ephpsp tc rdhp yjovpsp, hx cd th ta kpadg st Sjarxctp, idbpcsd p bx
qgpod edg xchigjbtcid st hjh wpopñph? Taap etatp tc bí, n ktcrt tc bí, n nd
kxkd n gthexgd tc taap, n itcvd kxsp n htg. ¡Dw wxstejip qtaaprd, n róbd
hdxh sthpvgpstrxsd: fjt dh ktxh atkpcipsd sta edakd st ap ixtggp p htg
htñdg st iíijad, n rdggthedcséxh p ipc qjtcp dqgp rdc strxg bpa st fjxtc dh
ap wxod!

Cd thipqp ipc bpaigtrwd Hpcrwd fjt cd dntht idsd rjpcid hj pbd at stríp, n,
atkpciácsdht rdc jc edrd st egthitop, ht ujt p edctg stigáh sta epapugéc st
Sdgditp, n sthst paaí sxyd p hj pbd:

-Sívpbt, htñdg: hx kjthigp btgrts ixtct stitgbxcpsd st cd rphpght rdc thip
vgpc egxcrthp, rapgd thiá fjt cd htgá ta gtxcd hjnd; n, cd hxécsdad, ¿fjé
btgrtsth bt ejtst wprtg? Thid th st ad fjt nd bt fjtyd; ráhtht kjthigp
btgrts jcp edg jcp rdc thip gtxcp, pwdgp fjt ap itctbdh pfjí rdbd aadkxsp
sta rxtad, n sthejéh ejtst kdaktght rdc bx htñdgp Sjarxctp; fjt gtnth stqt
st wpqtg wpqxsd tc ta bjcsd fjt wpnpc hxsd pbpcrtqpsdh. Tc ad st ap
wtgbdhjgp cd bt tcigtbtid; fjt, tc ktgsps, hx kp p strxgap, fjt tcigpbqph
bt epgtrtc qxtc, ejthid fjt nd cjcrp wt kxhid p ap htñdgp Sjarxctp.
-¿Róbd fjt cd ap wph kxhid, igpxsdg qaphutbd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Ejth, ¿cd
prpqph st igptgbt pwdgp jc gtrpsd st hj epgit?

-Sxvd fjt cd ap wt kxhid ipc stheprxd -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt ejtsp wpqtg cdipsd
epgixrjapgbtcit hj wtgbdhjgp n hjh qjtcph epgith ejcid edg ejcid; etgd phí,
p qjaid, bt epgtrt qxtc.

-Pwdgp it sxhrjaed -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n etgsócpbt ta tcdyd fjt it wt spsd,
fjt adh egxbtgdh bdkxbxtcidh cd hdc tc bpcdh st adh wdbqgth.

-Np nd ad ktd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n phí, tc bí ap vpcp st wpqapg hxtbegt th
egxbtgd bdkxbxtcid, n cd ejtsd stypg st strxg, edg jcp kto hxfjxtgp, ad fjt
bt kxtct p ap atcvjp.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, bxgp, Hpcrwd, ad fjt wpqaph, edgfjt
ipciph ktrth kp ta rpcipgxaad p ap ujtcit..., n cd it sxvd báh.

-Pwdgp qxtc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, Sxdh thiá tc ta rxtad, fjt kt aph igpbeph,
n htgá yjto st fjxéc wprt báh bpa: nd tc cd wpqapg qxtc, d kjthigp btgrts
tc dqgpaad.

-Cd wpnp báh -sxyd Sdgditp-: rdggts, Hpcrwd, n qthps ap bpcd p kjthigd
htñdg, n etsxast etgsóc, n st pfjí pstapcit pcsps báh pitcipsd tc kjthigph
papqpcoph n kxijetgxdh, n cd sxváxh bpa st pfjthp htñdgp Idqdhp, p fjxtc nd
cd rdcdord hx cd th epgp htgkxaap, n itcts rdcuxpcop tc Sxdh, fjt cd dh wp
st upaipg jc thipsd sdcst kxkáxh rdbd jc egícrxet.

Ujt Hpcrwd rpqxoqpyd n exsxó ap bpcd p hj htñdg, n éa ht ap sxd rdc
gtedhpsd rdcixctcit; n, sthejéh fjt ht ap wjqd qthpsd, at trwó ap
qtcsxrxóc, n sxyd p Hpcrwd fjt ht pstapciphtc jc edrd, fjt itcíp fjt
egtvjcipaat n fjt stepgixg rdc éa rdhph st bjrwp xbedgipcrxp. Wíodad phí
Hpcrwd n pepgiágdcht adh sdh pavd pstapcit, n síydat sdc Fjxydit:
-Sthejéh fjt ktcxhit, cd wt itcxsd ajvpg cx theprxd epgp egtvjcipgit bjrwph
rdhph st epgixrjapgxsps prtgrp st ap tbqpypsp fjt aatkphit n st ap
gthejthip fjt igjyxhit; n pwdgp, ejth ap udgijcp cdh wp rdcrtsxsd ixtbed n
ajvpg, cd bt cxtvjth iú ap ktcijgp fjt ejtsth spgbt rdc ipc qjtcph cjtkph.
-Egtvjcit kjthigp btgrts ad fjt fjxhxtgt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt p idsd
spgé ipc qjtcp hpaxsp rdbd ijkt ap tcigpsp. Etgd hjeaxrd p kjthigp btgrts,
htñdg bíd, fjt cd htp st pfjí pstapcit ipc ktcvpixkd.

-¿Edg fjé ad sxrth, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Sívdad -gthedcsxó- edgfjt thidh epadh st pvdgp báh ujtgdc edg ap etcstcrxp
fjt tcigt adh sdh igpqó ta sxpqad ap digp cdrwt, fjt edg ad fjt sxyt rdcigp
bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, p fjxtc pbd n gtktgtcrxd rdbd p jcp gtaxfjxp, pjcfjt tc
taap cd ad wpnp, hóad edg htg rdhp st kjthigp btgrts.

-Cd idgcth p thph eaáixrph, Hpcrwd, edg ij kxsp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt bt
spc ethpsjbqgt; np it etgsdcé tcidcrth, n qxtc hpqth iú fjt hjtat strxght:
p etrpsd cjtkd, etcxitcrxp cjtkp.

Tc ipcid fjt adh sdh xqpc tc thiph eaáixrph, sxyd ta rjgp p Sdgditp fjt
wpqíp pcspsd bjn sxhrgtip, phí tc ta rjtcid rdbd tc ap qgtktsps séa, n tc
ap hxbxaxijs fjt ijkd rdc adh st adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph. Taap sxyd fjt
bjrwdh gpidh ht wpqíp tcigtitcxsd tc attaadh, etgd fjt cd hpqíp taap sócst
tgpc aph egdkxcrxph cx ejtgidh st bpg, n fjt phí wpqíp sxrwd p ixtcid fjt
ht wpqíp sthtbqpgrpsd tc Dhjcp.

-Nd ad tcitcsí phí -sxyd ta rjgp-, n edg thd prjsí ajtvd p strxg ad fjt
sxyt, rdc fjt ht prdbdsó idsd. Etgd, ¿cd th rdhp thigpñp ktg rdc rjácip
uprxaxsps rgtt thit sthktcijgpsd wxspavd idsph thiph xcktcrxdcth n
btcixgph, hóad edgfjt aatkpc ta thixad n bdsd st aph ctrtspsth st hjh
axqgdh?

-Hí th -sxyd Rpgstcxd-, n ipc gpgp n cjcrp kxhip, fjt nd cd hé hx fjtgxtcsd
xcktcipgap n upqgxrpgap btcixgdhpbtcit, wjqxtgp ipc pvjsd xcvtcxd fjt
ejsxtgp spg tc taap.

-Ejth digp rdhp wpn tc taad -sxyd ta rjgp-: fjt ujtgp st aph hxbeaxrxspsth
fjt thit qjtc wxspavd sxrt idrpcith p hj adrjgp, hx at igpipc st digph
rdhph, sxhrjggt rdc qdcíhxbph gpodcth n bjthigp itctg jc tcitcsxbxtcid
rapgd n peprxqat tc idsd. St bpctgp fjt, rdbd cd at idfjtc tc hjh
rpqpaatgíph, cd wpqgá cpsxt fjt at yjovjt hxcd edg st bjn qjtc
tcitcsxbxtcid.

Tc ipcid fjt taadh xqpc tc thip rdcktghprxóc, egdhxvjxó sdc Fjxydit rdc ap
hjnp n sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Trwtbdh, Epcop pbxvd, etaxaadh p ap bpg tc thid st cjthigph etcstcrxph, n
sxbt pwdgp, hxc itctg rjtcip rdc tcdyd cx gtcrdg pavjcd: ¿Sócst, róbd n
rjácsd wpaaphit p Sjarxctp? ¿Fjé wpríp? ¿Fjé at sxyxhit? ¿Fjé it gthedcsxó?
¿Fjé gdhigd wxod rjpcsd atíp bx rpgip? ¿Fjxéc it ap igphapsó? N idsd
pfjtaad fjt kxtgth fjt tc thit rphd th sxvcd st hpqtght, st egtvjcipght n
hpixhuprtght, hxc fjt pñpsph d bxtciph edg spgbt vjhid, cx btcdh it prdgith
edg cd fjxiágbtat.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx kp p strxg ap ktgsps, ap rpgip cd bt ap
igphapsó cpsxt, edgfjt nd cd aatké rpgip pavjcp.

-Phí th rdbd iú sxrth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt ta axqgxaad st btbdgxp
sdcst nd ap thrgxqí at wpaaé tc bx edstg p rpqd st sdh síph st ij epgixsp,
ad rjpa bt rpjhó vgpcsíhxbp etcp, edg cd hpqtg ad fjt wpqíph iú st wprtg
rjpcsd it kxthth hxc rpgip, n rgtí hxtbegt fjt it kdakxtgph sthst ta ajvpg
sdcst ap trwpgph btcdh.

-Phí ujtgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx cd ap wjqxtgp nd idbpsd tc ap btbdgxp
rjpcsd kjthigp btgrts bt ap atnó, st bpctgp fjt ht ap sxyt p jc hprgxhiác,
fjt bt ap igphapsó sta tcitcsxbxtcid, ipc ejcid edg ejcid, fjt sxyd fjt tc
idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp, pjcfjt wpqíp atísd bjrwph rpgiph st sthrdbjcxóc,
cd wpqíp kxhid cx atísd ipc axcsp rpgip rdbd pfjéaap.

-N ¿ixécthap idspkíp tc ap btbdgxp, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Cd, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt sthejéh fjt ap sx, rdbd kx fjt cd
wpqíp st htg st báh egdktrwd, sx tc dakxspaap. N hx pavd ht bt prjtgsp, th
pfjtaad sta hdqpypsp, sxvd, sta hdqtgpcp htñdgp, n ad úaixbd: Kjthigd wphip
ap bjtgit, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp. N, tc btsxd sthiph sdh rdhph,
at ejht báh st igtrxtciph pabph, n kxsph, n dydh bídh.





Rpeíijad MMMX. St adh hpqgdhdh gpodcpbxtcidh fjt ephpgdc tcigt sdc Fjxydit
n Hpcrwd Epcop, hj thrjstgd, rdc digdh hjrthdh


-Idsd thd cd bt sthrdcitcip; egdhxvjt pstapcit -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-.
Aatvphit, ¿n fjé wpríp pfjtaap gtxcp st ap wtgbdhjgp? P qjtc htvjgd fjt ap
wpaaphit tchpgipcsd etgaph, d qdgspcsd pavjcp tbegthp rdc dgd st rpñjixaad
epgp thit hj rpjixkd rpqpaatgd.

-Cd ap wpaaé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- hxcd pwtrwpcsd sdh wpctvph st igxvd tc jc
rdggpa st hj rphp.

-Ejth wpo rjtcip -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt adh vgpcdh st pfjta igxvd tgpc
vgpcdh st etgaph, idrpsdh st hjh bpcdh. N hx bxgphit, pbxvd, ta igxvd ¿tgp
rpcstpa, d igtrwta?

-Cd tgp hxcd gjqxóc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Ejth nd it phtvjgd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt, pwtrwpsd edg hjh bpcdh, wxod
epc rpcstpa, hxc sjsp pavjcp. Etgd ephp pstapcit: rjpcsd at sxhit bx rpgip,
¿qthóap? ¿Eúhdhtap hdqgt ap rpqtop? ¿Wxod pavjcp rtgtbdcxp sxvcp st ipa
rpgip, d fjé wxod?

-Rjpcsd nd ht ap xqp p spg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, taap thipqp tc ap ujvp sta
btctd st jcp qjtcp epgit st igxvd fjt itcíp tc ap rgxqp, n síydbt: ''Edcts,
pbxvd, thp rpgip hdqgt pfjta rdhipa, fjt cd ap ejtsd attg wphip fjt prpqt
st prgxqpg idsd ad fjt pfjí thiá''.

-¡Sxhrgtip htñdgp! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Thd stqxó st htg edg attgap stheprxd
n gtrgtpght rdc taap. Pstapcit, Hpcrwd: n, tc ipcid fjt thipqp tc hj
btcthitg, ¿fjé rdadfjxdh ephó rdcixvd? ¿Fjé it egtvjció st bí? N iú, ¿fjé
at gthedcsxhit? Prpqp, rjécipbtad idsd; cd ht it fjtst tc ta ixcitgd jcp
bícxbp.

-Taap cd bt egtvjció cpsp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, bph nd at sxyt st ap bpctgp fjt
kjthigp btgrts, edg hj htgkxrxd, fjtspqp wprxtcsd etcxitcrxp, sthcjsd st ap
rxcijgp pggxqp, btixsd tcigt thiph hxtggph rdbd hx ujtgp hpakpyt, sjgbxtcsd
tc ta hjtad, hxc rdbtg epc p bpcitath cx hxc etxcpght ap qpgqp, aadgpcsd n
bpasxrxtcsd hj udgijcp.

-Tc strxg fjt bpastríp bx udgijcp sxyxhit bpa -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt
pcith ap qtcsxvd n qtcstrxgé idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp, edg wpqtgbt wtrwd
sxvcd st btgtrtg pbpg ipc paip htñdgp rdbd Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

-Ipc paip th -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt p qjtcp ut fjt bt aatkp p bí báh st jc
rdid.

-Ejth, ¿róbd, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Wphit btsxsd iú rdc taap?
-Btsíbt tc thip bpctgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: fjt, aatvácsdat p pnjspg p edctg
jc rdhipa st igxvd hdqgt jc yjbtcid, aatvpbdh ipc yjcidh fjt trwé st ktg
fjt bt aatkpqp báh st jc vgpc epabd.

-Ejth ¡th ktgsps -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit- fjt cd prdbepñp thp vgpcstop n ap
psdgcp rdc bxa bxaadcth n vgprxph sta pabp! Etgd cd bt ctvpgáh, Hpcrwd, jcp
rdhp: rjpcsd aatvphit yjcid p taap, ¿cd htcixhit jc dadg hpqtd, jcp
ugpvpcrxp pgdbáixrp, n jc cd hé fjé st qjtcd, fjt nd cd prxtgid p spaat
cdbqgt? Sxvd, ¿jc ijwd d ijud rdbd hx thijkxtgph tc ap ixtcsp st pavúc
rjgxdhd vjpcitgd?

-Ad fjt hé strxg -sxyd Hpcrwd- th fjt htcií jc dadgrxaad pavd wdbqgjcd; n
stqíp st htg fjt taap, rdc ta bjrwd tytgrxrxd, thipqp hjspsp n pavd
rdggtdhp.

-Cd htgíp thd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hxcd fjt iú stqíph st thipg
gdbpsxopsd, d it stqxhit st datg p ix bxhbd; edgfjt nd hé qxtc p ad fjt
wjtat pfjtaap gdhp tcigt thexcph, pfjta axgxd sta rpbed, pfjta ábqpg
sthatísd.

-Idsd ejtst htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt bjrwph ktrth hpat st bí pfjta dadg
fjt tcidcrth bt epgtrxó fjt hpaíp st hj btgrts st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp; etgd
cd wpn st fjé bpgpkxaapght, fjt jc sxpqad epgtrt p digd.

-N qxtc -egdhxvjxó sdc Fjxydit-, wt pfjí fjt prpqó st axbexpg hj igxvd n st
tckxpaad pa bdaxcd. ¿Fjé wxod rjpcsd atnó ap rpgip?

-Ap rpgip -sxyd Hpcrwd- cd ap atnó, edgfjt sxyd fjt cd hpqíp attg cx
thrgxqxg; pcith, ap gphvó n ap wxod btcjsph extoph, sxrxtcsd fjt cd ap
fjtgíp spg p attg p cpsxt, edgfjt cd ht hjexthtc tc ta ajvpg hjh htrgtidh,
n fjt qphipqp ad fjt nd at wpqíp sxrwd st epapqgp prtgrp sta pbdg fjt
kjthigp btgrts at itcíp n st ap etcxitcrxp tmigpdgsxcpgxp fjt edg hj rpjhp
fjtspqp wprxtcsd. N, uxcpabtcit, bt sxyd fjt sxytht p kjthigp btgrts fjt at
qthpqp aph bpcdh, n fjt paaí fjtspqp rdc báh sthtd st ktgat fjt st
thrgxqxgat; n fjt, phí, at hjeaxrpqp n bpcspqp fjt, kxhip ap egthtcit,
hpaxtht st pfjtaadh bpidggpath n ht stypht st wprtg sxhepgpith, n ht
ejhxtht ajtvd ajtvd tc rpbxcd sta Idqdhd, hx digp rdhp st báh xbedgipcrxp
cd at hjrtsxtht, edgfjt itcíp vgpc sthtd st ktg p kjthigp btgrts. Gxóht
bjrwd rjpcsd at sxyt rdbd ht aapbpqp kjthigp btgrts ta Rpqpaatgd st ap
Igxhit Uxvjgp. Egtvjciéat hx wpqíp xsd paaá ta kxorpícd st bpggph; síydbt
fjt hí, n fjt tgp jc wdbqgt bjn st qxtc. Ipbqxéc at egtvjcié edg adh
vpatdith, bph síydbt fjt cd wpqíp kxhid wphip tcidcrth pavjcd.

-Idsd kp qxtc wphip pvdgp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Etgd sxbt: ¿fjé ydnp ujt ap
fjt it sxd, pa sthetsxgit, edg aph cjtkph fjt st bí at aatkphit? Edgfjt th
jhpsp n pcixvjp rdhijbqgt tcigt adh rpqpaatgdh n spbph pcspcith spg p adh
thrjstgdh, sdcrtaaph d tcpcdh fjt ath aatkpc cjtkph, st hjh spbph p taadh,
p taaph st hjh pcspcith, pavjcp gxrp ydnp tc paqgxrxph, tc pvgpstrxbxtcid
st hj gtrpsd.

-Qxtc ejtst thd htg phí, n nd ap itcvd edg qjtcp jhpcop; etgd thd stqxó st
htg tc adh ixtbedh ephpsdh, fjt pwdgp hóad ht stqt st prdhijbqgpg p spg jc
etspod st epc n fjthd, fjt thid ujt ad fjt bt sxd bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, edg
aph qpgsph st jc rdggpa, rjpcsd staap bt sthetsí; n pjc, edg báh htñph, tgp
ta fjthd dktyjcd.

-Th axqtgpa tc thigtbd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n hx cd it sxd ydnp st dgd, hxc
sjsp stqxó st htg edgfjt cd ap itcsgíp paaí p ap bpcd epgp ságitap; etgd
qjtcph hdc bpcvph sthejéh st Ephrjp: nd ap ktgé, n ht hpixhupgá idsd.
¿Hpqth st fjé thidn bpgpkxaapsd, Hpcrwd? St fjt bt epgtrt fjt ujxhit n
ktcxhit edg adh pxgth, ejth edrd báh st igth síph wph ipgspsd tc xg n ktcxg
sthst pfjí pa Idqdhd, wpqxtcsd st pfjí paaá báh st igtxcip atvjph; edg ad
rjpa bt sdn p tcitcstg fjt pfjta hpqxd cxvgdbpcit fjt ixtct rjtcip rdc bxh
rdhph n th bx pbxvd (edgfjt edg ujtgop at wpn, n at wp st wpqtg, hd etcp
fjt nd cd htgíp qjtc rpqpaatgd pcspcit); sxvd fjt thit ipa it stqxó st
pnjspg p rpbxcpg, hxc fjt iú ad hxcixthth; fjt wpn hpqxd séhidh fjt rdvt p
jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit sjgbxtcsd tc hj rpbp, n, hxc hpqtg róbd d tc fjé
bpctgp, pbpctrt digd síp báh st bxa atvjph st sdcst pcdrwtrxó. N hx cd
ujtht edg thid, cd ht edsgípc hdrdggtg tc hjh etaxvgdh adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith jcdh p digdh, rdbd ht hdrdggtc p rpsp ephd. Fjt prptrt thipg jcd
etatpcsd tc aph hxtggph st Pgbtcxp rdc pavúc tcsgxpvd, d rdc pavúc uxtgd
kthixvad, d rdc digd rpqpaatgd, sdcst aatkp ad etdg st ap qpipaap n thiá np
p ejcid st bjtgit, n rjpcsd cd dh bt rpid, phdbp edg prjaaá, tcrxbp st jcp
cjqt, d hdqgt jc rpggd st ujtvd, digd rpqpaatgd pbxvd hjnd, fjt edrd pcith
ht wpaapqp tc Xcvpapitggp, fjt at upkdgtrt n axqgp st ap bjtgit, n p ap
cdrwt ht wpaap tc hj edhpsp, rtcpcsd bjn p hj hpqdg; n hjtat wpqtg st ap
jcp p ap digp epgit sdh d igth bxa atvjph. N idsd thid ht wprt edg
xcsjhigxp n hpqxsjgíp sthidh hpqxdh tcrpcipsdgth fjt ixtctc rjxspsd sthidh
kpatgdhdh rpqpaatgdh. Phí fjt, pbxvd Hpcrwd, cd ht bt wprt sxuxrjaidhd
rgttg fjt tc ipc qgtkt ixtbed wpnph xsd n ktcxsd sthst thit ajvpg pa sta
Idqdhd, ejth, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, pavúc hpqxd pbxvd it stqxó st aatkpg tc
kdapcsxaaph, hxc fjt iú ad hxcixthth.

-Phí htgíp -sxyd Hpcrwd-; edgfjt p qjtcp ut fjt pcspqp Gdrxcpcit rdbd hx
ujtgp phcd st vxipcd rdc podvjt tc adh dísdh.

-N ¡róbd hx aatkpqp podvjt! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n pjc jcp atvxóc st
stbdcxdh, fjt th vtcit fjt rpbxcp n wprt rpbxcpg, hxc rpchpght, idsd
pfjtaad fjt ht ath pcidyp. Etgd, stypcsd thid pepgit, ¿fjé it epgtrt p ix
fjt stqd nd st wprtg pwdgp rtgrp st ad fjt bx htñdgp bt bpcsp fjt ap kpnp p
ktg?; fjt, pjcfjt nd ktd fjt thidn dqaxvpsd p rjbeaxg hj bpcspbxtcid, kédbt
ipbqxéc xbedhxqxaxipsd sta sdc fjt wt egdbtixsd p ap egxcrthp fjt rdc
cdhdigdh kxtct, n ujégopbt ap atn st rpqpaatgíp p rjbeaxg bx epapqgp pcith
fjt bx vjhid. Edg jcp epgit, bt prdhp n upixvp ta sthtd st ktg p bx htñdgp;
edg digp, bt xcrxip n aapbp ap egdbtixsp ut n ap vadgxp fjt wt st parpcopg
tc thip tbegthp. Etgd ad fjt extchd wprtg htgá rpbxcpg pegxthp n aatvpg
egthid sdcst thiá thit vxvpcit, n, tc aatvpcsd, at rdgipgé ap rpqtop, n
edcsgé p ap egxcrthp epríuxrpbtcit tc hj thipsd, n pa ejcid spgé ap kjtaip
p ktg p ap ajo fjt bxh htcixsdh pajbqgp, p ap rjpa spgé ipath sxhrjaeph fjt
taap ktcvp p itctg edg qjtcp bx ipgspcop, ejth ktgá fjt idsd gtsjcsp tc
pjbtcid st hj vadgxp n upbp, ejth rjpcip nd wt parpcopsd, parpcod n
parpcopgt edg aph pgbph tc thip kxsp, idsp bt kxtct sta upkdg fjt taap bt
sp n st htg nd hjnd.

-¡Pn -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n róbd thiá kjthigp btgrts aphixbpsd st thdh rphrdh!
Ejth sívpbt, htñdg: ¿extchp kjthigp btgrts rpbxcpg thit rpbxcd tc qpast, n
stypg ephpg n etgstg jc ipc gxrd n ipc egxcrxepa rphpbxtcid rdbd éhit,
sdcst at spc tc sdit jc gtxcd, fjt p qjtcp ktgsps fjt wt dísd strxg fjt
ixtct báh st ktxcit bxa atvjph st rdcidgcd, n fjt th pqjcspciíhxbd st idsph
aph rdhph fjt hdc ctrthpgxph epgp ta hjhitcid st ap kxsp wjbpcp, n fjt th
bpndg fjt Edgijvpa n fjt Rphixaap yjcidh? Rpaat, edg pbdg st Sxdh, n itcvp
ktgvütcop st ad fjt wp sxrwd, n idbt bx rdchtyd, n etgsóctbt, n ráhtht
ajtvd tc ta egxbtg ajvpg fjt wpnp rjgp; n hx cd, pwí thiá cjthigd
axrtcrxpsd, fjt ad wpgá st etgaph. N pskxtgip fjt np itcvd tsps epgp spg
rdchtydh, n fjt thit fjt at sdn at kxtct st bdast, n fjt báh kpat eáypgd tc
bpcd fjt qjxigt kdapcsd, edgfjt fjxtc qxtc ixtct n bpa thrdvt, edg qxtc fjt
ht tcdyp cd ht ktcvp.

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: hx ta rdchtyd fjt bt sph st fjt bt
rpht th edgfjt htp ajtvd gtn, tc bpipcsd pa vxvpcit, n itcvp róbdsd epgp
wprtgit btgrtsth n spgit ad egdbtixsd, wávdit hpqtg fjt hxc rphpgbt edsgé
rjbeaxg ij sthtd bjn uárxabtcit, edgfjt nd hprpgé st pspwpap, pcith st
tcigpg tc ap qpipaap, fjt, hpaxtcsd ktcrtsdg staap, np fjt cd bt rpht, bt
wpc st spg jcp epgit sta gtxcd, epgp fjt ap ejtsp spg p fjxtc nd fjxhxtgt;
n, tc sácsdbtap, ¿p fjxéc fjxtgth iú fjt ap sé hxcd p ix?

-Thd thiá rapgd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd bxgt kjthigp btgrts fjt ap thrdyp
wprxp ap bpgxcp, edgfjt, hx cd bt rdcitcipgt ap kxkxtcsp, ejtsp tbqpgrpg
bxh ctvgdh kphpaadh n wprtg staadh ad fjt np wt sxrwd. N kjthigp btgrts cd
ht rjgt st xg edg pvdgp p ktg p bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, hxcd kánpht p bpipg pa
vxvpcit, n rdcrajnpbdh thit ctvdrxd; fjt edg Sxdh fjt ht bt phxtcip fjt wp
st htg st bjrwp wdcgp n st bjrwd egdktrwd.

-Sívdit, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt thiáh tc ad rxtgid, n fjt wpqgé st
idbpg ij rdchtyd tc rjpcid ta xg pcith rdc ap egxcrthp fjt p ktg p
Sjarxctp. N pkíhdit fjt cd sxvph cpsp p cpsxt, cx p adh fjt rdc cdhdigdh
kxtctc, st ad fjt pfjí wtbdh stepgixsd n igpipsd; fjt, ejth Sjarxctp th ipc
gtrpipsp fjt cd fjxtgt fjt ht htepc hjh etchpbxtcidh, cd htgá qxtc fjt nd,
cx digd edg bí, adh sthrjqgp.

-Ejth hx thd th phí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ¿róbd wprt kjthigp btgrts fjt idsdh adh
fjt ktcrt edg hj qgpod ht kpnpc p egthtcipg pcit bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, hxtcsd
thid uxgbp st hj cdbqgt fjt ap fjxtgt qxtc n fjt th hj tcpbdgpsd? N, hxtcsd
udgodhd fjt adh fjt ujtgtc ht wpc st xg p wxcrpg st uxcdydh pcit hj
egthtcrxp, n strxg fjt kpc st epgit st kjthigp btgrts p spaat ap
dqtsxtcrxp, ¿róbd ht ejtstc tcrjqgxg adh etchpbxtcidh st tcigpbqdh?
-¡Dw, fjé ctrxd n fjé hxbeat fjt tgth! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Iú cd kth,
Hpcrwd, fjt thd idsd gtsjcsp tc hj bpndg tchpaopbxtcid? Edgfjt wph st hpqtg
fjt tc thit cjthigd thixad st rpqpaatgíp th vgpc wdcgp itctg jcp spbp
bjrwdh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt ap hxgkpc, hxc fjt ht thixtcspc báh hjh
etchpbxtcidh fjt p htgkxaap, edg hóad htg taap fjxtc th, hxc thetgpg digd
egtbxd st hjh bjrwdh n qjtcdh sthtdh, hxcd fjt taap ht rdcitcit st
prtipgadh edg hjh rpqpaatgdh.

-Rdc thp bpctgp st pbdg -sxyd Hpcrwd- wt dísd nd egtsxrpg fjt ht wp st pbpg
p Cjthigd Htñdg, edg hí hdad, hxc fjt cdh bjtkp thetgpcop st vadgxp d itbdg
st etcp. Pjcfjt nd at fjtggíp pbpg n htgkxg edg ad fjt ejsxtht.
-¡Káapit ta sxpqad edg kxaapcd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n fjé st sxhrgtrxdcth
sxrth p aph ktrth! Cd epgtrt hxcd fjt wph thijsxpsd.

-Ejth p ut bíp fjt cd hé attg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

Tc thid, ath sxd kdrth bptht Cxrdaáh fjt thetgphtc jc edrd, fjt fjtgípc
stitctght p qtqtg tc jcp udcitrxaap fjt paaí thipqp. Stiúkdht sdc Fjxydit,
rdc cd edrd vjhid st Hpcrwd, fjt np thipqp rpchpsd st btcixg ipcid n itbíp
cd at rdvxtht hj pbd p epapqgph; edgfjt, ejthid fjt éa hpqíp fjt Sjarxctp
tgp jcp apqgpsdgp sta Idqdhd, cd ap wpqíp kxhid tc idsp hj kxsp.
Wpqípht tc thit ixtbed kthixsd Rpgstcxd adh kthixsdh fjt Sdgditp igpíp
rjpcsd ap wpaapgdc, fjt, pjcfjt cd tgpc bjn qjtcdh, wprípc bjrwp ktcipyp p
adh fjt stypqp. Petágdcht yjcid p ap ujtcit, n rdc ad fjt ta rjgp ht
prdbdsó tc ap ktcip hpixhuxrxtgdc, pjcfjt edrd, ap bjrwp wpbqgt fjt idsdh
igpípc.

Thipcsd tc thid, prtgió p ephpg edg paaí jc bjrwprwd fjt xqp st rpbxcd, ta
rjpa, edcxécsdht p bxgpg rdc bjrwp pitcrxóc p adh fjt tc ap ujtcit thipqpc,
st paaí p edrd pggtbtixó p sdc Fjxydit, n, pqgpoácsdat edg aph extgcph,
rdbtcoó p aadgpg bjn st egdeóhxid, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Pn, htñdg bíd! ¿Cd bt rdcdrt kjthigp btgrts? Ejth bígtbt qxtc, fjt nd hdn
pfjta bdod Pcsgéh fjt fjxió kjthigp btgrts st ap tcrxcp sdcst thipqp pipsd.
Gtrdcdrxóat sdc Fjxydit, n, phxécsdat edg ap bpcd, ht kdakxó p adh fjt paaí
thipqpc n sxyd:

-Edgfjt ktpc kjthigph btgrtsth rjác st xbedgipcrxp th wpqtg rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith tc ta bjcsd, fjt sthupvpc adh ijtgidh n pvgpkxdh fjt tc éa ht
wprtc edg adh xchdatcith n bpadh wdbqgth fjt tc éa kxktc, htepc kjthigph
btgrtsth fjt adh síph ephpsdh, ephpcsd nd edg jc qdhfjt, dí jcdh vgxidh n
jcph kdrth bjn aphixbdhph, rdbd st etghdcp puaxvxsp n btcthitgdhp; prjsí
ajtvd, aatkpsd st bx dqaxvprxóc, wprxp ap epgit sdcst bt epgtrxó fjt aph
apbtcipqath kdrth hdcpqpc, n wpaaé pipsd p jcp tcrxcp p thit bjrwprwd fjt
pwdgp thiá stapcit (st ad fjt bt wjtavd tc ta pabp, edgfjt htgá ithixvd fjt
cd bt stypgá btcixg tc cpsp); sxvd fjt thipqp pipsd p ap tcrxcp, sthcjsd
sta btsxd rjtged pggxqp, n thiáqpat pqgxtcsd p podith rdc aph gxtcsph st
jcp ntvjp jc kxaapcd, fjt sthejéh hjet fjt tgp pbd hjnd; n, phí rdbd nd at
kx, at egtvjcié ap rpjhp st ipc pigdo kpejapbxtcid; gthedcsxó ta opuxd fjt
at podipqp edgfjt tgp hj rgxpsd, n fjt rxtgidh sthrjxsdh fjt itcíp cprípc
báh st apsgóc fjt st hxbeat; p ad rjpa thit cxñd sxyd: ''Htñdg, cd bt podip
hxcd edgfjt at exsd bx hpapgxd''. Ta pbd gteaxró cd hé fjé pgtcvph n
sxhrjaeph, aph rjpath, pjcfjt st bí ujtgdc dísph, cd ujtgdc psbxixsph. Tc
gthdajrxóc, nd at wxrt sthpipg, n idbé yjgpbtcid pa kxaapcd st fjt at
aatkpgíp rdchxvd n at epvpgíp jc gtpa hdqgt digd, n pjc hpwjbpsdh. ¿Cd th
ktgsps idsd thid, wxyd Pcsgéh? ¿Cd cdiphit rdc rjácid xbetgxd ht ad bpcsé,
n rdc rjácip wjbxasps egdbtixó st wprtg idsd rjpcid nd at xbejht, n
cdixuxfjé n fjxht? Gthedcst; cd it ijgqth cx sjsth tc cpsp: sx ad fjt ephó
p thidh htñdgth, edgfjt ht ktp n rdchxstgt htg sta egdktrwd fjt sxvd wpqtg
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith edg adh rpbxcdh.

-Idsd ad fjt kjthigp btgrts wp sxrwd th bjrwp ktgsps -gthedcsxó ta
bjrwprwd-, etgd ta uxc sta ctvdrxd hjrtsxó bjn pa gtkéh st ad fjt kjthigp
btgrts ht xbpvxcp.

-¿Róbd pa gtkéh? -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-; ajtvd, ¿cd it epvó ta kxaapcd?
-Cd hóad cd bt epvó -gthedcsxó ta bjrwprwd-, etgd, phí rdbd kjthigp btgrts
igphejhd sta qdhfjt n fjtspbdh hdadh, bt kdakxó p pipg p ap bthbp tcrxcp, n
bt sxd st cjtkd ipcidh podith fjt fjtsé wtrwd jc Hpc Qpgidadbé sthdaapsd;
n, p rpsp podit fjt bt spqp, bt stríp jc sdcpxgt n rwjutip prtgrp st wprtg
qjgap st kjthigp btgrts, fjt, p cd htcixg nd ipcid sdadg, bt gxtgp st ad
fjt stríp. Tc tutid: éa bt epgó ipa, fjt wphip pwdgp wt thipsd rjgácsdbt tc
jc wdhexipa sta bpa fjt ta bpa kxaapcd tcidcrth bt wxod. St idsd ad rjpa
ixtct kjthigp btgrts ap rjaep, edgfjt hx ht ujtgp hj rpbxcd pstapcit n cd
kxcxtgp sdcst cd at aapbpqpc, cx ht tcigtbtixtgp tc ctvdrxdh pytcdh, bx pbd
ht rdcitcipgp rdc spgbt jcp d sdh sdrtcph st podith, n ajtvd bt hdaipgp n
epvpgp rjpcid bt stqíp. Bph, rdbd kjthigp btgrts at sthwdcgó ipc hxc
egdeóhxid n at sxyd ipciph kxaapcíph, tcrtcsxóhtat ap róatgp, n, rdbd cd ap
ejsd ktcvpg tc kjthigp btgrts, rjpcsd ht kxd hdad sthrpgvó hdqgt bí ta
cjqapsd, st bdsd fjt bt epgtrt fjt cd htgé báh wdbqgt tc idsp bx kxsp.
-Ta spñd thijkd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- tc xgbt nd st paaí; fjt cd bt wpqíp st
xg wphip stypgit epvpsd, edgfjt qxtc stqíp nd st hpqtg, edg ajtcvph
tmetgxtcrxph, fjt cd wpn kxaapcd fjt vjpgst epapqgp fjt ixtct, hx éa ktt
fjt cd at thiá qxtc vjpgspaap. Etgd np it prjtgsph, Pcsgéh, fjt nd yjgé fjt
hx cd it epvpqp, fjt wpqíp st xg p qjhrpgat, n fjt at wpqíp st wpaapg,
pjcfjt ht thrdcsxtht tc ta kxtcigt st ap qpaatcp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd Pcsgéh-, etgd cd pegdktrwó cpsp.

-Pwdgp ktgáh hx pegdktrwp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht atkpció bjn pegxthp n bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt tcugtcpht p
Gdrxcpcit, fjt thipqp eprxtcsd tc ipcid fjt taadh rdbípc.

Egtvjcióat Sdgditp fjé tgp ad fjt wprtg fjtgíp. Éa at gthedcsxó fjt fjtgíp
xg p qjhrpg pa kxaapcd n rphixvpaat st ipc bpa iégbxcd, n wprtg epvpsd p
Pcsgéh wphip ta úaixbd bpgpktsí, p sthetrwd n ethpg st rjpcidh kxaapcdh
wjqxtht tc ta bjcsd. P ad fjt taap gthedcsxó fjt pskxgixtht fjt cd edsíp,
rdcudgbt pa sdc egdbtixsd, tcigtbtitght tc cxcvjcp tbegthp wphip prpqpg ap
hjnp; n fjt, ejth thid hpqíp éa btydg fjt digd pavjcd, fjt hdhtvpht ta
etrwd wphip ap kjtaip st hj gtxcd.

-Phí th ktgsps -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n th udgodhd fjt Pcsgéh itcvp
eprxtcrxp wphip ap kjtaip, rdbd kdh, htñdgp, stríh; fjt nd at idgcd p yjgpg
n p egdbtitg st cjtkd st cd epgpg wphip wprtgat ktcvpsd n epvpsd.

-Cd bt rgtd sthdh yjgpbtcidh -sxyd Pcsgéh-; báh fjxhxtgp itctg pvdgp rdc
fjé aatvpg p Htkxaap fjt idsph aph ktcvpcoph sta bjcsd: sébt, hx ixtct pwí,
pavd fjt rdbp n aatkt, n fjéstht rdc Sxdh hj btgrts n idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith; fjt ipc qxtc pcspcith htpc taadh epgp rdchxvd rdbd ad wpc hxsd
epgp rdcbxvd.

Hpró st hj gtejthid Hpcrwd jc etspod st epc n digd st fjthd, n, sácsdhtad
pa bdod, at sxyd:

-Idbá, wtgbpcd Pcsgéh, fjt p idsdh cdh parpcop epgit st kjthigp sthvgprxp.
-Ejth, ¿fjé epgit dh parpcop p kdh? -egtvjció Pcsgéh.

-Thip epgit st fjthd n epc fjt dh sdn -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt Sxdh hpqt hx
bt wp st wprtg upaip d cd; edgfjt dh wpvd hpqtg, pbxvd, fjt adh thrjstgdh
st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith thipbdh hjytidh p bjrwp wpbqgt n p bpap ktcijgp,
n pjc p digph rdhph fjt ht hxtcitc btydg fjt ht sxrtc.

Pcsgéh phxó st hj epc n fjthd, n, kxtcsd fjt cpsxt at spqp digp rdhp, pqpyó
hj rpqtop n idbó ta rpbxcd tc aph bpcdh, rdbd hjtat strxght. Qxtc th ktgsps
fjt, pa epgixght, sxyd p sdc Fjxydit:

-Edg pbdg st Sxdh, htñdg rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt hx digp kto bt tcrdcigpgt,
pjcfjt ktp fjt bt wprtc etspodh, cd bt hdrdggp cx pnjst, hxcd séytbt rdc bx
sthvgprxp; fjt cd htgá ipcip, fjt cd htp bpndg ap fjt bt ktcsgá st hj pnjsp
st kjthigp btgrts, p fjxtc Sxdh bpasxvp, n p idsdh rjpcidh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith wpc cprxsd tc ta bjcsd.

Íqpht p atkpcipg sdc Fjxydit epgp rphixvpaat, bph éa ht ejhd p rdggtg st
bdsd fjt cxcvjcd ht pigtkxó p htvjxaat. Fjtsó rdggxsíhxbd sdc Fjxydit sta
rjtcid st Pcsgéh, n ujt btcthitg fjt adh stbáh ijkxthtc bjrwp rjtcip rdc cd
gtíght, edg cd prpqpaat st rdggtg sta idsd.





Rpeíijad MMMXX. Fjt igpip st ad fjt hjrtsxó tc ap ktcip p idsp ap rjpsgxaap
st sdc Fjxydit


Prpqóht ap qjtcp rdbxsp, tchxaapgdc ajtvd, n, hxc fjt ath hjrtsxtht rdhp
sxvcp st rdcipg, aatvpgdc digd síp p ap ktcip, thepcid n phdbqgd st Hpcrwd
Epcop; n, pjcfjt éa fjxhxtgp cd tcigpg tc taap, cd ad ejsd wjxg. Ap
ktcitgp, ktcitgd, hj wxyp n Bpgxidgcth, fjt kxtgdc ktcxg p sdc Fjxydit n p
Hpcrwd, ath hpaxtgdc p gtrtqxg rdc bjthigph st bjrwp patvgíp, n éa aph
gtrxqxó rdc vgpkt rdcixctcit n peapjhd, n síydath fjt at pstgtophtc digd
btydg atrwd fjt ap kto ephpsp; p ad rjpa at gthedcsxó ap wjéhetsp fjt rdbd
ap epvpht btydg fjt ap digp kto, fjt taap ht ap spgíp st egícrxeth. Sdc
Fjxydit sxyd fjt hí wpgíp, n phí, at pstgtopgdc jcd gpodcpqat tc ta bxhbd
rpgpbpcrwóc st bpggph, n éa ht prdhió ajtvd, edgfjt ktcíp bjn fjtqgpcipsd n
upaid st yjxrxd.

Cd ht wjqd qxtc tcrtggpsd, rjpcsd ap wjéhetsp pggtbtixó pa qpgqtgd, n,
phxécsdat st ap qpgqp, sxyd:

-Epgp bx hpcixvjpsp, fjt cd ht wp púc st pegdktrwpg báh st bx gpqd epgp hj
qpgqp, n fjt bt wp st kdaktg bx rdap; fjt pcsp ad st bx bpgxsd edg thdh
hjtadh, fjt th ktgvütcop; sxvd, ta etxct, fjt hdaíp nd rdavpg st bx qjtcp
rdap.

Cd ht ap fjtgíp spg ta qpgqtgd, pjcfjt taap báh ixgpqp, wphip fjt ta
axrtcrxpsd at sxyd fjt ht ap sxtht, fjt np cd tgp btcthitg báh jhpg st
pfjtaap xcsjhigxp, hxcd fjt ht sthrjqgxtht n bdhigpht tc hj bxhbp udgbp, n
sxytht p sdc Fjxydit fjt rjpcsd at sthedypgdc adh apsgdcth vpatdith ht
wpqípc ktcxsd p pfjtaap ktcip wjntcsd; n fjt hx egtvjcipht edg ta thrjstgd
st ap egxcrthp, at sxgípc fjt taap at wpqíp tckxpsd pstapcit p spg pkxhd p
adh st hj gtxcd rdbd taap xqp n aatkpqp rdchxvd ta axqtgipsdg st idsdh. Rdc
thid, sxd st qjtcp vpcp ap rdap p ap ktcitgp ta qpgqtgd, n phxbxhbd at
kdakxtgdc idsdh adh pswtgtcith fjt wpqíp egthipsd epgp ap axqtgips st sdc
Fjxydit. Thepciágdcht idsdh adh st ap ktcip st ap wtgbdhjgp st Sdgditp, n
pjc sta qjtc ipaat sta opvpa Rpgstcxd. Wxod ta rjgp fjt ath pstgtophtc st
rdbtg st ad fjt tc ap ktcip wjqxtht, n ta wjéhets, rdc thetgpcop st btydg
epvp, rdc sxaxvtcrxp ath pstgtoó jcp gpodcpqat rdbxsp; n p idsd thid sdgbíp
sdc Fjxydit, n ujtgdc st epgtrtg st cd sthetgipaat, edgfjt báh egdktrwd at
wpgíp edg tcidcrth ta sdgbxg fjt ta rdbtg.

Igpipgdc hdqgt rdbxsp, thipcsd stapcit ta ktcitgd, hj bjytg, hj wxyp,
Bpgxidgcth, idsdh adh ephpytgdh, st ap thigpñp adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit n sta
bdsd fjt at wpqípc wpaapsd. Ap wjéhetsp ath rdció ad fjt rdc éa n rdc ta
pggxtgd ath wpqíp prdcitrxsd, n, bxgpcsd hx prphd thipqp paaí Hpcrwd, rdbd
cd at kxtht, rdció idsd ad st hj bpcitpbxtcid, st fjt cd edrd vjhid
gtrxqxtgdc. N, rdbd ta rjgp sxytht fjt adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph fjt sdc
Fjxydit wpqíp atísd at wpqípc kjtaid ta yjxrxd, sxyd ta ktcitgd:

-Cd hé nd róbd ejtst htg thd; fjt tc ktgsps fjt, p ad fjt nd tcixtcsd, cd
wpn btydg atigpsd tc ta bjcsd, n fjt itcvd pwí sdh d igth staadh, rdc digdh
epetath, fjt ktgspstgpbtcit bt wpc spsd ap kxsp, cd hóad p bí, hxcd p digdh
bjrwdh. Edgfjt, rjpcsd th ixtbed st ap hxtvp, ht gtrdvtc pfjí, aph uxthiph,
bjrwdh htvpsdgth, n hxtbegt wpn pavjcdh fjt hpqtc attg, ta rjpa rdvt jcd
sthidh axqgdh tc aph bpcdh, n gdstábdcdh séa báh st igtxcip, n thiábdhat
thrjrwpcsd rdc ipcid vjhid fjt cdh fjxip bxa rpcph; p ad btcdh, st bí hé
strxg fjt rjpcsd dnd strxg pfjtaadh ujgxqjcsdh n itggxqath vdaeth fjt adh
rpqpaatgdh etvpc, fjt bt idbp vpcp st wprtg digd ipcid, n fjt fjtggíp thipg
dnécsdadh cdrwth n síph.

-N nd cx báh cx btcdh -sxyd ap ktcitgp-, edgfjt cjcrp itcvd qjtc gpid tc bx
rphp hxcd pfjta fjt kdh thiáxh thrjrwpcsd attg: fjt thiáxh ipc tbqdqpsd,
fjt cd dh prdgsáxh st gtñxg edg tcidcrth.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd Bpgxidgcth-, n p qjtcp ut fjt nd ipbqxéc vjhid
bjrwd st díg pfjtaaph rdhph, fjt hdc bjn axcsph; n báh, rjpcsd rjtcipc fjt
ht thiá ap digp htñdgp stqpyd st jcdh cpgpcydh pqgpopsp rdc hj rpqpaatgd, n
fjt ath thiá jcp sjtñp wprxécsdath ap vjpgsp, bjtgip st tckxsxp n rdc bjrwd
hdqgthpaid. Sxvd fjt idsd thid th rdhp st bxtath.

-N p kdh ¿fjé dh epgtrt, htñdgp sdcrtaap? -sxyd ta rjgp, wpqapcsd rdc ap
wxyp sta ktcitgd.

-Cd hé, htñdg, tc bx ácxbp -gthedcsxó taap-; ipbqxéc nd ad thrjrwd, n tc
ktgsps fjt, pjcfjt cd ad tcixtcsd, fjt gtrxqd vjhid tc díaad; etgd cd vjhid
nd st adh vdaeth st fjt bx epsgt vjhip, hxcd st aph apbtciprxdcth fjt adh
rpqpaatgdh wprtc rjpcsd thiác pjhtcith st hjh htñdgph: fjt tc ktgsps fjt
pavjcph ktrth bt wprtc aadgpg st rdbephxóc fjt ath itcvd.

-Ajtvd, ¿qxtc aph gtbtsxágpsth kdh, htñdgp sdcrtaap -sxyd Sdgditp-, hx edg
kdh aadgpgpc?

-Cd hé ad fjt bt wxrxtgp -gthedcsxó ap bdop-; hóad hé fjt wpn pavjcph
htñdgph st pfjéaaph ipc rgjtath, fjt aph aapbpc hjh rpqpaatgdh ixvgth n
atdcth n digph bxa xcbjcsxrxph. N, ¡Ythúh!, nd cd hé fjé vtcit th pfjéaap
ipc sthpabpsp n ipc hxc rdcrxtcrxp, fjt edg cd bxgpg p jc wdbqgt wdcgpsd,
at stypc fjt ht bjtgp, d fjt ht kjtakp adrd. Nd cd hé epgp fjé th ipcid
btaxcsgt: hx ad wprtc st wdcgpsph, ráhtcht rdc taadh, fjt taadh cd sthtpc
digp rdhp.

-Rpaap, cxñp -sxyd ap ktcitgp-, fjt epgtrt fjt hpqth bjrwd sthiph rdhph, n
cd thiá qxtc p aph sdcrtaaph hpqtg cx wpqapg ipcid.

-Rdbd bt ad egtvjcip thit htñdg -gthedcsxó taap-, cd ejst stypg st
gthedcstaat.

-Pwdgp qxtc -sxyd ta rjgp-, igptsbt, htñdg wjéhets, pfjthdh axqgdh, fjt adh
fjxtgd ktg.

-Fjt bt eaprt -gthedcsxó éa.

N, tcigpcsd tc hj pedhtcid, hpró séa jcp bpatixaap kxtyp, rtggpsp rdc jcp
rpstcxaap, n, pqgxécsdap, wpaaó tc taap igth axqgdh vgpcsth n jcdh epetath
st bjn qjtcp atigp, thrgxidh st bpcd. Ta egxbtg axqgd fjt pqgxó kxd fjt tgp
Sdc Rxgdcvxaxd st Igprxp; n ta digd, st Utaxmbpgit st Wxgrpcxp; n ta digd,
ap Wxhidgxp sta Vgpc Rpexiác Vdcopad Wtgcácsto st Rógsdqp, rdc ap kxsp st
Sxtvd Vpgríp st Epgtsth. Phí rdbd ta rjgp atnó adh sdh iíijadh egxbtgdh,
kdakxó ta gdhigd pa qpgqtgd n sxyd:

-Upaip cdh wprtc pfjí pwdgp ta pbp st bx pbxvd n hj hdqgxcp.

-Cd wprtc -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd-, fjt ipbqxéc hé nd aatkpaadh pa rdggpa d p
ap rwxbtctp; fjt tc ktgsps fjt wpn bjn qjtc ujtvd tc taap.

-Ajtvd, ¿fjxtgt kjthigp btgrts fjtbpg báh axqgdh? -sxyd ta ktcitgd.
-Cd báh -sxyd ta rjgp- fjt thidh sdh: ta st Sdc Rxgdcvxaxd n ta st
Utaxmbpgit.

-Ejth, ¿edg ktcijgp -sxyd ta ktcitgd- bxh axqgdh hdc wtgtyth d uatbáixrdh,
fjt adh fjxtgt fjtbpg?

-Rxhbáixrdh fjtgéxh strxg, pbxvd -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, fjt cd uatbáixrdh.

-Phí th -gteaxró ta ktcitgd-; bph hx pavjcd fjxtgt fjtbpg, htp tht sta Vgpc
Rpexiác n stht Sxtvd Vpgríp, fjt pcith stypgé fjtbpg jc wxyd fjt stypg
fjtbpg cxcvjcd sthdigdh.

-Wtgbpcd bíd -sxyd ta rjgp-, thidh sdh axqgdh hdc btcixgdhdh n thiác aatcdh
st sxhepgpith n stkpctdh; n thit sta Vgpc Rpexiác th wxhidgxp ktgspstgp, n
ixtct adh wtrwdh st Vdcopad Wtgcácsto st Rógsdqp, ta rjpa, edg hjh bjrwph n
vgpcsth wpopñph, btgtrxó htg aapbpsd st idsd ta bjcsd Vgpc Rpexiác,
gtcdbqgt upbdhd n rapgd, n séa hóad btgtrxsd. N thit Sxtvd Vpgríp st
Epgtsth ujt jc egxcrxepa rpqpaatgd, cpijgpa st ap rxjsps st Igjyxaad, tc
Thigtbpsjgp, kpatciíhxbd hdaspsd, n st ipciph ujtgoph cpijgpath fjt stitcíp
rdc jc stsd jcp gjtsp st bdaxcd tc ap bxips st hj ujgxp; n, ejthid rdc jc
bdcipcit tc ap tcigpsp st jcp ejtcit, stijkd p idsd jc xccjbtgpqat
tyégrxid, fjt cd ephpht edg taap; n wxod digph ipath rdhph fjt, rdbd hx éa
aph rjtcip n aph thrgxqt éa phxbxhbd, rdc ap bdsthixp st rpqpaatgd n st
rdgdcxhip egdexd, aph thrgxqxtgp digd, axqgt n sthpephxdcpsd, ejhxtgpc tc
hj dakxsd aph st adh Wéidgth, Pfjxath n Gdaspcth.

-¡Idbpdh rdc bx epsgt! -sxyd ta sxrwd ktcitgd-. ¡Bxgps st fjé ht thepcip:
st stitctg jcp gjtsp st bdaxcd! Edg Sxdh, pwdgp wpqíp kjthigp btgrts st
attg ad fjt wxod Utaxmbpgit st Wxgrpcxp, fjt st jc gtkéh hdad epgixó rxcrd
vxvpcith edg ap rxcijgp, rdbd hx ujtgpc wtrwdh st wpqph, rdbd adh
ugpxatrxrdh fjt wprtc adh cxñdh. N digp kto pggtbtixó rdc jc vgpcsíhxbd n
edstgdhíhxbd tyégrxid, sdcst aatkó báh st jc bxaaóc n htxhrxtcidh bxa
hdaspsdh, idsdh pgbpsdh sthst ta ext wphip ap rpqtop, n adh sthqpgpió p
idsdh, rdbd hx ujtgpc bpcpsph st dktyph. Ejth, ¿fjé bt sxgác sta qjtcd st
sdc Rxgdcvxaxd st Igprxp, fjt ujt ipc kpaxtcit n pcxbdhd rdbd ht ktgá tc ta
axqgd, sdcst rjtcip fjt, cpktvpcsd edg jc gíd, at hpaxó st ap bxips sta
pvjp jcp htgextcit st ujtvd, n éa, phí rdbd ap kxd, ht pggdyó hdqgt taap, n
ht ejhd p wdgrpypsph tcrxbp st hjh thrpbdhph thepasph, n at pegtió rdc
pbqph bpcdh ap vpgvpcip, rdc ipcip ujtgop fjt, kxtcsd ap htgextcit fjt ap
xqp pwdvpcsd, cd ijkd digd gtbtsxd hxcd stypght xg p ad wdcsd sta gíd,
aatkácsdht igph hí pa rpqpaatgd, fjt cjcrp ap fjxhd hdaipg? N, rjpcsd
aatvpgdc paaá qpyd, ht wpaaó tc jcdh epaprxdh n tc jcdh ypgsxcth ipc axcsdh
fjt tgp bpgpkxaap; n ajtvd ap hxtget ht kdakxó tc jc kxtyd pcrxpcd, fjt at
sxyd ipciph st rdhph fjt cd wpn báh fjt díg. Rpaat, htñdg, fjt hx dntht
thid, ht kdaktgíp adrd st eaprtg. ¡Sdh wxvph epgp ta Vgpc Rpexiác n epgp
tht Sxtvd Vpgríp fjt sxrt!

Dntcsd thid Sdgditp, sxyd rpaapcsd p Rpgstcxd:

-Edrd at upaip p cjthigd wjéhets epgp wprtg ap htvjcsp epgit st sdc
Fjxydit.

-Phí bt epgtrt p bí -gthedcsxó Rpgstcxd-, edgfjt, htvúc sp xcsxrxd, éa
ixtct edg rxtgid fjt idsd ad fjt thidh axqgdh rjtcipc ephó cx báh cx btcdh
fjt ad thrgxqtc, n cd at wpgác rgttg digp rdhp ugpxath sthrpaodh.
-Bxgps, wtgbpcd -idgcó p strxg ta rjgp-, fjt cd wjqd tc ta bjcsd Utaxmbpgit
st Wxgrpcxp, cx sdc Rxgdcvxaxd st Igprxp, cx digdh rpqpaatgdh htbtypcith
fjt adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph rjtcipc, edgfjt idsd th rdbedhijgp n uxrrxóc
st xcvtcxdh drxdhdh, fjt adh rdbejhxtgdc epgp ta tutid fjt kdh stríh st
tcigtitctg ta ixtbed, rdbd ad tcigtixtctc atnécsdadh kjthigdh htvpsdgth;
edgfjt gtpabtcit dh yjgd fjt cjcrp ipath rpqpaatgdh ujtgdc tc ta bjcsd, cx
ipath wpopñph cx sxhepgpith prdcitrxtgdc tc éa.

-¡P digd etggd rdc tht wjthd! -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd-. ¡Rdbd hx nd cd
hjextht rjáciph hdc rxcrd n psócst bt pegxtip ta opepid! Cd extcht kjthigp
btgrts spgbt epexaap, edgfjt edg Sxdh fjt cd hdn cpsp qapcrd. ¡Qjtcd th fjt
fjxtgp spgbt kjthigp btgrts p tcitcstg fjt idsd pfjtaad fjt thidh qjtcdh
axqgdh sxrtc htp sxhepgpith n btcixgph, thipcsd xbegthd rdc axrtcrxp st adh
htñdgth sta Rdchtyd Gtpa, rdbd hx taadh ujtgpc vtcit fjt wpqípc st stypg
xbegxbxg ipcip btcixgp yjcip, n ipciph qpipaaph n ipcidh tcrpcipbtcidh fjt
fjxipc ta yjxrxd!

-Np dh wt sxrwd, pbxvd -gteaxró ta rjgp-, fjt thid ht wprt epgp tcigtitctg
cjthigdh drxdhdh etchpbxtcidh; n, phí rdbd ht rdchxtcit tc aph gteúqaxrph
qxtc rdcrtgipsph fjt wpnp yjtvdh st pytsgto, st etadip n st igjrdh, epgp
tcigtitctg p pavjcdh fjt cx ixtctc, cx stqtc, cx ejtstc igpqpypg, phí ht
rdchxtcit xbegxbxg n fjt wpnp ipath axqgdh, rgtntcsd, rdbd th ktgsps, fjt
cd wp st wpqtg pavjcd ipc xvcdgpcit fjt itcvp edg wxhidgxp ktgspstgp
cxcvjcp sthidh axqgdh. N hx bt ujtgp aírxid pvdgp, n ta pjsxidgxd ad
gtfjxgxtgp, nd sxytgp rdhph prtgrp st ad fjt wpc st itctg adh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgíph epgp htg qjtcdh, fjt fjxoá ujtgpc st egdktrwd n pjc st vjhid
epgp pavjcdh; etgd nd thetgd fjt ktcsgá ixtbed tc fjt ad ejtsp rdbjcxrpg
rdc fjxtc ejtsp gtbtsxpaad, n tc thit tcigtipcid rgtts, htñdg ktcitgd, ad
fjt dh wt sxrwd, n idbps kjthigdh axqgdh, n paaá dh pktcxs rdc hjh ktgspsth
d btcixgph, n qjtc egdktrwd dh wpvpc, n fjxtgp Sxdh fjt cd rdytéxh sta ext
fjt rdytp kjthigd wjéhets sdc Fjxydit.

-Thd cd -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd-, fjt cd htgé nd ipc adrd fjt bt wpvp
rpqpaatgd pcspcit: fjt qxtc ktd fjt pwdgp cd ht jhp ad fjt ht jhpqp tc
pfjta ixtbed, rjpcsd ht sxrt fjt pcspqpc edg ta bjcsd thidh upbdhdh
rpqpaatgdh.

P ap bxips sthip eaáixrp ht wpaaó Hpcrwd egthtcit, n fjtsó bjn rdcujhd n
etchpixkd st ad fjt wpqíp dísd strxg fjt pwdgp cd ht jhpqpc rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith, n fjt idsdh adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph tgpc ctrtspsth n btcixgph,
n egdejhd tc hj rdgpoóc st thetgpg tc ad fjt epgpqp pfjta kxpyt st hj pbd,
n fjt hx cd hpaíp rdc ap utaxrxsps fjt éa etchpqp, stitgbxcpqp st stypaat n
kdaktght rdc hj bjytg n hjh wxydh p hj prdhijbqgpsd igpqpyd.

Aatkáqpht ap bpatip n adh axqgdh ta ktcitgd, bph ta rjgp at sxyd:
-Thetgps, fjt fjxtgd ktg fjé epetath hdc thdh fjt st ipc qjtcp atigp thiác
thrgxidh.

Hpróadh ta wjéhets, n, sácsdhtadh p attg, kxd wphip dqgp st drwd eaxtvdh
thrgxidh st bpcd, n pa egxcrxexd itcípc jc iíijad vgpcst fjt stríp: Cdktap
sta rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit. Atnó ta rjgp epgp hí igth d rjpigd gtcvadcth n
sxyd:

-Rxtgid fjt cd bt epgtrt bpa ta iíijad sthip cdktap, n fjt bt kxtct
kdajcips st attaap idsp.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd:

-Ejth qxtc ejtst attaap hj gtktgtcrxp, edgfjt at wpvd hpqtg fjt pavjcdh
wjéhetsth fjt pfjí ap wpc atísd ath wp rdcitcipsd bjrwd, n bt ap wpc etsxsd
rdc bjrwph ktgph; bph nd cd ht ap wt fjtgxsd spg, etchpcsd kdakéghtap p
fjxtc pfjí styó thip bpatip dakxspsp rdc thidh axqgdh n thdh epetath; fjt
qxtc ejtst htg fjt kjtakp hj sjtñd edg pfjí pavúc ixtbed, n, pjcfjt hé fjt
bt wpc st wprtg upaip adh axqgdh, p ut fjt ht adh wt st kdaktg: fjt, pjcfjt
ktcitgd, idspkíp hdn rgxhixpcd.

-Kdh itcéxh bjrwp gpoóc, pbxvd -sxyd ta rjgp-, bph, rdc idsd thd, hx ap
cdktap bt rdcitcip, bt ap wpqéxh st stypg igphapspg.

-St bjn qjtcp vpcp -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd.

Bxtcigph adh sdh thid strípc, wpqíp idbpsd Rpgstcxd ap cdktap n rdbtcopsd p
attg tc taap; n, epgtrxécsdat ad bxhbd fjt pa rjgp, at gdvó fjt ap atntht
st bdsd fjt idsdh ap dnthtc.

-Hí atntgp -sxyd ta rjgp-, hx cd ujtgp btydg vphipg thit ixtbed tc sdgbxg
fjt tc attg.

-Wpgid gtedhd htgá epgp bí -sxyd Sdgditp- tcigtitctg ta ixtbed dntcsd pavúc
rjtcid, ejth púc cd itcvd ta theígxij ipc hdhtvpsd fjt bt rdcrtsp sdgbxg
rjpcsd ujtgp gpoóc.

-Ejth sthp bpctgp -sxyd ta rjgp-, fjxtgd attgap, edg rjgxdhxsps hxfjxtgp;
fjxoá itcsgá pavjcp st vjhid.

Prjsxó bptht Cxrdaáh p gdvpgat ad bthbd, n Hpcrwd ipbqxéc; ad rjpa kxhid
sta rjgp, n tcitcsxtcsd fjt p idsdh spgíp vjhid n éa at gtrxqxgíp, sxyd:
-Ejth phí th, thiécbt idsdh pitcidh, fjt ap cdktap rdbxtcop sthip bpctgp:





Rpeíijad MMMXXX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap cdktap sta Rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit


«Tc Uadgtcrxp, rxjsps gxrp n upbdhp st Xipaxp, tc ap egdkxcrxp fjt aapbpc
Idhrpcp, kxkípc Pchtabd n Adipgxd, sdh rpqpaatgdh gxrdh n egxcrxepath, n
ipc pbxvdh fjt, edg tmrtatcrxp n pcidcdbphxp, st idsdh adh fjt adh rdcdrípc
adh sdh pbxvdh tgpc aapbpsdh. Tgpc hdaitgdh, bdodh st jcp bxhbp tsps n st
jcph bxhbph rdhijbqgth; idsd ad rjpa tgp qphipcit rpjhp p fjt adh sdh rdc
gtríegdrp pbxhips ht rdggthedcsxthtc. Qxtc th ktgsps fjt ta Pchtabd tgp
pavd báh xcraxcpsd p adh ephpixtbedh pbdgdhdh fjt ta Adipgxd, pa rjpa
aatkpqpc igph hí adh st ap rpop; etgd, rjpcsd ht dugtríp, stypqp Pchtabd st
prjsxg p hjh vjhidh edg htvjxg adh st Adipgxd, n Adipgxd stypqp adh hjndh
edg prjsxg p adh st Pchtabd; n, sthip bpctgp, pcspqpc ipc p jcp hjh
kdajcipsth, fjt cd wpqíp rdcrtgipsd gtady fjt phí ad pcsjkxtht.
»Pcspqp Pchtabd etgsxsd st pbdgth st jcp sdcrtaap egxcrxepa n wtgbdhp st ap
bxhbp rxjsps, wxyp st ipc qjtcdh epsgth n ipc qjtcp taap edg hí, fjt ht
stitgbxcó, rdc ta epgtrtg st hj pbxvd Adipgxd, hxc ta rjpa cxcvjcp rdhp
wpríp, st etsxaap edg thedhp p hjh epsgth, n phí ad ejhd tc tytrjrxóc; n ta
fjt aatkó ap tbqpypsp ujt Adipgxd, n ta fjt rdcrajnó ta ctvdrxd ipc p vjhid
st hj pbxvd, fjt tc qgtkt ixtbed ht kxd ejthid tc ap edhthxóc fjt sthtpqp,
n Rpbxap ipc rdcitcip st wpqtg parpcopsd p Pchtabd edg thedhd, fjt cd
rthpqp st spg vgprxph pa rxtad, n p Adipgxd, edg rjnd btsxd ipcid qxtc at
wpqíp ktcxsd.

»Adh egxbtgdh síph, rdbd idsdh adh st qdsp hjtatc htg patvgth, rdcixcjó
Adipgxd, rdbd hdaíp, ap rphp st hj pbxvd Pchtabd, egdrjgpcsd wdcgpaat,
uthitypaat n gtvdrxypaat rdc idsd pfjtaad fjt p éa at ujt edhxqat; etgd,
prpqpsph aph qdsph n hdhtvpsp np ap ugtrjtcrxp st aph kxhxiph n epgpqxtcth,
rdbtcoó Adipgxd p sthrjxspght rdc rjxspsd st aph xsph tc rphp st Pchtabd,
edg epgtrtgat p éa -rdbd th gpoóc fjt epgtorp p idsdh adh fjt ujtgtc
sxhrgtidh- fjt cd ht wpc st kxhxipg cx rdcixcjpg aph rphph st adh pbxvdh
rphpsdh st ap bxhbp bpctgp fjt rjpcsd tgpc hdaitgdh; edgfjt, pjcfjt ap
qjtcp n ktgspstgp pbxhips cd ejtst cx stqt st htg hdhetrwdhp tc cpsp, rdc
idsd thid, th ipc staxrpsp ap wdcgp sta rphpsd, fjt epgtrt fjt ht ejtst
dutcstg pjc st adh bthbdh wtgbpcdh, rjpcid báh st adh pbxvdh.

»Cdió Pchtabd ap gtbxhxóc st Adipgxd, n udgbó séa fjtyph vgpcsth,
sxrxécsdat fjt hx éa hjextgp fjt ta rphpght wpqíp st htg epgit epgp cd
rdbjcxrpaat rdbd hdaíp, fjt ypbáh ad wjqxtgp wtrwd, n fjt hx, edg ap qjtcp
rdggthedcstcrxp fjt adh sdh itcípc bxtcigph éa ujt hdaitgd, wpqípc
parpcopsd ipc sjart cdbqgt rdbd ta st htg aapbpsdh adh sdh pbxvdh, fjt cd
etgbxixtht, edg fjtgtg wprtg sta rxgrjchetrid, hxc digp drphxóc pavjcp,
fjt ipc upbdhd n ipc pvgpspqat cdbqgt ht etgsxtht; n fjt phí, at hjeaxrpqp,
hx tgp aírxid fjt ipa iégbxcd st wpqapg ht jhpht tcigt taadh, fjt kdakxtht
p htg htñdg st hj rphp, n p tcigpg n hpaxg tc taap rdbd st pcith,
phtvjgácsdat fjt hj thedhp Rpbxap cd itcíp digd vjhid cx digp kdajcips fjt
ap fjt éa fjtgíp fjt ijkxtht, n fjt, edg wpqtg hpqxsd taap rdc rjáciph
ktgph adh sdh ht pbpqpc, thipqp rdcujhp st ktg tc éa ipcip thfjxktop.
»P idsph thiph n digph bjrwph gpodcth fjt Pchtabd sxyd p Adipgxd epgp
etghjpsxaat kdakxtht rdbd hdaíp p hj rphp, gthedcsxó Adipgxd rdc ipcip
egjstcrxp, sxhrgtrxóc n pkxhd, fjt Pchtabd fjtsó hpixhutrwd st ap qjtcp
xcitcrxóc st hj pbxvd, n fjtspgdc st rdcrxtgid fjt sdh síph tc ap htbpcp n
aph uxthiph ujtht Adipgxd p rdbtg rdc éa; n, pjcfjt thid fjtsó phí
rdcrtgipsd tcigt adh sdh, egdejhd Adipgxd st cd wprtg báh st pfjtaad fjt
kxtht fjt báh rdcktcíp p ap wdcgp st hj pbxvd, rjnd rgésxid thixbpqp tc
báh fjt ta hjnd egdegxd. Stríp éa, n stríp qxtc, fjt ta rphpsd p fjxtc ta
rxtad wpqíp rdcrtsxsd bjytg wtgbdhp, ipcid rjxspsd wpqíp st itctg fjé
pbxvdh aatkpqp p hj rphp rdbd tc bxgpg rdc fjé pbxvph hj bjytg rdcktghpqp,
edgfjt ad fjt cd ht wprt cx rdcrxtgip tc aph eapoph, cx tc adh itbeadh, cx
tc aph uxthiph eúqaxrph, cx thiprxdcth -rdhph fjt cd idsph ktrth aph wpc st
ctvpg adh bpgxsdh p hjh bjytgth-, ht rdcrxtgip n uprxaxip tc rphp st ap
pbxvp d ap epgxtcip st fjxtc báh hpixhuprxóc ht ixtct.

»Ipbqxéc stríp Adipgxd fjt itcípc ctrthxsps adh rphpsdh st itctg rpsp jcd
pavúc pbxvd fjt at pskxgixtht st adh sthrjxsdh fjt tc hj egdrtstg wxrxtht,
edgfjt hjtat prdcitrtg fjt rdc ta bjrwd pbdg fjt ta bpgxsd p ap bjytg
ixtct, d cd at pskxtgit d cd at sxrt, edg cd tcdypaap, fjt wpvp d styt st
wprtg pavjcph rdhph, fjt ta wprtaaph d cd, at htgíp st wdcgp d st
kxijetgxd; st ad rjpa, hxtcsd sta pbxvd psktgixsd, uárxabtcit edcsgíp
gtbtsxd tc idsd. Etgd, ¿sócst ht wpaapgá pbxvd ipc sxhrgtid n ipc atpa n
ktgspstgd rdbd pfjí Adipgxd at exst? Cd ad hé nd, edg rxtgid; hóad Adipgxd
tgp éhit, fjt rdc idsp hdaxrxijs n psktgixbxtcid bxgpqp edg ap wdcgp st hj
pbxvd n egdrjgpqp stobpg, ugxhpg n prdgipg adh síph sta rdcrxtgid sta xg p
hj rphp, edgfjt cd epgtrxtht bpa pa kjavd drxdhd n p adh dydh kpvpqjcsdh n
bpaxrxdhdh ap tcigpsp st jc bdod gxrd, vtcixawdbqgt n qxtc cprxsd, n st aph
qjtcph epgith fjt éa etchpqp fjt itcíp, tc ap rphp st jcp bjytg ipc wtgbdhp
rdbd Rpbxap; fjt, ejthid fjt hj qdcsps n kpadg edsíp edctg ugtcd p idsp
bpasxrxtcit atcvjp, idspkíp cd fjtgíp edctg tc sjsp hj rgésxid cx ta st hj
pbxvd, n edg thid adh báh st adh síph sta rdcrxtgid adh drjepqp n
tcigtitcíp tc digph rdhph, fjt éa spqp p tcitcstg htg xctmrjhpqath. Phí
fjt, tc fjtyph sta jcd n sxhrjaeph sta digd ht ephpqpc bjrwdh gpidh n
epgith sta síp.

»Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt jcd fjt adh sdh ht pcspqpc ephtpcsd edg jc egpsd ujtgp
st ap rxjsps, Pchtabd sxyd p Adipgxd aph htbtypcith gpodcth:
»-Etchpqph, pbxvd Adipgxd, fjt p aph btgrtsth fjt Sxdh bt wp wtrwd tc
wprtgbt wxyd st ipath epsgth rdbd ujtgdc adh bídh n pa spgbt, cd rdc bpcd
thrphp, adh qxtcth, phí adh fjt aapbpc st cpijgpatop rdbd adh st udgijcp,
cd ejtsd nd rdggthedcstg rdc pvgpstrxbxtcid fjt aatvjt pa qxtc gtrtqxsd, n
hdqgt pa fjt bt wxod tc spgbt p ix edg pbxvd n p Rpbxap edg bjytg egdegxp:
sdh egtcsph fjt aph thixbd, hx cd tc ta vgpsd fjt stqd, tc ta fjt ejtsd.
Ejth rdc idsph thiph epgith, fjt hjtatc htg ta idsd rdc fjt adh wdbqgth
hjtatc n ejtstc kxkxg rdcitcidh, kxkd nd ta báh sthetrwpsd n ta báh
sthpqgxsd wdbqgt st idsd ta jcxktghd bjcsd; edgfjt cd hé fjé síph p thip
epgit bt upixvp n pegxtip jc sthtd ipc thigpñd, n ipc ujtgp sta jhd rdbúc
st digdh, fjt nd bt bpgpkxaad st bí bxhbd, n bt rjaed n bt gxñd p hdaph, n
egdrjgd rpaapgad n tcrjqgxgad st bxh egdegxdh etchpbxtcidh; n phí bt wp
hxsd edhxqat hpaxg rdc thit htrgtid rdbd hx st xcsjhigxp egdrjgpgp strxaad
p idsd ta bjcsd. N, ejth fjt, tc tutid, éa wp st hpaxg p eapop,fjxtgd fjt
htp tc ap sta pgrwxkd st ij htrgtid, rdcuxpsd fjt, rdc éa n rdc ap
sxaxvtcrxp fjt edcsgáh, rdbd bx pbxvd ktgspstgd, tc gtbtsxpgbt, nd bt ktgé
egthid axqgt st ap pcvjhixp fjt bt rpjhp, n aatvpgá bx patvgíp edg ij
hdaxrxijs pa vgpsd fjt wp aatvpsd bx sthrdcitcid edg bx adrjgp.
»Hjhetchd itcípc p Adipgxd aph gpodcth st Pchtabd, n cd hpqíp tc fjé wpqíp
st epgpg ipc apgvp egtktcrxóc d egtábqjad; n, pjcfjt xqp gtkdakxtcsd tc hj
xbpvxcprxóc fjé sthtd edsgíp htg pfjta fjt p hj pbxvd ipcid upixvpqp, sxd
hxtbegt bjn atydh sta qapcrd st ap ktgsps; n, edg hpaxg egthid st ap pvdcíp
fjt at rpjhpqp pfjtaap hjhetchxóc, at sxyd fjt wpríp cdidgxd pvgpkxd p hj
bjrwp pbxhips tc pcspg qjhrpcsd gdstdh epgp strxgat hjh báh tcrjqxtgidh
etchpbxtcidh, ejth itcíp rxtgid fjt ht edsíp egdbtitg séa, d np rdchtydh
epgp tcigtitctaadh, d np gtbtsxd epgp rjbeaxaadh.

»-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó Pchtabd-, n rdc thp rdcuxpcop it wpvd hpqtg,
pbxvd Adipgxd, fjt ta sthtd fjt bt upixvp th etchpg hx Rpbxap, bx thedhp,
th ipc qjtcp n ipc etgutip rdbd nd extchd; n cd ejtsd tcitgpgbt tc thip
ktgsps, hx cd th egdqácsdap st bpctgp fjt ap egjtqp bpcxuxthit adh fjxapith
st hj qdcsps, rdbd ta ujtvd bjthigp adh sta dgd. Edgfjt nd itcvd epgp bí,
¡dw pbxvd!, fjt cd th jcp bjytg báh qjtcp st rjpcid th d cd th hdaxrxipsp,
n fjt pfjtaap hdap th ujtgit fjt cd ht sdqap p aph egdbthph, p aph sásxkph,
p aph aávgxbph n p aph rdcixcjph xbedgijcxspsth st adh hdaírxidh pbpcith.
Edgfjt, ¿fjé wpn fjt pvgpstrtg -stríp éa- fjt jcp bjytg htp qjtcp, hx cpsxt
at sxrt fjt htp bpap? ¿Fjé bjrwd fjt thié gtrdvxsp n itbtgdhp ap fjt cd at
spc drphxóc epgp fjt ht hjtait, n ap fjt hpqt fjt ixtct bpgxsd fjt, tc
rdvxécsdap tc ap egxbtgp sthtckdaijgp, ap wp st fjxipg ap kxsp? Pchí fjt,
ap fjt th qjtcp edg itbdg, d edg upaip st ajvpg, nd cd ap fjxtgd itctg tc
pfjtaap thixbp tc fjt itcsgé p ap hdaxrxipsp n etghtvjxsp fjt hpaxó rdc ap
rdgdcp sta ktcrxbxtcid. St bdsd fjt, edg thiph gpodcth n edg digph bjrwph
fjt it ejsxtgp strxg epgp prgtsxipg n udgipatrtg ap dexcxóc fjt itcvd,
sthtd fjt Rpbxap, bx thedhp, epht edg thiph sxuxrjaipsth n ht prgxhdat n
fjxapit tc ta ujtvd st ktght gtfjtgxsp n hdaxrxipsp, n st fjxtc itcvp kpadg
epgp edctg tc taap hjh sthtdh; n hx taap hpat, rdbd rgtd fjt hpasgá, rdc ap
epabp sthip qpipaap, itcsgé nd edg hxc xvjpa bx ktcijgp; edsgé nd strxg fjt
thiá rdabd ta kpríd st bxh sthtdh; sxgé fjt bt rjed tc hjtgit ap bjytg
ujtgit, st fjxtc ta Hpqxd sxrt fjt ¿fjxéc ap wpaapgá? N, rjpcsd thid hjrtsp
pa gtkéh st ad fjt extchd, rdc ta vjhid st ktg fjt prtgié tc bx dexcxóc,
aatkpgé hxc etcp ap fjt st gpoóc edsgá rpjhpgbt bx ipc rdhidhp tmetgxtcrxp.
N, egdhjejthid fjt cxcvjcp rdhp st rjpciph bt sxytgth tc rdcigp st bx sthtd
wp st htg st pavúc egdktrwd epgp stypg st edctgat edg ap dqgp, fjxtgd, ¡dw
pbxvd Adipgxd!, fjt it sxhedcvph p htg ta xchigjbtcid fjt apqgt pfjthip
dqgp st bx vjhid; fjt nd it spgé ajvpg epgp fjt ad wpvph, hxc upaipgit idsd
pfjtaad fjt nd kxtgt htg ctrthpgxd epgp hdaxrxipg p jcp bjytg wdcthip,
wdcgpsp, gtrdvxsp n sthxcitgthpsp. N bjéktbt, tcigt digph rdhph, p uxpg st
ix thip ipc pgsjp tbegthp, ta ktg fjt hx st ix th ktcrxsp Rpbxap, cd wp st
aatvpg ta ktcrxbxtcid p idsd igpcrt n gxvdg, hxcd p hóad p itctg edg wtrwd
ad fjt ht wp st wprtg, edg qjtc gthetid; n phí, cd fjtspgé nd dutcsxsd báh
st rdc ta sthtd, n bx xcyjgxp fjtspgá thrdcsxsp tc ap kxgijs st ij
hxatcrxd, fjt qxtc hé fjt tc ad fjt bt idrpgt wp st htg titgcd rdbd ta st
ap bjtgit. Phí fjt, hx fjxtgth fjt nd itcvp kxsp fjt ejtsp strxg fjt ad th,
sthst ajtvd wph st tcigpg tc thip pbdgdhp qpipaap, cd ixqxp cx
etgtodhpbtcit, hxcd rdc ta pwícrd n sxaxvtcrxp fjt bx sthtd exst, n rdc ap
rdcuxpcop fjt cjthigp pbxhips bt phtvjgp.

»Éhiph ujtgdc aph gpodcth fjt Pchtabd sxyd p Adipgxd, p idsph aph rjpath
thijkd ipc pitcid, fjt hx cd ujtgdc aph fjt fjtspc thrgxiph fjt at sxyd, cd
stheatvó hjh apqxdh wphip fjt wjqd prpqpsd; n, kxtcsd fjt cd stríp báh,
sthejéh fjt at thijkd bxgpcsd jc qjtc theprxd, rdbd hx bxgpgp digp rdhp fjt
ypbáh wjqxtgp kxhid, fjt at rpjhpgp psbxgprxóc n thepcid, at sxyd:
»-Cd bt ejtsd etghjpsxg, ¡dw pbxvd Pchtabd!, p fjt cd htpc qjgaph aph rdhph
fjt bt wph sxrwd; fjt, p etchpg fjt st ktgph aph stríph, cd rdchxcixtgp fjt
ipc pstapcit ephpgph, edgfjt rdc cd thrjrwpgit egtkxcxtgp ij apgvp pgtcvp.
Hxc sjsp xbpvxcd, d fjt cd bt rdcdrth, d fjt nd cd it rdcdord. Etgd cd; fjt
qxtc hé fjt tgth Pchtabd, n iú hpqth fjt nd hdn Adipgxd; ta spñd thiá tc
fjt nd extchd fjt cd tgth ta Pchtabd fjt hdaíph, n iú stqth st wpqtg
etchpsd fjt ipbedrd nd hdn ta Adipgxd fjt stqíp htg, edgfjt aph rdhph fjt
bt wph sxrwd, cx hdc st pfjta Pchtabd bx pbxvd, cx aph fjt bt exsth ht wpc
st etsxg p pfjta Adipgxd fjt iú rdcdrth; edgfjt adh qjtcdh pbxvdh wpc st
egdqpg p hjh pbxvdh n kpatght staadh, rdbd sxyd jc edtip, jhfjt ps pgph;
fjt fjxhd strxg fjt cd ht wpqípc st kpatg st hj pbxhips tc rdhph fjt ujthtc
rdcigp Sxdh. Ejth, hx thid hxcixó jc vtcixa st ap pbxhips, ¿rjácid btydg th
fjt ad hxtcip ta rgxhixpcd, fjt hpqt fjt edg cxcvjcp wjbpcp wp st etgstg ap
pbxhips sxkxcp? N rjpcsd ta pbxvd ixgpht ipcid ap qpggp fjt ejhxtht pepgit
adh gthetidh sta rxtad edg prjsxg p adh st hj pbxvd, cd wp st htg edg rdhph
axvtgph n st edrd bdbtcid, hxcd edg pfjtaaph tc fjt kpnp ap wdcgp n ap kxsp
st hj pbxvd. Ejth sxbt iú pwdgp, Pchtabd: ¿rjáa sthiph sdh rdhph ixtcth tc
etaxvgd epgp fjt nd bt pktcijgt p rdbeaprtgit n p wprtg jcp rdhp ipc
stithipqat rdbd bt exsth? Cxcvjcp, edg rxtgid; pcith, bt exsth, htvúc nd
tcixtcsd, fjt egdrjgt n hdaxrxit fjxipgit ap wdcgp n ap kxsp, n fjxiágbtap
p bí yjcipbtcit. Edgfjt hx nd wt st egdrjgpg fjxipgit ap wdcgp, rapgd thiá
fjt it fjxid ap kxsp, ejth ta wdbqgt hxc wdcgp etdg th fjt jc bjtgid; n,
hxtcsd nd ta xchigjbtcid, rdbd iú fjxtgth fjt ad htp, st ipcid bpa ijnd,
¿cd ktcvd p fjtspg sthwdcgpsd, n, edg ta bthbd rdchxvjxtcit, hxc kxsp?
Thrjrwp, pbxvd Pchtabd, n itc eprxtcrxp st cd gthedcstgbt wphip fjt prpqt
st strxgit ad fjt ht bt dugtrxtgt prtgrp st ad fjt it wp etsxsd ij sthtd;
fjt ixtbed fjtspgá epgp fjt iú bt gteaxfjth n nd it thrjrwt.

»-Fjt bt eaprt -sxyd Pchtabd-: sx ad fjt fjxhxtgth.

»N Adipgxd egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

»-Epgértbt, ¡dw Pchtabd!, fjt ixtcth iú pwdgp ta xcvtcxd rdbd ta fjt
hxtbegt ixtctc adh bdgdh, p adh rjpath cd ht ath ejtst spg p tcitcstg ta
tggdg st hj htrip rdc aph prdiprxdcth st ap Hpcip Thrgxijgp, cx rdc gpodcth
fjt rdchxhipc tc thetrjaprxóc sta tcitcsxbxtcid, cx fjt kpnpc ujcspsph tc
pgiírjadh st ut, hxcd fjt ath wpc st igptg tytbeadh epaepqath, uárxath,
xcitatvxqath, stbdchigpixkdh, xcsjqxipqath, rdc stbdhigprxdcth bpitbáixrph
fjt cd ht ejtstc ctvpg, rdbd rjpcsd sxrtc: "Hx st sdh epgith xvjpath
fjxipbdh epgith xvjpath, aph fjt fjtspc ipbqxéc hdc xvjpath"; n, rjpcsd
thid cd tcixtcspc st epapqgp, rdbd, tc tutid, cd ad tcixtcstc, wáhtath st
bdhigpg rdc aph bpcdh n edcéghtad stapcit st adh dydh, n, pjc rdc idsd
thid, cd qphip cpsxt rdc taadh p etghjpsxgath aph ktgspsth st bx hprgp
gtaxvxóc. N thit bthbd iégbxcd n bdsd bt rdcktcsgá jhpg rdcixvd, edgfjt ta
sthtd fjt tc ix wp cprxsd kp ipc sthrpbxcpsd n ipc ujtgp st idsd pfjtaad
fjt itcvp hdbqgp st gpodcpqat, fjt bt epgtrt fjt wp st htg ixtbed vphipsd
ta fjt drjepgt tc spgit p tcitcstg ij hxbeaxrxsps, fjt edg pwdgp cd at
fjxtgd spg digd cdbqgt, n pjc thidn edg stypgit tc ij sthpixcd, tc etcp st
ij bpa sthtd; bph cd bt styp jhpg sthit gxvdg ap pbxhips fjt it itcvd, ap
rjpa cd rdchxtcit fjt it styt ejthid tc ipc bpcxuxthid etaxvgd st etgstgit.
N, edgfjt rapgd ad ktph, sxbt, Pchtabd: ¿iú cd bt wph sxrwd fjt itcvd st
hdaxrxipg p jcp gtixgpsp, etghjpsxg p jcp wdcthip, dugtrtg p jcp
sthxcitgthpsp, htgkxg p jcp egjstcit? Hí fjt bt ad wph sxrwd. Ejth hx iú
hpqth fjt ixtcth bjytg gtixgpsp, wdcthip, sthxcitgthpsp n egjstcit, ¿fjé
qjhrph? N hx extchph fjt st idsdh bxh phpaidh wp st hpaxg ktcrtsdgp, rdbd
hpasgá hxc sjsp, ¿fjé btydgth iíijadh extchph spgat sthejéh fjt adh fjt
pwdgp ixtct, d fjé htgá báh sthejéh st ad fjt th pwdgp? D th fjt iú cd ap
ixtcth edg ap fjt sxrth, d iú cd hpqth ad fjt exsth. Hx cd ap ixtcth edg ad
fjt sxrth, ¿epgp fjé fjxtgth egdqpgap, hxcd, rdbd p bpap, wprtg staap ad
fjt báh it kxcxtgt tc vjhid? Bph hx th ipc qjtcp rdbd rgtth, xbetgixctcit
rdhp htgá wprtg tmetgxtcrxp st ap bthbp ktgsps, ejth, sthejéh st wtrwp, ht
wp st fjtspg rdc ap thixbprxóc fjt egxbtgd itcíp. Phí fjt, th gpoóc
rdcrajntcit fjt ta xcitcipg aph rdhph st aph rjpath pcith cdh ejtst hjrtstg
spñd fjt egdktrwd th st yjxrxdh hxc sxhrjghd n itbtgpgxdh, n báh rjpcsd
fjxtgtc xcitcipg pfjtaaph p fjt cd hdc udgopsdh cx rdbetaxsdh, n fjt st bjn
atydh igptc sthrjqxtgid fjt ta xcitcipgaph th bpcxuxthip adrjgp. Aph rdhph
sxuxrjaidhph ht xcitcipc edg Sxdh, d edg ta bjcsd, d edg tcigpbqdh p sdh:
aph fjt ht prdbtitc edg Sxdh hdc aph fjt prdbtixtgdc adh hpcidh,
prdbtixtcsd p kxkxg kxsp st ácvtath tc rjtgedh wjbpcdh; aph fjt ht prdbtitc
edg gthetid sta bjcsd hdc aph st pfjtaadh fjt ephpc ipcip xcuxcxsps st
pvjp, ipcip sxktghxsps st raxbph, ipcip thigpñtop st vtcith, edg psfjxgxg
thidh fjt aapbpc qxtcth st udgijcp. N aph fjt ht xcitcipc edg Sxdh n edg ta
bjcsd yjcipbtcit hdc pfjtaaph st adh kpatgdhdh hdaspsdh, fjt petcph kttc tc
ta rdcigpgxd bjgd pqxtgid ipcid theprxd rjpcid th ta fjt ejsd wprtg jcp
gtsdcsp qpap st pgixaatgíp, rjpcsd, ejthid pepgit idsd itbdg, hxc wprtg
sxhrjghd cx psktgixg pa bpcxuxthid etaxvgd fjt ath pbtcpop, aatkpsdh tc
kjtad st aph paph sta sthtd st kdaktg edg hj ut, edg hj cprxóc n edg hj
gtn, ht pggdypc xcigéexspbtcit edg ap bxips st bxa rdcigpejthiph bjtgith
fjt adh thetgpc. Thiph rdhph hdc aph fjt hjtatc xcitcipght, n th wdcgp,
vadgxp n egdktrwd xcitcipgaph, pjcfjt ipc aatcph st xcrdcktcxtcith n
etaxvgdh. Etgd ap fjt iú sxrth fjt fjxtgth xcitcipg n edctg edg dqgp, cx it
wp st parpcopg vadgxp st Sxdh, qxtcth st ap udgijcp, cx upbp rdc adh
wdbqgth; edgfjt, ejthid fjt hpavph rdc taap rdbd sthtph, cd wph st fjtspg
cx báh jupcd, cx báh gxrd, cx báh wdcgpsd fjt thiáh pwdgp; n hx cd hpath,
it wph st ktg tc ap bpndg bxhtgxp fjt xbpvxcpght ejtsp, edgfjt cd it wp st
pegdktrwpg etchpg tcidcrth fjt cd hpqt cpsxt ap sthvgprxp fjt it wp
hjrtsxsd, edgfjt qphipgá epgp puaxvxgit n sthwprtgit fjt ap hteph iú bthbd.
N, epgp rdcuxgbprxóc sthip ktgsps, it fjxtgd strxg jcp thipcrxp fjt wxod ta
upbdhd edtip Ajxh Ipchxad, tc ta uxc st hj egxbtgp epgit st Aph aávgxbph st
Hpc Etsgd, fjt sxrt phí:

   Rgtrt ta sdadg n rgtrt ap ktgvütcop
   tc Etsgd, rjpcsd ta síp ht wp bdhigpsd;
   n, pjcfjt paaí cd kt p cpsxt, ht pktgvütcop
   st hí bthbd, edg ktg fjt wpqíp etrpsd:
   fjt p jc bpvcácxbd etrwd p wpqtg ktgvütcop
   cd hóad wp st bdktgat ta htg bxgpsd;
   fjt st hí ht pktgvütcop rjpcsd ntggp,
   hx qxtc digd cd ktt fjt rxtad n ixtggp.

Phí fjt, cd thrjhpgáh rdc ta htrgtid ij sdadg; pcith, itcsgáh fjt aadgpg
rdcixcd, hx cd aávgxbph st adh dydh, aávgxbph st hpcvgt sta rdgpoóc, rdbd
aph aadgpqp pfjta hxbeat sdridg fjt cjthigd edtip cdh rjtcip fjt wxod ap
egjtqp sta kphd, fjt, rdc btydg sxhrjghd, ht thrjhó st wprtgap ta egjstcit
Gtxcpasdh; fjt, ejthid fjt pfjtaad htp uxrrxóc edéixrp, ixtct tc hí
tcrtggpsdh htrgtidh bdgpath sxvcdh st htg psktgixsdh n tcitcsxsdh t
xbxipsdh. Rjpcid báh fjt, rdc ad fjt pwdgp extchd strxgit, prpqpgáh st
ktcxg tc rdcdrxbxtcid sta vgpcst tggdg fjt fjxtgth rdbtitg. Sxbt, Pchtabd,
hx ta rxtad, d ap hjtgit qjtcp, it wjqxtgp wtrwd htñdg n atvíixbd edhthdg
st jc uxcíhxbd sxpbpcit, st rjnp qdcsps n fjxapith thijkxthtc hpixhutrwdh
rjpcidh apexspgxdh at kxthtc, n fjt idsdh p jcp kdo n st rdbúc epgtrtg
sxythtc fjt aatvpqp tc fjxapith, qdcsps n uxctop p rjpcid ht edsíp thitcstg
ap cpijgpatop st ipa extsgp, n iú bthbd ad rgtnthth phí, hxc hpqtg digp
rdhp tc rdcigpgxd, ¿htgíp yjhid fjt it kxcxtht tc sthtd st idbpg pfjta
sxpbpcit, n edctgat tcigt jc pnjcfjt n jc bpgixaad, n paaí, p ejgp ujtgop
st vdaeth n qgpodh, egdqpg hx th ipc sjgd n ipc uxcd rdbd sxrtc? N báh, hx
ad ejhxthth edg dqgp; fjt, ejthid rphd fjt ap extsgp wxrxtht gthxhitcrxp p
ipc ctrxp egjtqp, cd edg thd ht at pñpsxgíp báh kpadg cx báh upbp; n hx ht
gdbextht, rdhp fjt edsgíp htg, ¿cd ht etgstgíp idsd? Hí, edg rxtgid,
stypcsd p hj sjtñd tc thixbprxóc st fjt idsdh at itcvpc edg hxbeat. Ejth
wpo rjtcip, Pchtabd pbxvd, fjt Rpbxap th uícxhxbd sxpbpcit, phí tc ij
thixbprxóc rdbd tc ap pytcp, n fjt cd th gpoóc edctgap tc rdcixcvtcrxp st
fjt ht fjxtqgt, ejth, pjcfjt ht fjtst rdc hj tcitgtop, cd ejtst hjqxg p báh
kpadg sta fjt pwdgp ixtct; n hx upaipht n cd gthxhixtht, rdchxstgp sthst
pwdgp rjáa fjtspgíph hxc taap, n rdc rjácip gpoóc it edsgíph fjtypg st ix
bthbd, edg wpqtg hxsd rpjhp st hj etgsxrxóc n ap ijnp. Bxgp fjt cd wpn ydnp
tc ta bjcsd fjt ipcid kpavp rdbd ap bjytg rphip n wdcgpsp, n fjt idsd ta
wdcdg st aph bjytgth rdchxhit tc ap dexcxóc qjtcp fjt staaph ht ixtct; n,
ejth ap st ij thedhp th ipa fjt aatvp pa thigtbd st qdcsps fjt hpqth, ¿epgp
fjé fjxtgth edctg thip ktgsps tc sjsp? Bxgp, pbxvd, fjt ap bjytg th pcxbpa
xbetgutrid, n fjt cd ht at wpc st edctg tbqpgpodh sdcst igdextrt n rpxvp,
hxcd fjxiághtadh n sthetypaat ta rpbxcd st rjpafjxtg xcrdcktcxtcit, epgp
fjt hxc ethpsjbqgt rdggp axvtgp p parpcopg ap etgutrxóc fjt at upaip, fjt
rdchxhit tc ta htg kxgijdhp. Rjtcipc adh cpijgpath fjt ta pgbxcxd th jc
pcxbpatyd fjt ixtct jcp exta qapcfjíhxbp, n fjt rjpcsd fjxtgtc rpopgat, adh
rpopsdgth jhpc sthit pgixuxrxd: fjt, hpqxtcsd aph epgith edg sdcst hjtat
ephpg n prjsxg, aph pipypc rdc adsd, n sthejéh, dytácsdat, at tcrpbxcpc
wprxp pfjta ajvpg, n phí rdbd ta pgbxcxd aatvp pa adsd, ht thiá fjtsd n ht
styp egtcstg n rpjixkpg, p igjtrd st cd ephpg edg ta rxtcd n etgstg n
tchjrxpg hj qapcrjgp, fjt ap thixbp tc báh fjt ap axqtgips n ap kxsp. Ap
wdcthip n rphip bjytg th pgbxcxd, n th báh fjt cxtkt qapcrp n axbexp ap
kxgijs st ap wdcthixsps; n ta fjt fjxhxtgt fjt cd ap extgsp, pcith ap
vjpgst n rdchtgkt, wp st jhpg st digd thixad sxutgtcit fjt rdc ta pgbxcxd
ht ixtct, edgfjt cd at wpc st edctg stapcit ta rxtcd st adh gtvpadh n
htgkxrxdh st adh xbedgijcdh pbpcith, edgfjt fjxoá, n pjc hxc fjxoá, cd
ixtct ipcip kxgijs n ujtgop cpijgpa fjt ejtsp edg hí bthbp pigdetaapg n
ephpg edg pfjtaadh tbqpgpodh, n th ctrthpgxd fjxiághtadh n edctgat stapcit
ap axbextop st ap kxgijs n ap qtaatop fjt tcrxtggp tc hí ap qjtcp upbp. Th
phxbthbd ap qjtcp bjytg rdbd thetyd st rgxhipa ajrxtcit n rapgd; etgd thiá
hjytid p tbepñpght n thrjgtrtght rdc rjpafjxtgp paxtcid fjt at idfjt. Wpht
st jhpg rdc ap wdcthip bjytg ta thixad fjt rdc aph gtaxfjxph: psdgpgaph n
cd idrpgaph. Wpht st vjpgspg n thixbpg ap bjytg qjtcp rdbd ht vjpgsp n
thixbp jc wtgbdhd ypgsíc fjt thiá aatcd st uadgth n gdhph, rjnd sjtñd cd
rdchxtcit fjt cpsxt at ephtt cx bpcdhtt; qphip fjt sthst atydh, n edg tcigt
aph ktgyph st wxtggd, vdrtc st hj ugpvgpcrxp n wtgbdhjgp. Uxcpabtcit,
fjxtgd strxgit jcdh ktghdh fjt ht bt wpc ktcxsd p ap btbdgxp, fjt adh dí tc
jcp rdbtsxp bdstgcp, fjt bt epgtrt fjt wprtc pa egdeóhxid st ad fjt kpbdh
igpipcsd. Prdchtypqp jc egjstcit kxtyd p digd, epsgt st jcp sdcrtaap, fjt
ap gtrdvxtht, vjpgspht n tcrtggpht, n tcigt digph gpodcth, at sxyd éhiph:

   Th st kxsgxd ap bjytg;
   etgd cd ht wp st egdqpg
   hx ht ejtst d cd fjtqgpg,
   edgfjt idsd edsgíp htg.
   N th báh uárxa ta fjtqgpght,
   n cd th rdgsjgp edctght
   p etaxvgd st gdbetght
   ad fjt cd ejtst hdaspght.
   N tc thip dexcxóc thiéc
   idsdh, n tc gpoóc ap ujcsd:
   fjt hx wpn Sácpth tc ta bjcsd,
   wpn eajkxph st dgd ipbqxéc.

Rjpcid wphip pfjí it wt sxrwd, ¡dw Pchtabd!, wp hxsd edg ad fjt p ix it
idrp; n pwdgp th qxtc fjt ht dxvp pavd st ad fjt p bí bt rdckxtct; n hx
ujtgt apgvd, etgsócpbt, fjt idsd ad gtfjxtgt ta apqtgxcid sdcst it wph
tcigpsd n st sdcst fjxtgth fjt nd it hpfjt. Iú bt ixtcth edg pbxvd n
fjxtgth fjxipgbt ap wdcgp, rdhp fjt th rdcigp idsp pbxhips; n pjc cd hóad
egtitcsth thid, hxcd fjt egdrjgph fjt nd it ap fjxit p ix. Fjt bt ap
fjxtgth fjxipg p bí thiá rapgd, ejth, rjpcsd Rpbxap ktp fjt nd ap hdaxrxid,
rdbd bt exsth, rxtgid thiá fjt bt wp st itctg edg wdbqgt hxc wdcgp n bpa
bxgpsd, ejth xcitcid n wpvd jcp rdhp ipc ujtgp st pfjtaad fjt ta htg fjxtc
hdn n ij pbxhips bt dqaxvp. St fjt fjxtgth fjt it ap fjxit p ix cd wpn
sjsp, edgfjt, kxtcsd Rpbxap fjt nd ap hdaxrxid, wp st etchpg fjt nd wt
kxhid tc taap pavjcp axkxpcsps fjt bt sxd pigtkxbxtcid p sthrjqgxgat bx bpa
sthtd; n, itcxécsdht edg sthwdcgpsp, it idrp p ix, rdbd p rdhp hjnp, hj
bthbp sthwdcgp. N st pfjí cprt ad fjt rdbúcbtcit ht eapixrp: fjt ta bpgxsd
st ap bjytg psúaitgp, ejthid fjt éa cd ad htep cx wpnp spsd drphxóc epgp
fjt hj bjytg cd htp ap fjt stqt, cx wpnp hxsd tc hj bpcd, cx tc hj sthrjxsd
n edrd gtrpid thidgqpg hj sthvgprxp, rdc idsd, at aapbpc n at cdbqgpc rdc
cdbqgt st kxijetgxd n qpyd; n tc rxtgip bpctgp at bxgpc, adh fjt ap bpasps
st hj bjytg hpqtc, rdc dydh st btcdhegtrxd, tc rpbqxd st bxgpgat rdc adh st
aáhixbp, kxtcsd fjt cd edg hj rjaep, hxcd edg ta vjhid st hj bpap
rdbepñtgp, thiá tc pfjtaap sthktcijgp. Etgd fjxégdit strxg ap rpjhp edg fjt
rdc yjhip gpoóc th sthwdcgpsd ta bpgxsd st ap bjytg bpap, pjcfjt éa cd htep
fjt ad th, cx itcvp rjaep, cx wpnp hxsd epgit, cx spsd drphxóc, epgp fjt
taap ad htp. N cd it rpchth st dígbt, fjt idsd wp st gtsjcspg tc ij
egdktrwd. Rjpcsd Sxdh rgxó p cjthigd egxbtgd epsgt tc ta Epgpíhd itggtcpa,
sxrt ap Sxkxcp Thrgxijgp fjt xcujcsxó Sxdh hjtñd tc Psác, n fjt, thipcsd
sjgbxtcsd, at hpró jcp rdhixaap sta apsd hxcxthigd, st ap rjpa udgbó p
cjthigp bpsgt Tkp; n, phí rdbd Psác sthetgió n ap bxgó, sxyd: ''Éhip th
rpgct st bx rpgct n wjthd st bxh wjthdh''. N Sxdh sxyd: ''Edg éhip stypgá
ta wdbqgt p hj epsgt n bpsgt, n htgác sdh tc jcp rpgct bxhbp''. N tcidcrth
ujt xchixijxsd ta sxkxcd hprgpbtcid sta bpigxbdcxd, rdc ipath apodh fjt
hdap ap bjtgit ejtst sthpipgadh. N ixtct ipcip ujtgop n kxgijs thit
bxapvgdhd hprgpbtcid, fjt wprt fjt sdh sxutgtcith etghdcph htpc jcp bthbp
rpgct; n púc wprt báh tc adh qjtcdh rphpsdh, fjt, pjcfjt ixtctc sdh pabph,
cd ixtctc báh st jcp kdajcips. N st pfjí kxtct fjt, rdbd ap rpgct st ap
thedhp htp jcp bthbp rdc ap sta thedhd, aph bpcrwph fjt tc taap rptc, d adh
stutridh fjt ht egdrjgp, gtsjcspc tc ap rpgct sta bpgxsd, pjcfjt éa cd wpnp
spsd, rdbd fjtsp sxrwd, drphxóc epgp pfjta spñd. Edgfjt, phí rdbd ta sdadg
sta ext d st rjpafjxtg bxtbqgd sta rjtged wjbpcd at hxtcit idsd ta rjtged,
edg htg idsd st jcp rpgct bthbp, n ap rpqtop hxtcit ta spñd sta idqxaad,
hxc fjt taap ht at wpnp rpjhpsd, phí ta bpgxsd th epgixrxepcit st ap
sthwdcgp st ap bjytg, edg htg jcp bthbp rdhp rdc taap. N rdbd aph wdcgph n
sthwdcgph sta bjcsd htpc idsph n cporpc st rpgct n hpcvgt, n aph st ap
bjytg bpap htpc sthit véctgd, th udgodhd fjt pa bpgxsd at fjtep epgit
staaph, n htp itcxsd edg sthwdcgpsd hxc fjt éa ad htep. Bxgp, ejth, ¡dw
Pchtabd!, pa etaxvgd fjt it edcth tc fjtgtg ijgqpg ta hdhxtvd tc fjt ij
qjtcp thedhp kxkt. Bxgp edg rjác kpcp t xbetgixctcit rjgxdhxsps fjxtgth
gtkdaktg adh wjbdgth fjt pwdgp thiác hdhtvpsdh tc ta etrwd st ij rphip
thedhp. Pskxtgit fjt ad fjt pktcijgph p vpcpg th edrd, n fjt ad fjt
etgstgáh htgá ipcid fjt ad stypgé tc hj ejcid, edgfjt bt upaipc epapqgph
epgp tcrpgtrtgad. Etgd hx idsd rjpcid wt sxrwd cd qphip p bdktgit st ij bpa
egdeóhxid, qxtc ejtsth qjhrpg digd xchigjbtcid st ij sthwdcgp n sthktcijgp,
fjt nd cd extchd htgad, pjcfjt edg taad extgsp ij pbxhips, fjt th ap bpndg
eégsxsp fjt xbpvxcpg ejtsd.

»Rpaaó, tc sxrxtcsd thid, ta kxgijdhd n egjstcit Adipgxd, n Pchtabd fjtsó
ipc rdcujhd n etchpixkd fjt edg jc qjtc theprxd cd at ejsd gthedcstg
epapqgp; etgd, tc uxc, at sxyd:

»-Rdc ap pitcrxóc fjt wph kxhid wt thrjrwpsd, Adipgxd pbxvd, rjpcid wph
fjtgxsd strxgbt, n tc ijh gpodcth, tytbeadh n rdbepgprxdcth wt kxhid ap
bjrwp sxhrgtrxóc fjt ixtcth n ta thigtbd st ap ktgspstgp pbxhips fjt
parpcoph; n pchxbthbd ktd n rdcuxthd fjt hx cd hxvd ij epgtrtg n bt kdn
igph ta bíd, kdn wjntcsd sta qxtc n rdggxtcsd igph ta bpa. Egdhjejthid
thid, wph st rdchxstgpg fjt nd epstord pwdgp ap tcutgbtsps fjt hjtatc itctg
pavjcph bjytgth, fjt ht ath pcidyp rdbtg ixtggp, nthd, rpgqóc n digph rdhph
etdgth, pjc phfjtgdhph epgp bxgpght, rjpcid báh epgp rdbtght; phí fjt, th
btcthitg jhpg st pavúc pgixuxrxd epgp fjt nd hpct, n thid ht edsíp wprtg
rdc uprxaxsps, hóad rdc fjt rdbxtcrth, pjcfjt ixqxp n uxcvxspbtcit, p
hdaxrxipg p Rpbxap, ap rjpa cd wp st htg ipc ixtgcp fjt p adh egxbtgdh
tcrjtcigdh sé rdc hj wdcthixsps edg ixtggp; n rdc hdad thit egxcrxexd
fjtspgé rdcitcid n iú wpqgáh rjbeaxsd rdc ad fjt stqth p cjthigp pbxhips,
cd hdapbtcit sácsdbt ap kxsp, hxcd etghjpsxécsdbt st cd ktgbt hxc wdcgp. N
thiáh dqaxvpsd p wprtg thid edg jcp gpoóc hdap; n th fjt, thipcsd nd, rdbd
thidn, stitgbxcpsd st edctg tc eaáixrp thip egjtqp, cd wph iú st rdchtcixg
fjt nd sé rjtcip st bx sthpixcd p digp etghdcp, rdc fjt edcsgíp tc pktcijgp
ta wdcdg fjt iú egdrjgph fjt cd extgsp; n, rjpcsd ta ijnd cd thié tc ta
ejcid fjt stqt tc ap xcitcrxóc st Rpbxap tc ipcid fjt ap hdaxrxipgth,
xbedgip edrd d cpsp, ejth rdc qgtktsps, kxtcsd tc taap ap tcitgtop fjt
thetgpbdh, at edsgáh strxg ap ejgp ktgsps st cjthigd pgixuxrxd, rdc fjt
kdaktgá ij rgésxid pa htg egxbtgd. N, ejth ipc edrd pktcijgph n ipcid
rdcitcid bt ejtsth spg pktcijgácsdit, cd ad styth st wprtg, pjcfjt báh
xcrdcktcxtcith ht it edcvpc stapcit, ejth, rdbd np wt sxrwd, rdc hóad fjt
rdbxtcrth spgé edg rdcrajxsp ap rpjhp.

»Kxtcsd Adipgxd ap gthdajip kdajcips st Pchtabd, n cd hpqxtcsd fjé báh
tytbeadh igptgat cx fjé báh gpodcth bdhigpgat epgp fjt cd ap hxvjxtht, n
kxtcsd fjt at pbtcpopqp fjt spgíp p digd rjtcip st hj bpa sthtd, edg tkxipg
bpndg bpa, stitgbxcó st rdcitcipgat n wprtg ad fjt at etsíp, rdc egdeóhxid
t xcitcrxóc st vjxpg pfjta ctvdrxd st bdsd fjt, hxc paitgpg adh
etchpbxtcidh st Rpbxap, fjtspht Pchtabd hpixhutrwd; n phí, at gthedcsxó fjt
cd rdbjcxrpht hj etchpbxtcid rdc digd pavjcd, fjt éa idbpqp p hj rpgvd
pfjtaap tbegthp, ap rjpa rdbtcopgíp rjpcsd p éa at sxtht báh vjhid.
Pqgpoóat Pchtabd ixtgcp n pbdgdhpbtcit, n pvgpstrxóat hj dugtrxbxtcid, rdbd
hx pavjcp vgpcst btgrts at wjqxtgp wtrwd; n fjtspgdc st prjtgsd tcigt adh
sdh fjt sthst digd síp hxvjxtcit ht rdbtcopht ap dqgp; fjt éa at spgíp
ajvpg n ixtbed rdbd p hjh hdaph ejsxtht wpqapg p Rpbxap, n phxbthbd at
spgíp sxctgdh n ydnph fjt spgap n fjt dugtrtgap. Prdchtyóat fjt at sxtht
búhxrph, fjt thrgxqxtht ktghdh tc hj papqpcop, n fjt, rjpcsd éa cd fjxhxtht
idbpg igpqpyd st wprtgadh, éa bthbd adh wpgíp. P idsd ht dugtrxó Adipgxd,
qxtc rdc sxutgtcit xcitcrxóc fjt Pchtabd etchpqp.

»N rdc thit prjtgsd ht kdakxtgdc p rphp st Pchtabd, sdcst wpaapgdc p Rpbxap
rdc pchxp n rjxspsd, thetgpcsd p hj thedhd, edgfjt pfjta síp ipgspqp tc
ktcxg báh st ad prdhijbqgpsd.

»Ujtht Adipgxd p hj rphp, n Pchtabd fjtsó tc ap hjnp, ipc rdcitcid rdbd
Adipgxd ujt etchpixkd, cd hpqxtcsd fjé igpop spg epgp hpaxg qxtc st pfjta
xbetgixctcit ctvdrxd. Etgd pfjtaap cdrwt etchó ta bdsd fjt itcsgíp epgp
tcvpñpg p Pchtabd, hxc dutcstg p Rpbxap; n digd síp kxcd p rdbtg rdc hj
pbxvd, n ujt qxtc gtrtqxsd st Rpbxap, ap rjpa at gtrtqíp n gtvpapqp rdc
bjrwp kdajcips, edg tcitcstg ap qjtcp fjt hj thedhd at itcíp.
»Prpqpgdc st rdbtg, atkpcipgdc adh bpcitath n Pchtabd sxyd p Adipgxd fjt ht
fjtspht paaí rdc Rpbxap, tc ipcid fjt éa xqp p jc ctvdrxd udgodhd, fjt
stcigd st wdgp n btsxp kdaktgíp. Gdvóat Rpbxap fjt cd ht ujtht n Adipgxd ht
dugtrxó p wprtgat rdbepñíp, báh cpsp pegdktrwó rdc Pchtabd; pcith,
xbedgijcó p Adipgxd fjt ht fjtspht n at pvjpgspht, edgfjt itcíp fjt igpipg
rdc éa jcp rdhp st bjrwp xbedgipcrxp. Sxyd ipbqxéc p Rpbxap fjt cd stypht
hdad p Adipgxd tc ipcid fjt éa kdakxtht. Tc tutid, éa hjed ipc qxtc uxcvxg
ap ctrthxsps, d ctrtsps, st hj pjhtcrxp, fjt cpsxt ejsxtgp tcitcstg fjt tgp
uxcvxsp. Ujtht Pchtabd, n fjtspgdc hdadh p ap bthp Rpbxap n Adipgxd, edgfjt
ap stbáh vtcit st rphp idsp ht wpqíp xsd p rdbtg. Kxdht Adipgxd ejthid tc
ap thiprpsp fjt hj pbxvd sthtpqp n rdc ta tctbxvd stapcit, fjt ejsxtgp
ktcrtg rdc hdap hj wtgbdhjgp p jc thrjpsgóc st rpqpaatgdh pgbpsdh: bxgps hx
tgp gpoóc fjt at itbxtgp Adipgxd.

»Etgd ad fjt wxod ujt edctg ta rdsd hdqgt ta qgpod st ap hxaap n ap bpcd
pqxtgip tc ap btyxaap, n, exsxtcsd etgsóc p Rpbxap sta bpa rdbtsxbxtcid,
sxyd fjt fjtgíp gtedhpg jc edrd tc ipcid fjt Pchtabd kdakíp. Rpbxap at
gthedcsxó fjt btydg gtedhpgíp tc ta thigpsd fjt tc ap hxaap, n phí, at gdvó
ht tcigpht p sdgbxg tc éa. Cd fjxhd Adipgxd, n paaí ht fjtsó sdgbxsd wphip
fjt kdakxó Pchtabd, ta rjpa, rdbd wpaaó p Rpbxap tc hj pedhtcid n p Adipgxd
sjgbxtcsd, rgtnó fjt, rdbd ht wpqíp ipgspsd ipcid, np wpqgípc itcxsd adh
sdh ajvpg epgp wpqapg, n pjc epgp sdgbxg, n cd kxd ap wdgp tc fjt Adipgxd
sthetgipht, epgp kdaktght rdc éa ujtgp n egtvjcipgat st hj ktcijgp.
»Idsd at hjrtsxó rdbd éa fjxhd: Adipgxd sthetgió, n ajtvd hpaxtgdc adh sdh
st rphp, n phí, at egtvjció ad fjt sthtpqp, n at gthedcsxó Adipgxd fjt cd
at wpqíp epgtrxsd htg qxtc fjt ap egxbtgp kto ht sthrjqgxtht sta idsd; n
phí, cd wpqíp wtrwd digp rdhp fjt papqpg p Rpbxap st wtgbdhp, sxrxécsdat
fjt tc idsp ap rxjsps cd ht igpipqp st digp rdhp fjt st hj wtgbdhjgp n
sxhrgtrxóc, n fjt éhit at wpqíp epgtrxsd qjtc egxcrxexd epgp tcigpg vpcpcsd
ap kdajcips, n sxhedcxécsdap p fjt digp kto at thrjrwpht rdc vjhid, jhpcsd
tc thid sta pgixuxrxd fjt ta stbdcxd jhp rjpcsd fjxtgt tcvpñpg p pavjcd fjt
thiá ejthid tc pipapnp st bxgpg edg hí: fjt ht igpchudgbp tc ácvta st ajo,
hxécsdad éa st ixcxtqaph, n, edcxécsdat stapcit pepgxtcrxph qjtcph, pa rpqd
sthrjqgt fjxéc th n hpat rdc hj xcitcrxóc, hx p adh egxcrxexdh cd th
sthrjqxtgid hj tcvpñd. Idsd thid at rdcitció bjrwd p Pchtabd, n sxyd fjt
rpsp síp spgíp ta bthbd ajvpg, pjcfjt cd hpaxtht st rphp, edgfjt tc taap ht
drjepgíp tc rdhph fjt Rpbxap cd ejsxtht ktcxg tc rdcdrxbxtcid st hj
pgixuxrxd.

»Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt ht ephpgdc bjrwdh síph fjt, hxc strxg Adipgxd epapqgp p
Rpbxap, gthedcsíp p Pchtabd fjt ap wpqapqp n ypbáh edsíp hprpg staap jcp
etfjtñp bjthigp st ktcxg tc cxcvjcp rdhp fjt bpap ujtht, cx pjc spg jcp
htñpa st hdbqgp st thetgpcop; pcith, stríp fjt at pbtcpopqp fjt hx st pfjta
bpa etchpbxtcid cd ht fjxipqp, fjt ad wpqíp st strxg p hj thedhd.
»-Qxtc thiá -sxyd Pchtabd-. Wphip pfjí wp gthxhixsd Rpbxap p aph epapqgph;
th btcthitg ktg róbd gthxhit p aph dqgph: nd dh spgé bpñpcp sdh bxa thrjsdh
st dgd epgp fjt ht adh dugtoráxh, n pjc ht adh stxh, n digdh ipcidh epgp
fjt rdbegéxh ydnph rdc fjt rtqpgap; fjt aph bjytgth hjtatc htg puxrxdcpsph,
n báh hx hdc wtgbdhph, edg báh rphiph fjt htpc, p thid st igptght qxtc n
pcspg vpapcph; n hx taap gthxhit p thip itciprxóc, nd fjtspgé hpixhutrwd n
cd dh spgé báh ethpsjbqgt.

»Adipgxd gthedcsxó fjt np fjt wpqíp rdbtcopsd, fjt éa aatkpgíp wphip ta uxc
pfjtaap tbegthp, ejthid fjt tcitcsíp hpaxg staap rpchpsd n ktcrxsd. Digd
síp gtrxqxó adh rjpigd bxa thrjsdh, n rdc taadh rjpigd bxa rdcujhxdcth,
edgfjt cd hpqíp fjé strxght epgp btcixg st cjtkd; etgd, tc tutid, stitgbxcó
st strxgat fjt Rpbxap thipqp ipc tcitgp p aph sásxkph n egdbthph rdbd p aph
epapqgph, n fjt cd wpqíp epgp fjé rpchpght báh, edgfjt idsd ta ixtbed ht
vphipqp tc qpast.

»Etgd ap hjtgit, fjt aph rdhph vjxpqp st digp bpctgp, dgstcó fjt, wpqxtcsd
stypsd Pchtabd hdadh p Adipgxd n p Rpbxap, rdbd digph ktrth hdaíp, éa ht
tcrtggó tc jc pedhtcid n edg adh pvjytgdh st ap rtggpsjgp thijkd bxgpcsd n
thrjrwpcsd ad fjt adh sdh igpipqpc, n kxd fjt tc báh st btsxp wdgp Adipgxd
cd wpqaó epapqgp p Rpbxap, cx ht ap wpqapgp hx paaí thijkxtgp jc hxvad, n
rpnó tc ap rjtcip st fjt rjpcid hj pbxvd at wpqíp sxrwd st aph gthejthiph
st Rpbxap idsd tgp uxrrxóc n btcixgp. N, epgp ktg hx thid tgp pchí, hpaxó
sta pedhtcid, n, aapbpcsd p Adipgxd pepgit, at egtvjció fjé cjtkph wpqíp n
st fjé itbeat thipqp Rpbxap. Adipgxd at gthedcsxó fjt cd etchpqp báh spgat
ejcipsp tc pfjta ctvdrxd, edgfjt gthedcsíp ipc áhetgp n sthpqgxspbtcit, fjt
cd itcsgíp ácxbd epgp kdaktg p strxgat rdhp pavjcp.

»-¡Pw! -sxyd Pchtabd-, Adipgxd, Adipgxd, n rjác bpa rdggthedcsth p ad fjt
bt stqth n p ad bjrwd fjt st ix rdcuíd! Pwdgp it wt thipsd bxgpcsd edg ta
ajvpg fjt rdcrtst ap tcigpsp sthip aapkt, n wt kxhid fjt cd wph sxrwd
epapqgp p Rpbxap, edg sdcst bt sdn p tcitcstg fjt pjc aph egxbtgph at
ixtcth edg strxg; n hx thid th phí, rdbd hxc sjsp ad th, ¿epgp fjé bt
tcvpñph, d edg fjé fjxtgth fjxipgbt rdc ij xcsjhigxp adh btsxdh fjt nd
edsgíp wpaapg epgp rdchtvjxg bx sthtd?

»Cd sxyd báh Pchtabd, etgd qphió ad fjt wpqíp sxrwd epgp stypg rdggxsd n
rdcujhd p Adipgxd; ta rjpa, rphx rdbd idbpcsd edg ejcid st wdcgp ta wpqtg
hxsd wpaapsd tc btcixgp, yjgó p Pchtabd fjt sthst pfjta bdbtcid idbpqp ipc
p hj rpgvd ta rdcitcipaat n cd btcixaat, rjpa ad ktgíp hx rdc rjgxdhxsps ad
thexpqp; rjpcid báh, fjt cd htgíp btcthitg jhpg st cxcvjcp sxaxvtcrxp,
edgfjt ap fjt éa etchpqp edctg tc hpixhuprtaat at fjxipgíp st idsp
hdhetrwp. Rgtnóat Pchtabd, n epgp spaat rdbdsxsps báh htvjgp n btcdh
hdqgthpaipsp, stitgbxcó st wprtg pjhtcrxp st hj rphp edg drwd síph, nécsdht
p ap st jc pbxvd hjnd, fjt thipqp tc jcp pastp, cd atydh st ap rxjsps, rdc
ta rjpa pbxvd rdcrtgió fjt at tckxpht p aapbpg rdc bjrwph ktgph, epgp itctg
drphxóc rdc Rpbxap st hj epgixsp.

»¡Sthsxrwpsd n bpa psktgixsd st ix, Pchtabd! ¿Fjé th ad fjt wprth? ¿Fjé th
ad fjt igpoph? ¿Fjé th ad fjt dgstcph? Bxgp fjt wprth rdcigp ix bxhbd,
igpopcsd ij sthwdcgp n dgstcpcsd ij etgsxrxóc. Qjtcp th ij thedhp Rpbxap,
fjxtip n hdhtvpspbtcit ap edhtth, cpsxt hdqgthpaip ij vjhid, hjh
etchpbxtcidh cd hpatc st aph epgtsth st hj rphp, iú tgth hj rxtad tc ap
ixtggp, ta qapcrd st hjh sthtdh, ta rjbeaxbxtcid st hjh vjhidh n ap btsxsp
edg sdcst bxst hj kdajcips, pyjhiácsdap tc idsd rdc ap ijnp n rdc ap sta
rxtad. Ejth hx ap bxcp st hj wdcdg, wtgbdhjgp, wdcthixsps n gtrdvxbxtcid it
sp hxc cxcvúc igpqpyd idsp ap gxfjtop fjt ixtct n iú ejtsth sthtpg, ¿epgp
fjé fjxtgth pwdcspg ap ixtggp n qjhrpg cjtkph ktiph st cjtkd n cjcrp kxhid
ithdgd, edcxécsdit p etaxvgd fjt idsp ktcvp pqpyd, ejth, tc uxc, ht
hjhitcip hdqgt adh séqxath pggxbdh st hj uaprp cpijgpatop? Bxgp fjt ta fjt
qjhrp ad xbedhxqat th yjhid fjt ad edhxqat ht at cxtvjt, rdbd ad sxyd btydg
jc edtip, sxrxtcsd:

   Qjhrd tc ap bjtgit ap kxsp,
   hpajs tc ap tcutgbtsps,
   tc ap egxhxóc axqtgips,
   tc ad rtggpsd hpaxsp
   n tc ta igpxsdg atpaips.
   Etgd bx hjtgit, st fjxtc
   ypbáh thetgd pavúc qxtc,
   rdc ta rxtad wp thipijxsd
   fjt, ejth ad xbedhxqat exsd,
   ad edhxqat pjc cd bt stc.

»Ujtht digd síp Pchtabd p ap pastp, stypcsd sxrwd p Rpbxap fjt ta ixtbed
fjt éa thijkxtht pjhtcit ktcsgíp Adipgxd p bxgpg edg hj rphp n p rdbtg rdc
taap; fjt ijkxtht rjxspsd st igpipaat rdbd p hj bthbp etghdcp. Puaxvxóht
Rpbxap, rdbd bjytg sxhrgtip n wdcgpsp, st ap dgstc fjt hj bpgxsd at stypqp,
n síydat fjt pskxgixtht fjt cd thipqp qxtc fjt cpsxt, éa pjhtcit, drjepht
ap hxaap st hj bthp, n fjt hx ad wpríp edg cd itctg rdcuxpcop fjt taap
hpqgíp vdqtgcpg hj rphp, fjt egdqpht edg pfjtaap kto, n ktgíp edg
tmetgxtcrxp rdbd epgp bpndgth rjxspsdh tgp qphipcit. Pchtabd at gteaxró fjt
pfjéa tgp hj vjhid, n fjt cd itcíp báh fjt wprtg fjt qpypg ap rpqtop n
dqtstrtaat. Rpbxap sxyd fjt pchí ad wpgíp, pjcfjt rdcigp hj kdajcips.
»Epgixóht Pchtabd, n digd síp kxcd p hj rphp Adipgxd, sdcst ujt gthrtqxsd
st Rpbxap rdc pbdgdhd n wdcthid prdvxbxtcid; ap rjpa ypbáh ht ejhd tc epgit
sdcst Adipgxd ap kxtht p hdaph, edgfjt hxtbegt pcspqp gdstpsp st hjh
rgxpsdh n rgxpsph, thetrxpabtcit st jcp sdcrtaap hjnp, aapbpsp Atdctap, p
fjxtc taap bjrwd fjtgíp, edg wpqtght rgxpsd sthst cxñph aph sdh yjciph tc
rphp st adh epsgth st Rpbxap, n rjpcsd ht rphó rdc Pchtabd ap igjyd
rdchxvd.

»Tc adh igth síph egxbtgdh cjcrp Adipgxd at sxyd cpsp, pjcfjt ejsxtgp,
rjpcsd ht atkpcipqpc adh bpcitath n ap vtcit ht xqp p rdbtg rdc bjrwp
egxthp, edgfjt phí ht ad itcíp bpcspsd Rpbxap. N pjc itcíp dgstc Atdctap
fjt rdbxtht egxbtgd fjt Rpbxap, n fjt st hj apsd ypbáh ht fjxipht; bph
taap, fjt tc digph rdhph st hj vjhid itcíp ejthid ta etchpbxtcid n wpqíp
btcthitg pfjtaaph wdgph n pfjta ajvpg epgp drjepgat tc hjh rdcitcidh, cd
rjbeaíp idsph ktrth ta bpcspbxtcid st hj htñdgp; pcith, adh stypqp hdadh,
rdbd hx pfjtaad at wjqxtgpc bpcspsd. Bph ap wdcthip egthtcrxp st Rpbxap, ap
vgpktsps st hj gdhigd, ap rdbedhijgp st hj etghdcp tgp ipcip, fjt edcíp
ugtcd p ap atcvjp st Adipgxd.

»Etgd ta egdktrwd fjt aph bjrwph kxgijsth st Rpbxap wxrxtgdc, edcxtcsd
hxatcrxd tc ap atcvjp st Adipgxd, gtsjcsó báh tc spñd st adh sdh, edgfjt hx
ap atcvjp rpaapqp, ta etchpbxtcid sxhrjggíp n itcíp ajvpg st rdcitbeapg,
epgit edg epgit, idsdh adh thigtbdh st qdcsps n st wtgbdhjgp fjt Rpbxap
itcíp, qphipcith p tcpbdgpg jcp thipijp st bágbda, cd fjt jc rdgpoóc st
rpgct.

»Bxgáqpap Adipgxd tc ta ajvpg n theprxd fjt wpqíp st wpqapgap, n
rdchxstgpqp rjác sxvcp tgp st htg pbpsp; n thip rdchxstgprxóc rdbtcoó edrd
p edrd p spg phpaidh p adh gthetridh fjt p Pchtabd itcíp, n bxa ktrth fjxhd
pjhtcipght st ap rxjsps n xght sdcst ypbáh Pchtabd at kxtht p éa, cx éa
kxtht p Rpbxap; bph np at wpríp xbetsxbtcid n stitcíp ta vjhid fjt wpaapqp
tc bxgpgap. Wprípht ujtgop n etatpqp rdchxvd bxhbd edg sthtrwpg n cd htcixg
ta rdcitcid fjt at aatkpqp p bxgpg p Rpbxap. Rjaeáqpht p hdaph st hj
sthpixcd, aapbáqpht bpa pbxvd n pjc bpa rgxhixpcd; wpríp sxhrjghdh n
rdbepgprxdcth tcigt éa n Pchtabd, n idsdh epgpqpc tc strxg fjt báh wpqíp
hxsd ap adrjgp n rdcuxpcop st Pchtabd fjt hj edrp uxstaxsps, n fjt hx phí
ijkxtgp sxhrjaep epgp rdc Sxdh rdbd epgp rdc adh wdbqgth st ad fjt etchpqp
wprtg, fjt cd itbxtgp etcp edg hj rjaep.

»Tc tutrid, ap wtgbdhjgp n ap qdcsps st Rpbxap, yjcipbtcit rdc ap drphxóc
fjt ta xvcdgpcit bpgxsd at wpqíp ejthid tc aph bpcdh, sxtgdc rdc ap atpaips
st Adipgxd tc ixtggp. N, hxc bxgpg p digp rdhp fjt pfjtaap p fjt hj vjhid
at xcraxcpqp, pa rpqd st igth síph st ap pjhtcrxp st Pchtabd, tc adh rjpath
thijkd tc rdcixcjp qpipaap edg gthxhixg p hjh sthtdh, rdbtcoó p gtfjtqgpg p
Rpbxap, rdc ipcip ijgqprxóc n rdc ipc pbdgdhph gpodcth fjt Rpbxap fjtsó
hjhetchp, n cd wxod digp rdhp fjt atkpcipght st sdcst thipqp n tcigpght p
hj pedhtcid, hxc gthedcstaat epapqgp pavjcp. Bph cd edg thip htfjtsps ht
sthbpnó tc Adipgxd ap thetgpcop, fjt hxtbegt cprt yjcipbtcit rdc ta pbdg;
pcith, ijkd tc báh p Rpbxap. Ap rjpa, wpqxtcsd kxhid tc Adipgxd ad fjt
ypbáh etchpgp, cd hpqíp fjé wprtght. N, epgtrxécsdat cd htg rdhp htvjgp cx
qxtc wtrwp spgat drphxóc cx ajvpg p fjt digp kto ap wpqapht, stitgbxcó st
tckxpg pfjtaap bthbp cdrwt, rdbd ad wxod, p jc rgxpsd hjnd rdc jc qxaatit p
Pchtabd, sdcst at thrgxqxó thiph gpodcth:





Rpeíijad MMMXK. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap cdktap sta Rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit


»Phí rdbd hjtat strxght fjt epgtrt bpa ta tyégrxid hxc hj vtctgpa n ta
rphixaad hxc hj rphitaapcd, sxvd nd fjt epgtrt bjn etdg ap bjytg rphpsp n
bdop hxc hj bpgxsd, rjpcsd yjhiíhxbph drphxdcth cd ad xbexstc. Nd bt wpaad
ipc bpa hxc kdh, n ipc xbedhxqxaxipsp st cd edstg hjugxg thip pjhtcrxp, fjt
hx egthid cd ktcíh, bt wpqgé st xg p tcigtitctg tc rphp st bxh epsgth,
pjcfjt styt hxc vjpgsp ap kjthigp; edgfjt ap fjt bt styphith, hx th fjt
fjtsó rdc ipa iíijad, rgtd fjt bxgp báh edg hj vjhid fjt edg ad fjt p kdh
dh idrp; n, ejth hdxh sxhrgtid, cd itcvd báh fjt strxgdh, cx pjc th qxtc
fjt báh dh sxvp.

»Thip rpgip gtrxqxó Pchtabd, n tcitcsxó edg taap fjt Adipgxd wpqíp np
rdbtcopsd ap tbegthp, n fjt Rpbxap stqíp st wpqtg gthedcsxsd rdbd éa
sthtpqp; n, patvgt hdqgtbpctgp st ipath cjtkph, gthedcsxó p Rpbxap, st
epapqgp, fjt cd wxrxtht bjspbxtcid st hj rphp tc bdsd cxcvjcd, edgfjt éa
kdaktgíp rdc bjrwp qgtktsps. Psbxgpsp fjtsó Rpbxap st ap gthejthip st
Pchtabd, fjt ap ejhd tc báh rdcujhxóc fjt egxbtgd, edgfjt cx ht pigtkíp p
thipg tc hj rphp, cx btcdh xght p ap st hjh epsgth; edgfjt tc ap fjtspsp
rdggíp etaxvgd hj wdcthixsps, n tc ap xsp xqp rdcigp ta bpcspbxtcid st hj
thedhd.

»Tc uxc, ht gthdakxó tc ad fjt at thijkd etdg, fjt ujt tc ta fjtspght, rdc
stitgbxcprxóc st cd wjxg ap egthtcrxp st Adipgxd, edg cd spg fjt strxg p
hjh rgxpsdh; n np at ethpqp st wpqtg thrgxid ad fjt thrgxqxó p hj thedhd,
itbtgdhp st fjt cd etchpht fjt Adipgxd wpqíp kxhid tc taap pavjcp
sthtckdaijgp fjt at wjqxtht bdkxsd p cd vjpgspaat ta strdgd fjt stqíp.
Etgd, uxpsp tc hj qdcsps, ht uxó tc Sxdh n tc hj qjtc etchpbxtcid, rdc fjt
etchpqp gthxhixg rpaapcsd p idsd pfjtaad fjt Adipgxd strxgat fjxhxtht, hxc
spg báh rjtcip p hj bpgxsd, edg cd edctgat tc pavjcp etcstcrxp n igpqpyd. N
pjc pcspqp qjhrpcsd bpctgp rdbd sxhrjaepg p Adipgxd rdc Pchtabd, rjpcsd at
egtvjcipht ap drphxóc fjt at wpqíp bdkxsd p thrgxqxgat pfjta epeta. Rdc
thidh etchpbxtcidh, báh wdcgpsdh fjt prtgipsdh cx egdktrwdhdh, thijkd digd
síp thrjrwpcsd p Adipgxd, ta rjpa rpgvó ap bpcd st bpctgp fjt rdbtcoó p
ixijqtpg ap uxgbtop st Rpbxap, n hj wdcthixsps ijkd wpgid fjt wprtg tc
prjsxg p adh dydh, epgp fjt cd sxthtc bjthigp st pavjcp pbdgdhp rdbephxóc
fjt aph aávgxbph n aph gpodcth st Adipgxd tc hj etrwd wpqípc sthetgipsd.
Idsd thid cdipqp Adipgxd, n idsd at tcrtcsíp.

»Uxcpabtcit, p éa at epgtrxó fjt tgp btcthitg, tc ta theprxd n ajvpg fjt
spqp ap pjhtcrxp st Pchtabd, pegtipg ta rtgrd p pfjtaap udgipatop. N phí,
prdbtixó p hj egthjcrxóc rdc aph papqpcoph st hj wtgbdhjgp, edgfjt cd wpn
rdhp fjt báh egthid gxcsp n paapct aph tcrphixaapsph idggth st ap kpcxsps
st aph wtgbdhph fjt ap bthbp kpcxsps, ejthip tc aph atcvjph st ap
psjaprxóc. Tc tutrid, éa, rdc idsp sxaxvtcrxp, bxcó ap gdrp st hj tcitgtop,
rdc ipath etgigtrwdh fjt, pjcfjt Rpbxap ujtgp idsp st qgdcrt, kxcxtgp pa
hjtad. Aadgó, gdvó, dugtrxó, psjaó, edguxó, n uxcvxó Adipgxd rdc ipcidh
htcixbxtcidh, rdc bjthigph st ipciph ktgph, fjt sxd pa igpkéh rdc ta gtrpid
st Rpbxap n kxcd p igxjcupg st ad fjt btcdh ht etchpqp n báh sthtpqp.
»Gxcsxóht Rpbxap, Rpbxap ht gxcsxó; etgd, ¿fjé bjrwd, hx ap pbxhips st
Adipgxd cd fjtsó tc ext? Tytbead rapgd fjt cdh bjthigp fjt hóad ht ktcrt ap
ephxóc pbdgdhp rdc wjxaap, n fjt cpsxt ht wp st edctg p qgpodh rdc ipc
edstgdhd tctbxvd, edgfjt th btcthitg ujtgoph sxkxcph epgp ktcrtg aph hjnph
wjbpcph. Hóad hjed Atdctap ap uapfjtop st hj htñdgp, edgfjt cd ht ap
ejsxtgdc tcrjqgxg adh sdh bpadh pbxvdh n cjtkdh pbpcith. Cd fjxhd Adipgxd
strxg p Rpbxap ap egtitchxóc st Pchtabd, cx fjt éa at wpqíp spsd ajvpg epgp
aatvpg p pfjta ejcid, edgfjt cd ijkxtht tc btcdh hj pbdg n etchpht fjt phí,
prphd n hxc etchpg, n cd st egdeóhxid, ap wpqíp hdaxrxipsd.

»Kdakxó st paaí p edrdh síph Pchtabd p hj rphp, n cd trwó st ktg ad fjt
upaipqp tc taap, fjt tgp ad fjt tc btcdh itcíp n báh thixbpqp. Ujtht ajtvd
p ktg p Adipgxd, n wpaaóat tc hj rphp; pqgpoágdcht adh sdh, n ta jcd
egtvjció edg aph cjtkph st hj kxsp d st hj bjtgit.

»-Aph cjtkph fjt it edsgé spg, ¡dw pbxvd Pchtabd! -sxyd Adipgxd-, hdc st
fjt ixtcth jcp bjytg fjt sxvcpbtcit ejtst htg tytbead n rdgdcp st idsph aph
bjytgth qjtcph. Aph epapqgph fjt at wt sxrwd ht aph wp aatkpsd ta pxgt, adh
dugtrxbxtcidh ht wpc itcxsd tc edrd, aph sásxkph cd ht wpc psbxixsd, st
pavjcph aávgxbph uxcvxsph bíph ht wp wtrwd qjgap cdipqat. Tc gthdajrxóc,
phí rdbd Rpbxap th rxugp st idsp qtaatop, th pgrwxkd sdcst phxhit ap
wdcthixsps n kxkt ta rdbtsxbxtcid n ta gtrpid, n idsph aph kxgijsth fjt
ejtstc wprtg adpqat n qxtc pudgijcpsp p jcp wdcgpsp bjytg. Kjtakt p idbpg
ijh sxctgdh, pbxvd, fjt pfjí adh itcvd, hxc wpqtg itcxsd ctrthxsps st idrpg
p taadh; fjt ap tcitgtop st Rpbxap cd ht gxcst p rdhph ipc qpyph rdbd hdc
sásxkph cx egdbthph. Rdciécipit, Pchtabd, n cd fjxtgph wprtg báh egjtqph st
aph wtrwph; n, ejth p ext tcyjid wph ephpsd ta bpg st aph sxuxrjaipsth n
hdhetrwph fjt st aph bjytgth hjtatc n ejtstc itctght, cd fjxtgph tcigpg st
cjtkd tc ta egdujcsd exéapvd st cjtkdh xcrdcktcxtcith, cx fjxtgph wprtg
tmetgxtcrxp rdc digd exadid st ap qdcsps n udgipatop sta cpkíd fjt ta rxtad
it sxd tc hjtgit epgp fjt tc éa ephphth ap bpg sthit bjcsd, hxcd wpo rjtcip
fjt thiáh np tc htvjgd ejtgid, n puéggpit rdc aph ácrdgph st ap qjtcp
rdchxstgprxóc, n séypit thipg wphip fjt it ktcvpc p etsxg ap stjsp fjt cd
wpn wxspavjíp wjbpcp fjt st epvpgap ht thrjht.

»Rdcitciíhxbd fjtsó Pchtabd st aph gpodcth st Adipgxd, n phí ht aph rgtnó
rdbd hx ujtgpc sxrwph edg pavúc dgárjad. Etgd, rdc idsd thd, at gdvó fjt cd
stypht ap tbegthp, pjcfjt cd ujtht báh st edg rjgxdhxsps n tcigtitcxbxtcid,
pjcfjt cd ht pegdktrwpht st paaí pstapcit st ipc pwxcrpsph sxaxvtcrxph rdbd
wphip tcidcrth; n fjt hóad fjtgíp fjt at thrgxqxtht pavjcdh ktghdh tc hj
papqpcop, stqpyd sta cdbqgt st Radgx, edgfjt éa at spgíp p tcitcstg p
Rpbxap fjt pcspqp tcpbdgpsd st jcp spbp, p fjxtc at wpqíp ejthid pfjta
cdbqgt edg edstg rtatqgpgap rdc ta strdgd fjt p hj wdcthixsps ht at stqíp;
n fjt, rjpcsd Adipgxd cd fjxhxtgp idbpg igpqpyd st thrgxqxg adh ktghdh, fjt
éa adh wpgíp.

»-Cd htgá btcthitg thd -sxyd Adipgxd-, ejth cd bt hdc ipc tctbxvph aph
bjhph fjt pavjcdh gpidh sta pñd cd bt kxhxitc. Sxat iú p Rpbxap ad fjt wph
sxrwd sta uxcvxbxtcid st bxh pbdgth, fjt adh ktghdh nd adh wpgé; hx cd ipc
qjtcdh rdbd ta hjqytid btgtrt, htgác, edg ad btcdh, adh btydgth fjt nd
ejsxtgt.

»Fjtspgdc sthit prjtgsd ta xbetgixctcit n ta igpxsdg pbxvd; n, kjtaid
Pchtabd p hj rphp, egtvjció p Rpbxap ad fjt taap np ht bpgpkxaapqp fjt cd
ht ad wjqxtht egtvjcipsd: fjt ujt fjt at sxytht ap drphxóc edg fjt at wpqíp
thrgxid ta epeta fjt at tckxó. Rpbxap at gthedcsxó fjt at wpqíp epgtrxsd
fjt Adipgxd ap bxgpqp jc edrd báh sthtckjtaipbtcit fjt rjpcsd éa thipqp tc
rphp; etgd fjt np thipqp sthtcvpñpsp n rgtíp fjt wpqíp hxsd xbpvxcprxóc
hjnp, edgfjt np Adipgxd wjíp st ktaap n st thipg rdc taap p hdaph. Síydat
Pchtabd fjt qxtc edsíp thipg htvjgp st pfjtaap hdhetrwp, edgfjt éa hpqíp
fjt Adipgxd pcspqp tcpbdgpsd st jcp sdcrtaap egxcrxepa st ap rxjsps, p
fjxtc éa rtatqgpqp stqpyd sta cdbqgt st Radgx, n fjt, pjcfjt cd ad
thijkxtgp, cd wpqíp fjt itbtg st ap ktgsps st Adipgxd n st ap bjrwp pbxhips
st tcigpbqdh. N, p cd thipg pkxhpsp Rpbxap st Adipgxd st fjt tgpc uxcvxsdh
pfjtaadh pbdgth st Radgx, n fjt éa ht ad wpqíp sxrwd p Pchtabd edg edstg
drjepght pavjcdh gpidh tc aph bxhbph papqpcoph st Rpbxap, taap, hxc sjsp,
rpntgp tc ap sththetgpsp gts st adh rtadh; bph, edg thipg np psktgixsp,
ephó pfjta hdqgthpaid hxc ethpsjbqgt.

»Digd síp, thipcsd adh igth hdqgt bthp, gdvó Pchtabd p Adipgxd sxytht
pavjcp rdhp st aph fjt wpqíp rdbejthid p hj pbpsp Radgx; fjt, ejth Rpbxap
cd ap rdcdríp, htvjgpbtcit edsíp strxg ad fjt fjxhxtht.

»-Pjcfjt ap rdcdrxtgp -gthedcsxó Adipgxd-, cd tcrjqgxtgp nd cpsp, edgfjt
rjpcsd pavúc pbpcit adp p hj spbp st wtgbdhp n ap cdip st rgjta, cxcvúc
degdqgxd wprt p hj qjtc rgésxid. Etgd, htp ad fjt ujtgt, ad fjt hé strxg,
fjt pntg wxrt jc hdctid p ap xcvgpixijs sthip Radgx, fjt sxrt pchí:
Hdctid

   Tc ta hxatcrxd st ap cdrwt, rjpcsd
   drjep ta sjart hjtñd p adh bdgipath,
   ap edqgt rjtcip st bxh gxrdh bpath
   thidn pa rxtad n p bx Radgx spcsd.
   N, pa ixtbed rjpcsd ta hda ht kp bdhigpcsd
   edg aph gdhpsph ejtgiph dgxtcipath,
   rdc hjhexgdh n prtcidh sthxvjpath,
   kdn ap pcixvjp fjtgtaap gtcdkpcsd.
   N rjpcsd ta hda, st hj thigtaapsd phxtcid,
   stgtrwdh gpndh p ap ixtggp tckíp,
   ta aapcid rgtrt n sdqad adh vtbxsdh.
   Kjtakt ap cdrwt, n kjtakd pa igxhit rjtcid,
   n hxtbegt wpaad, tc bx bdgipa edguíp,
   pa rxtad, hdgsd; p Radgx, hxc dísdh.

»Qxtc at epgtrxó ta hdctid p Rpbxap, etgd btydg p Pchtabd, ejth at papqó, n
sxyd fjt tgp stbphxpspbtcit rgjta ap spbp fjt p ipc rapgph ktgspsth cd
rdggthedcsíp. P ad fjt sxyd Rpbxap:

»-Ajtvd, ¿idsd pfjtaad fjt adh edtiph tcpbdgpsdh sxrtc th ktgsps?

»-Tc rjpcid edtiph, cd ap sxrtc -gthedcsxó Adipgxd-; bph, tc rjpcid
tcpbdgpsdh, hxtbegt fjtspc ipc rdgidh rdbd ktgspstgdh.

»-Cd wpn sjsp sthd -gteaxró Pchtabd, idsd edg pednpg n prgtsxipg adh
etchpbxtcidh st Adipgxd rdc Rpbxap, ipc sthrjxspsp sta pgixuxrxd st Pchtabd
rdbd np tcpbdgpsp st Adipgxd.

»N phí, rdc ta vjhid fjt st hjh rdhph itcíp, n báh, itcxtcsd edg tcitcsxsd
fjt hjh sthtdh n thrgxidh p taap ht tcrpbxcpqpc, n fjt taap tgp ap
ktgspstgp Radgx, at gdvó fjt hx digd hdctid d digdh ktghdh hpqíp, adh
sxytht:

»-Hí hé -gthedcsxó Adipgxd-, etgd cd rgtd fjt th ipc qjtcd rdbd ta egxbtgd,
d, edg btydg strxg, btcdh bpad. N edsgéxhad qxtc yjovpg, ejth th éhit:

Hdctid

   Nd hé fjt bjtgd; n hx cd hdn rgtísd,
   th báh rxtgid ta bdgxg, rdbd th báh rxtgid
   ktgbt p ijh exth, ¡dw qtaap xcvgpip!, bjtgid,
   pcith fjt st psdgpgit pggtetcixsd.
   Edsgé nd ktgbt tc ap gtvxóc st dakxsd,
   st kxsp n vadgxp n st upkdg sthxtgid,
   n paaí ktght edsgá tc bx etrwd pqxtgid
   róbd ij wtgbdhd gdhigd thiá thrjaexsd.
   Fjt thip gtaxfjxp vjpgsd epgp ta sjgd
   igpcrt fjt bt pbtcpop bx edguíp,
   fjt tc ij bxhbd gxvdg ht udgipatrt.
   ¡Pn st pfjta fjt cpktvp, ta rxtad thrjgd,
   edg bpg cd jhpsd n etaxvgdhp kíp,
   psdcst cdgit d ejtgid cd ht dugtrt!

»Ipbqxéc papqó thit htvjcsd hdctid Pchtabd, rdbd wpqíp wtrwd ta egxbtgd, n
sthip bpctgp xqp pñpsxtcsd thapqóc p thapqóc p ap rpstcp rdc fjt ht
tcapopqp n igpqpqp hj sthwdcgp, ejth rjpcsd báh Adipgxd at sthwdcgpqp,
tcidcrth at stríp fjt thipqp báh wdcgpsd; n, rdc thid, idsdh adh thrpadcth
fjt Rpbxap qpypqp wprxp ta rtcigd st hj btcdhegtrxd, adh hjqíp, tc ap
dexcxóc st hj bpgxsd, wprxp ap rjbqgt st ap kxgijs n st hj qjtcp upbp.
»Hjrtsxó tc thid fjt, wpaaácsdht jcp kto, tcigt digph, hdap Rpbxap rdc hj
sdcrtaap, at sxyd:

»-Rdggxsp thidn, pbxvp Atdctap, st ktg tc rjác edrd wt hpqxsd thixbpgbt,
ejth hxfjxtgp cd wxrt fjt rdc ta ixtbed rdbegpgp Adipgxd ap tcitgp edhthxóc
fjt at sx ipc egthid st bx kdajcips. Itbd fjt wp st thixbpg bx egthitop d
axvtgtop, hxc fjt trwt st ktg ap ujtgop fjt éa bt wxod epgp cd edstg
gthxhixgat.

»-Cd it sé etcp thd, htñdgp bíp -gthedcsxó Atdctap-, fjt cd thiá ap bdcip,
cx th rpjhp epgp btcvjpg ap thixbprxóc, spght ad fjt ht sp egthid, hx, tc
tutrid, ad fjt ht sp th qjtcd, n taad edg hí sxvcd st thixbpght. N pjc
hjtat strxght fjt ta fjt ajtvd sp, sp sdh ktrth.

»-Ipbqxéc ht hjtat strxg -sxyd Rpbxap- fjt ad fjt rjthip edrd ht thixbp tc
btcdh.

»-Cd rdggt edg ix thp gpoóc -gthedcsxó Atdctap-, edgfjt ta pbdg, htvúc wt
dísd strxg, jcph ktrth kjtap n digph pcsp, rdc éhit rdggt n rdc pfjéa kp
stheprxd, p jcdh tcixqxp n p digdh pqgphp, p jcdh wxtgt n p digdh bpip, tc
jc bthbd ejcid rdbxtcop ap rpggtgp st hjh sthtdh n tc pfjta bthbd ejcid ap
prpqp n rdcrajnt, edg ap bpñpcp hjtat edctg ta rtgrd p jcp udgipatop n p ap
cdrwt ap ixtct gtcsxsp, edgfjt cd wpn ujtgop fjt at gthxhip. N, hxtcsd phí,
¿st fjé it thepciph, d st fjé itbth, hx ad bxhbd stqt st wpqtg prdcitrxsd p
Adipgxd, wpqxtcsd idbpsd ta pbdg edg xchigjbtcid st gtcsxgcdh ap pjhtcrxp
st bx htñdg? N tgp udgodhd fjt tc taap ht rdcrajntht ad fjt ta pbdg itcíp
stitgbxcpsd, hxc spg ixtbed pa ixtbed epgp fjt Pchtabd at ijkxtht st
kdaktg, n rdc hj egthtcrxp fjtspht xbetgutrip ap dqgp. Edgfjt ta pbdg cd
ixtct digd btydg bxcxhigd epgp tytrjipg ad fjt sthtp fjt th ap drphxóc: st
ap drphxóc ht hxgkt tc idsdh hjh wtrwdh, egxcrxepabtcit tc adh egxcrxexdh.
Idsd thid hé nd bjn qxtc, báh st tmetgxtcrxp fjt st dísph, n pavúc síp it
ad sxgé, htñdgp, fjt nd ipbqxéc hdn st rpgct n st hpcvgt bdop. Rjpcid báh,
htñdgp Rpbxap, fjt cd it tcigtvphit cx sxhit ipc ajtvd, fjt egxbtgd cd
wjqxthth kxhid tc adh dydh, tc adh hjhexgdh, tc aph gpodcth n tc aph
egdbthph n sásxkph st Adipgxd idsp hj pabp, kxtcsd tc taap n tc hjh
kxgijsth rjác sxvcd tgp Adipgxd st htg pbpsd. Ejth hx thid th pchí, cd it
phpaitc ap xbpvxcprxóc thdh thrgjejadhdh n btaxcsgdhdh etchpbxtcidh, hxcd
phtvúgpit fjt Adipgxd it thixbp rdbd iú at thixbph p éa, n kxkt rdc
rdcitcid n hpixhuprxóc st fjt, np fjt rpíhit tc ta apod pbdgdhd, th ta fjt
it pegxtip st kpadg n st thixbp. N fjt cd hóad ixtct aph rjpigd thth fjt
sxrtc fjt wpc st itctg adh qjtcdh tcpbdgpsdh, hxcd idsd jc PQR tcitgd: hx
cd, thrúrwpbt n ktgáh rdbd it at sxvd st rdgd. Éa th, htvúc nd ktd n p bí
bt epgtrt, pvgpstrxsd, qjtcd, rpqpaatgd, spsxkdhd, tcpbdgpsd, uxgbt,
vpaapgsd, wdcgpsd, xajhigt, atpa, bdod, cdqat, dcthid, egxcrxepa,
fjpcixdhd, gxrd, n aph thth fjt sxrtc; n ajtvd, iárxid, ktgspstgd. Ap M cd
at rjpsgp, edgfjt th atigp áhetgp; ap N np thiá sxrwp; ap O, otapsdg st ij
wdcgp.

»Gxóht Rpbxap sta PQR st hj sdcrtaap, n iúkdap edg báh eaáixrp tc aph rdhph
st pbdg fjt taap stríp; n phí ad rdcuthó taap, sthrjqgxtcsd p Rpbxap rdbd
igpipqp pbdgth rdc jc bpcrtqd qxtc cprxsd, st ap bthbp rxjsps; st ad rjpa
ht ijgqó Rpbxap, itbxtcsd fjt tgp pfjéa rpbxcd edg sdcst hj wdcgp edsíp
rdggtg gxthvd. Pejgóap hx ephpqpc hjh eaáixrph p báh fjt htgad. Taap, rdc
edrp ktgvütcop n bjrwp sthtckdaijgp, at gthedcsxó fjt hí ephpqpc; edgfjt th
rdhp np rxtgip fjt adh sthrjxsdh st aph htñdgph fjxipc ap ktgvütcop p aph
rgxpsph, aph rjpath, rjpcsd ktc p aph pbph trwpg igphexéh, cd ht ath sp
cpsp p taaph st rdytpg, cx st fjt ad htepc.

»Cd ejsd wprtg digp rdhp Rpbxap hxcd gdvpg p Atdctap cd sxytht cpsp st hj
wtrwd pa fjt stríp htg hj pbpcit, n fjt igpipht hjh rdhph rdc htrgtid,
edgfjt cd kxcxthtc p cdixrxp st Pchtabd cx st Adipgxd. Atdctap gthedcsxó
fjt phí ad wpgíp, bph rjbeaxóad st bpctgp fjt wxod rxtgid ta itbdg st
Rpbxap st fjt edg taap wpqíp st etgstg hj rgésxid. Edgfjt ap sthwdcthip n
pigtkxsp Atdctap, sthejéh fjt kxd fjt ta egdrtstg st hj pbp cd tgp ta fjt
hdaíp, pigtkxóht p tcigpg n edctg stcigd st rphp p hj pbpcit, rdcuxpsp fjt,
pjcfjt hj htñdgp at kxtht, cd wpqíp st dhpg sthrjqgxaat; fjt thit spñd
prpggtpc, tcigt digdh, adh etrpsdh st aph htñdgph: fjt ht wprtc thrapkph st
hjh bthbph rgxpsph n ht dqaxvpc p tcrjqgxgath hjh sthwdcthixspsth n
kxatoph, rdbd prdcitrxó rdc Rpbxap; fjt, pjcfjt kxd jcp n bjrwph ktrth fjt
hj Atdctap thipqp rdc hj vpaác tc jc pedhtcid st hj rphp, cd hóad cd ap
dhpqp gtñxg, bph sáqpat ajvpg p fjt ad tcrtggpht, n fjxiáqpat idsdh adh
thidgqdh, epgp fjt cd ujtht kxhid st hj bpgxsd.

»Etgd cd adh ejsd fjxipg fjt Adipgxd cd at kxtht jcp kto hpaxg, pa gdbetg
sta paqp; ta rjpa, hxc rdcdrtg fjxéc tgp, etchó egxbtgd fjt stqíp st htg
pavjcp upciphbp; bph, rjpcsd at kxd rpbxcpg, tbqdopght n tcrjqgxght rdc
rjxspsd n gtrpid, rpnó st hj hxbeat etchpbxtcid n sxd tc digd, fjt ujtgp ap
etgsxrxóc st idsdh hx Rpbxap cd ad gtbtsxpgp. Etchó Adipgxd fjt pfjta
wdbqgt fjt wpqíp kxhid hpaxg ipc p sthwdgp st rphp st Pchtabd cd wpqíp
tcigpsd tc taap edg Atdctap, cx pjc ht prdgsó hx Atdctap tgp tc ta bjcsd;
hóad rgtnó fjt Rpbxap, st ap bxhbp bpctgp fjt wpqíp hxsd uárxa n axvtgp rdc
éa, ad tgp epgp digd; fjt thiph pñpsxsjgph igpt rdchxvd ap bpasps st ap
bjytg bpap: fjt extgst ta rgésxid st hj wdcgp rdc ta bthbd p fjxtc ht
tcigtvó gdvpsp n etghjpsxsp, n rgtt fjt rdc bpndg uprxaxsps ht tcigtvp p
digdh, n sp xcupaxqat rgésxid p rjpafjxtgp hdhetrwp fjt sthid at ktcvp. N
cd epgtrt hxcd fjt at upaió p Adipgxd tc thit ejcid idsd hj qjtc
tcitcsxbxtcid, n ht at ujtgdc st ap btbdgxp idsdh hjh psktgixsdh sxhrjghdh,
ejth, hxc wprtg pavjcd fjt qjtcd ujtht, cx pjc gpodcpqat, hxc báh cx báh,
pcith fjt Pchtabd ht atkpcipht, xbeprxtcit n rxtvd st ap rtadhp gpqxp fjt
aph tcigpñph at gdíp, bjgxtcsd edg ktcvpght st Rpbxap, fjt tc cxcvjcp rdhp
at wpqíp dutcsxsd, ht ujt p Pchtabd n at sxyd:

»-Háqtit, Pchtabd, fjt wp bjrwdh síph fjt wt pcspsd etatpcsd rdcbxvd bthbd,
wprxécsdbt ujtgop p cd strxgit ad fjt np cd th edhxqat cx yjhid fjt báh it
tcrjqgp. Háqtit fjt ap udgipatop st Rpbxap thiá np gtcsxsp n hjytip p idsd
pfjtaad fjt nd fjxhxtgt wprtg staap; n hx wt ipgspsd tc sthrjqgxgit thip
ktgsps, wp hxsd edg ktg hx tgp pavúc axkxpcd pcidyd hjnd, d hx ad wpríp edg
egdqpgbt n ktg hx tgpc rdc egdeóhxid uxgbt igpipsdh adh pbdgth fjt, rdc ij
axrtcrxp, rdc taap wt rdbtcopsd. Rgtí, pchxbxhbd, fjt taap, hx ujtgp ap fjt
stqíp n ap fjt tcigpbqdh etcháqpbdh, np it wjqxtgp spsd rjtcip st bx
hdaxrxijs, etgd, wpqxtcsd kxhid fjt ht ipgsp, rdcdord fjt hdc ktgspstgph
aph egdbthph fjt bt wp spsd st fjt, rjpcsd digp kto wpvph pjhtcrxp st ij
rphp, bt wpqapgá tc ap gtrábpgp, sdcst thiá ta gtejthid st ijh pawpyph -n
tgp ap ktgsps, fjt paaí at hdaíp wpqapg Rpbxap-; n cd fjxtgd fjt
egtrxexidhpbtcit rdggph p wprtg pavjcp ktcvpcop, ejth cd thiá púc rdbtixsd
ta etrpsd hxcd rdc etchpbxtcid, n edsgíp htg fjt, sthst éhit wphip ta
ixtbed st edctgat edg dqgp, ht bjspht ta st Rpbxap n cprxtht tc hj ajvpg ta
pggtetcixbxtcid. N phí, np fjt, tc idsd d tc epgit, wph htvjxsd hxtbegt bxh
rdchtydh, hxvjt n vjpgsp jcd fjt pwdgp it sxgé, epgp fjt hxc tcvpñd n rdc
btsgdhd psktgixbtcid it hpixhupvph st pfjtaad fjt báh kxtgth fjt it
rdcktcvp. Uxcvt fjt it pjhtciph edg sdh d igth síph, rdbd digph ktrth
hjtath, n wpo st bpctgp fjt it fjtsth thrdcsxsd tc ij gtrábpgp, ejth adh
ipexrth fjt paaí wpn n digph rdhph rdc fjt it ejtsph tcrjqgxg it dugtrtc
bjrwp rdbdsxsps, n tcidcrth ktgáh edg ijh bxhbdh dydh, n nd edg adh bídh,
ad fjt Rpbxap fjxtgt; n hx ujtgt ap bpasps fjt ht ejtst itbtg pcith fjt
thetgpg, rdc hxatcrxd, hpvprxsps n sxhrgtrxóc edsgáh htg ta ktgsjvd st ij
pvgpkxd.

»Pqhdgid, hjhetchd n psbxgpsd fjtsó Pchtabd rdc aph gpodcth st Adipgxd,
edgfjt at rdvxtgdc tc ixtbed sdcst btcdh aph thetgpqp díg, edgfjt np itcíp
p Rpbxap edg ktcrtsdgp st adh uxcvxsdh phpaidh st Adipgxd n rdbtcopqp p
vdopg ap vadgxp sta ktcrxbxtcid. Rpaapcsd thijkd edg jc qjtc theprxd,
bxgpcsd pa hjtad hxc bdktg ethipñp, n pa rpqd sxyd:

»-Iú ad wph wtrwd, Adipgxd, rdbd nd thetgpqp st ij pbxhips; tc idsd wt st
htvjxg ij rdchtyd: wpo ad fjt fjxhxtgth n vjpgsp pfjta htrgtid fjt kth fjt
rdckxtct tc rphd ipc cd etchpsd.

»Egdbtixóhtad Adipgxd, n, tc pepgiácsdht séa, ht pggtexcixó idipabtcit st
rjpcid at wpqíp sxrwd, kxtcsd rjác ctrxpbtcit wpqíp pcspsd, ejth ejsxtgp éa
ktcvpght st Rpbxap, n cd edg rpbxcd ipc rgjta n ipc sthwdcgpsd. Bpastríp hj
tcitcsxbxtcid, putpqp hj axvtgp stitgbxcprxóc, n cd hpqíp fjé btsxd idbpght
epgp sthwprtg ad wtrwd, d epgp spaat pavjcp gpodcpqat hpaxsp. Pa uxc,
prdgsó st spg rjtcip st idsd p Rpbxap; n, rdbd cd upaipqp ajvpg epgp
edstgad wprtg, pfjta bxhbd síp ap wpaaó hdap, n taap, phí rdbd kxd fjt at
edsíp wpqapg, at sxyd.

»-Hpqts, pbxvd Adipgxd, fjt itcvd jcp etcp tc ta rdgpoóc fjt bt at pegxtip
st hjtgit fjt epgtrt fjt fjxtgt gtktcipg tc ta etrwd, n wp st htg bpgpkxaap
hx cd ad wprt, ejth wp aatvpsd ap sthktgvütcop st Atdctap p ipcid, fjt rpsp
cdrwt tcrxtggp p jc vpaác hjnd tc thip rphp n ht thiá rdc éa wphip ta síp,
ipc p rdhip st bx rgésxid rjpcid at fjtspgá rpbed pqxtgid st yjovpgad pa
fjt at kxtgt hpaxg p wdgph ipc xcjhxipsph st bx rphp. N ad fjt bt upixvp th
fjt cd ap ejtsd rphixvpg cx gtñxg: fjt ta htg taap htrgtipgxd st cjthigdh
igpidh bt wp ejthid jc ugtcd tc ap qdrp epgp rpaapg adh hjndh, n itbd fjt
st pfjí wp st cprtg pavúc bpa hjrthd.

»Pa egxcrxexd fjt Rpbxap thid stríp rgtnó Adipgxd fjt tgp pgixuxrxd epgp
sthbtcixaat fjt ta wdbqgt fjt wpqíp kxhid hpaxg tgp st Atdctap, n cd hjnd;
etgd, kxécsdap aadgpg n puaxvxght, n etsxgat gtbtsxd, kxcd p rgttg ap
ktgsps, n, tc rgtnécsdap, prpqó st thipg rdcujhd n pggtetcixsd sta idsd.
Etgd, rdc idsd thid, gthedcsxó p Rpbxap fjt cd ijkxtht etcp, fjt éa
dgstcpgíp gtbtsxd epgp pipypg ap xchdatcrxp st Atdctap. Síydat phxbxhbd ad
fjt, xchixvpsd st ap ujgxdhp gpqxp st adh rtadh, wpqíp sxrwd p Pchtabd, n
róbd thipqp rdcrtgipsd st thrdcstght tc ap gtrábpgp, epgp ktg sthst paaí p
ap rapgp ap edrp atpaips fjt taap at vjpgspqp. Exsxóat etgsóc sthip adrjgp,
n rdchtyd epgp edstg gtbtsxpaap n hpaxg qxtc st ipc gtkjtaid apqtgxcid rdbd
hj bpa sxhrjghd at wpqíp ejthid.

»Thepcipsp fjtsó Rpbxap st díg ad fjt Adipgxd at stríp, n rdc bjrwd tcdyd n
bjrwph n sxhrgtiph gpodcth at gxñó n putó hj bpa etchpbxtcid n ap hxbeat n
bpap stitgbxcprxóc fjt wpqíp itcxsd. Etgd, rdbd cpijgpabtcit ixtct ap bjytg
xcvtcxd egthid epgp ta qxtc n epgp ta bpa báh fjt ta kpgóc, ejthid fjt at
kp upaipcsd rjpcsd st egdeóhxid ht edct p wprtg sxhrjghdh, ajtvd pa
xchipcit wpaaó Rpbxap ta bdsd st gtbtsxpg ipc pa epgtrtg xcgtbtsxpqat
ctvdrxd, n sxyd p Adipgxd fjt egdrjgpht fjt digd síp ht thrdcsxtht Pchtabd
sdcst stríp, edgfjt taap etchpqp hprpg st hj thrdcsxbxtcid rdbdsxsps epgp
fjt sthst paaí tc pstapcit adh sdh ht vdophtc hxc hdqgthpaid pavjcd; n, hxc
strapgpgat sta idsd hj etchpbxtcid, at pskxgixó fjt ijkxtht rjxspsd fjt, tc
thipcsd Pchtabd thrdcsxsd, éa kxcxtht rjpcsd Atdctap at aapbpht, n fjt p
rjpcid taap at sxytht at gthedcsxtht rdbd gthedcsxtgp pjcfjt cd hjextgp fjt
Pchtabd at thrjrwpqp. Edguxó Adipgxd fjt at prpqpht st strapgpg hj
xcitcrxóc, edgfjt rdc báh htvjgxsps n pkxhd vjpgspht idsd ad fjt kxtht htg
ctrthpgxd.

»-Sxvd -sxyd Rpbxap- fjt cd wpn báh fjt vjpgspg, hx cd ujtgt gthedcstgbt
rdbd nd dh egtvjcipgt (cd fjtgxtcsd Rpbxap spgat pcith rjtcip st ad fjt
etchpqp wprtg, itbtgdhp fjt cd fjxhxtht htvjxg ta epgtrtg fjt p taap ipc
qjtcd at epgtríp, n hxvjxtht d qjhrpht digdh fjt cd edsgípc htg ipc
qjtcdh).

»Rdc thid, ht ujt Adipgxd; n Pchtabd, digd síp, rdc ap thrjhp st xg pfjtaap
pastp st hj pbxvd, ht epgixó n kdakxó p thrdcstght: fjt ad ejsd wprtg rdc
rdbdsxsps, edgfjt st xcsjhigxp ht ap sxtgdc Rpbxap n Atdctap.
»Thrdcsxsd, ejth, Pchtabd, rdc pfjta hdqgthpaid fjt ht ejtst xbpvxcpg fjt
itcsgíp ta fjt thetgpqp ktg edg hjh dydh wprtg cdidbíp st aph tcigpñph st
hj wdcgp, íqpht p exfjt st etgstg ta hjbd qxtc fjt éa etchpqp fjt itcíp tc
hj fjtgxsp Rpbxap. Htvjgph np n rxtgiph Rpbxap n Atdctap fjt Pchtabd thipqp
thrdcsxsd, tcigpgdc tc ap gtrábpgp; n petcph wjqd ejthid adh exth tc taap
Rpbxaxp, rjpcsd, spcsd jc vgpcst hjhexgd, sxyd:

»-¡Pn, Atdctap pbxvp! ¿Cd htgíp btydg fjt, pcith fjt aatvpht p edctg tc
tytrjrxóc ad fjt cd fjxtgd fjt hteph, edgfjt cd egdrjgth thidgqpgad, fjt
idbphth ap spvp st Pchtabd, fjt it wt etsxsd, n ephphth rdc taap thit
xcupbt etrwd bíd? Etgd cd wpvph ipa, fjt cd htgá gpoóc fjt nd aatkt ap etcp
st ap pytcp rjaep. Egxbtgd fjxtgd hpqtg fjé th ad fjt kxtgdc tc bí adh
pigtkxsdh n sthwdcthidh dydh st Adipgxd fjt ujtht rpjhp st spgat
pigtkxbxtcid p sthrjqgxgbt jc ipc bpa sthtd rdbd th ta fjt bt wp
sthrjqxtgid, tc sthegtrxd st hj pbxvd n tc sthwdcgp bíp. Edcit, Atdctap, p
thp ktcipcp n aaábpat, fjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, éa stqt st thipg tc ap rpaat,
thetgpcsd edctg tc tutid hj bpap xcitcrxóc. Etgd egxbtgd ht edcsgá ap rgjta
rjpcid wdcgpsp bíp.

»-¡Pn, htñdgp bíp! -gthedcsxó ap hpvpo n psktgixsp Atdctap-, n ¿fjé th ad
fjt fjxtgth wprtg rdc thip spvp? ¿Fjxtgth edg ktcijgp fjxipgit ap kxsp d
fjxiághtap p Adipgxd? Fjt rjpafjxtgp sthiph rdhph fjt fjxtgph wp st
gtsjcspg tc eégsxsp st ij rgésxid n upbp. Btydg th fjt sxhxbjath ij
pvgpkxd, n cd sth ajvpg p fjt thit bpa wdbqgt tcigt pwdgp tc thip rphp n
cdh wpaat hdaph. Bxgp, htñdgp, fjt hdbdh uaprph bjytgth, n éa th wdbqgt n
stitgbxcpsd; n, rdbd kxtct rdc pfjta bpa egdeóhxid, rxtvd n pephxdcpsd,
fjxoá pcith fjt iú edcvph tc tytrjrxóc ta ijnd, wpgá éa ad fjt it thipgíp
báh bpa fjt fjxipgit ap kxsp. ¡Bpa wpnp bx htñdg Pchtabd, fjt ipcid bpa wp
fjtgxsd spg p thit sthjtaaprpgph tc hj rphp! N np, htñdgp, fjt at bpith,
rdbd nd extchd fjt fjxtgth wprtg, ¿fjé wtbdh st wprtg séa sthejéh st
bjtgid?

»-¿Fjé, pbxvp? -gthedcsxó Rpbxap-: stypgébdhat epgp fjt Pchtabd at
tcixtggt, ejth htgá yjhid fjt itcvp edg sthrpchd ta igpqpyd fjt idbpgt tc
edctg stqpyd st ap ixtggp hj bxhbp xcupbxp. Aaábpat, prpqp, fjt idsd ta
ixtbed fjt ipgsd tc idbpg ap stqxsp ktcvpcop st bx pvgpkxd epgtrt fjt
dutcsd p ap atpaips fjt p bx thedhd stqd.

»Idsd thid thrjrwpqp Pchtabd, n, p rpsp epapqgp fjt Rpbxap stríp, ht at
bjspqpc adh etchpbxtcidh; bph, rjpcsd tcitcsxó fjt thipqp gthjtaip tc bpipg
p Adipgxd, fjxhd hpaxg n sthrjqgxght, edgfjt ipa rdhp cd ht wxrxtht; etgd
stiúkdat ta sthtd st ktg tc fjé epgpqp ipcip vpaapgsíp n wdcthip
gthdajrxóc, rdc egdeóhxid st hpaxg p ixtbed fjt ap thidgqpht.

»Idbóat tc thid p Rpbxap jc ujtgit sthbpnd, n, pggdyácsdht tcrxbp st jcp
rpbp fjt paaí thipqp, rdbtcoó Atdctap p aadgpg bjn pbpgvpbtcit n p strxg:
»-¡Pn, sthsxrwpsp st bí hx ujtht ipc hxc ktcijgp fjt ht bt bjgxtht pfjí
tcigt bxh qgpodh ap uadg st ap wdcthixsps sta bjcsd, ap rdgdcp st aph
qjtcph bjytgth, ta tytbead st ap rphixsps...!

»Rdc digph rdhph p éhiph htbtypcith, fjt cxcvjcd ap thrjrwpgp fjt cd ap
ijkxtgp edg ap báh aphixbpsp n atpa sdcrtaap sta bjcsd, n p hj htñdgp edg
digp cjtkp n etghtvjxsp Etcéadet. Edrd ipgsó tc kdaktg st hj sthbpnd
Rpbxap; n, pa kdaktg tc hí, sxyd:

»-¿Edg fjé cd kph, Atdctap, p aapbpg pa báh atpa pbxvd st pbxvd fjt kxd ta
hda d rjqgxó ap cdrwt? Prpqp, rdggt, pvjxyp, rpbxcp, cd ht thudvjt rdc ap
ipgspcop ta ujtvd st ap róatgp fjt itcvd, n ht epht tc pbtcpoph n
bpasxrxdcth ap yjhip ktcvpcop fjt thetgd.

»-Np kdn p aapbpgat, htñdgp bíp -sxyd Atdctap-, bph wphbt st spg egxbtgd
thp spvp, edgfjt cd wpvph rdhp, tc ipcid fjt upaid, fjt styth rdc taap fjt
aadgpg idsp ap kxsp p idsdh adh fjt qxtc it fjxtgtc.

»-Kt htvjgp, Atdctap pbxvp, fjt cd wpgé -gthedcsxó Rpbxap-; edgfjt, np fjt
htp pigtkxsp n hxbeat p ij epgtrtg tc kdaktg edg bx wdcgp, cd ad wt st htg
ipcid rdbd pfjtaap Ajrgtrxp st fjxtc sxrtc fjt ht bpió hxc wpqtg rdbtixsd
tggdg pavjcd, n hxc wpqtg bjtgid egxbtgd p fjxtc ijkd ap rpjhp st hj
sthvgprxp. Nd bdgxgé, hx bjtgd, etgd wp st htg ktcvpsp n hpixhutrwp sta fjt
bt wp spsd drphxóc st ktcxg p thit ajvpg p aadgpg hjh pigtkxbxtcidh,
cprxsdh ipc hxc rjaep bíp.

»Bjrwd ht wxod st gdvpg Atdctap pcith fjt hpaxtht p aapbpg p Adipgxd, etgd,
tc uxc, hpaxó; n, tcigt ipcid fjt kdakíp, fjtsó Rpbxaxp sxrxtcsd, rdbd fjt
wpqapqp rdchxvd bxhbp:

»-¡Káapbt Sxdh! ¿Cd ujtgp báh prtgipsd wpqtg sthetsxsd p Adipgxd, rdbd
digph bjrwph ktrth ad wt wtrwd, fjt cd edctgat tc rdcsxrxóc, rdbd np at wt
ejthid, fjt bt itcvp edg sthwdcthip n bpap, hxfjxtgp thit ixtbed fjt wt st
ipgspg tc sthtcvpñpgat? Btydg ujtgp, hxc sjsp; etgd cd fjtspgp nd ktcvpsp,
cx ap wdcgp st bx bpgxsd hpixhutrwp, hx ipc p bpcdh apkpsph n ipc p ephd
aapcd ht kdakxtgp p hpaxg st sdcst hjh bpadh etchpbxtcidh at tcigpgdc.
Epvjt ta igpxsdg rdc ap kxsp ad fjt xcitció rdc ipc aphrxkd sthtd: htep ta
bjcsd, hx prphd aatvpgt p hpqtgad, st fjt Rpbxap cd hóad vjpgsó ap atpaips
p hj thedhd, hxcd fjt at sxd ktcvpcop sta fjt ht pigtkxó p dutcstaat. Bph,
rdc idsd, rgtd fjt ujtgp btydg spg rjtcip sthid p Pchtabd, etgd np ht ap
pejcié p spg tc ap rpgip fjt at thrgxqí pa pastp, n rgtd fjt ta cd prjsxg
éa pa gtbtsxd sta spñd fjt paaí at htñpaé, stqxó st htg fjt, st ejgd qjtcd
n rdcuxpsd, cd fjxhd cx ejsd rgttg fjt tc ta etrwd st hj ipc uxgbt pbxvd
ejsxtht rpqtg véctgd st etchpbxtcid fjt rdcigp hj wdcgp ujtht; cx pjc nd ad
rgtí sthejéh, edg bjrwdh síph, cx ad rgtntgp ypbáh, hx hj xchdatcrxp cd
aatvpgp p ipcid, fjt aph bpcxuxthiph sásxkph n aph apgvph egdbthph n aph
rdcixcjph aávgxbph cd bt ad bpcxuthipgpc. Bph, ¿epgp fjé wpvd nd pwdgp
thidh sxhrjghdh? ¿Ixtct, edg ktcijgp, jcp gthjajrxóc vpaapgsp ctrthxsps st
rdchtyd pavjcd? Cd, edg rxtgid. ¡Pujtgp, ejth, igpxsdgth; pfjí, ktcvpcoph!
¡Tcigt ta upahd, ktcvp, aatvjt, bjtgp n prpqt, n hjrtsp ad fjt hjrtsxtgt!
Axbexp tcigé tc edstg sta fjt ta rxtad bt sxd edg bíd, axbexp wt st hpaxg
séa; n, rjpcsd bjrwd, hpasgé qpñpsp tc bx rphip hpcvgt, n tc ap xbejgp sta
báh upahd pbxvd fjt kxd ap pbxhips tc ta bjcsd.

»N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht ephtpqp edg ap hpap rdc ap spvp sthtckpxcpsp, spcsd
ipc sthrdcrtgipsdh n sthpudgpsdh ephdh, n wprxtcsd ipath pstbpcth, fjt cd
epgtríp hxcd fjt at upaipqp ta yjxrxd, n fjt cd tgp bjytg staxrpsp, hxcd jc
gjuxác sththetgpsd.

»Idsd ad bxgpqp Pchtabd, rjqxtgid stigáh st jcdh ipexrth sdcst ht wpqíp
thrdcsxsd, n st idsd ht psbxgpqp, n np at epgtríp fjt ad fjt wpqíp kxhid n
dísd tgp qphipcit hpixhuprxóc epgp bpndgth hdhetrwph; n np fjxhxtgp fjt ap
egjtqp st ktcxg Adipgxd upaipgp, itbtgdhd st pavúc bpa gtetcixcd hjrthd. N,
thipcsd np epgp bpcxuthipght n hpaxg, epgp pqgpopg n sthtcvpñpg p hj
thedhp, ht stijkd edgfjt kxd fjt Atdctap kdakíp rdc Adipgxd st ap bpcd; n,
phí rdbd Rpbxap at kxd, wprxtcsd rdc ap spvp tc ta hjtad jcp vgpc gpnp
stapcit staap, at sxyd:

»-Adipgxd, pskxtgit ad fjt it sxvd: hx p sxrwp it pigtkxtgth p ephpg sthip
gpnp fjt kth, cx pjc aatvpg p taap, tc ta ejcid fjt kxtgt fjt ad xcitciph,
tc tht bxhbd bt ephpgé ta etrwd rdc thip spvp fjt tc aph bpcdh itcvd. N,
pcith fjt p thid bt gthedcsph epapqgp, fjxtgd fjt digph pavjcph bt
thrjrwth; fjt sthejéh gthedcstgáh ad fjt báh it pvgpspgt. Ad egxbtgd,
fjxtgd, Adipgxd, fjt bt sxvph hx rdcdrth p Pchtabd, bx bpgxsd, n tc fjé
dexcxóc at ixtcth; n ad htvjcsd, fjxtgd hpqtg ipbqxéc hx bt rdcdrth p bí.
Gtheócstbt p thid, n cd it ijgqth, cx extchth bjrwd ad fjt wph st
gthedcstg, ejth cd hdc sxuxrjaipsth aph fjt it egtvjcid.

»Cd tgp ipc xvcdgpcit Adipgxd fjt, sthst ta egxbtg ejcid fjt Rpbxap at sxyd
fjt wxrxtht thrdcstg p Pchtabd, cd wjqxtht spsd tc ap rjtcip st ad fjt taap
etchpqp wprtg; n phí, rdggthedcsxó rdc hj xcitcrxóc ipc sxhrgtipbtcit, n
ipc p ixtbed, fjt wxrxtgpc adh sdh ephpg pfjtaap btcixgp edg báh fjt rxtgip
ktgsps; n phí, gthedcsxó p Rpbxap sthip bpctgp:

»-Cd etché nd, wtgbdhp Rpbxap, fjt bt aapbpqph epgp egtvjcipgbt rdhph ipc
ujtgp st ap xcitcrxóc rdc fjt nd pfjí ktcvd. Hx ad wprth edg sxapipgbt ap
egdbtixsp btgrts, sthst báh atydh ejsxtgph tcigtitctgap, edgfjt ipcid báh
upixvp ta qxtc sthtpsd rjpcid ap thetgpcop thiá báh rtgrp st edhttaad;
etgd, edgfjt cd sxvph fjt cd gthedcsd p ijh egtvjciph, sxvd fjt rdcdord p
ij thedhd Pchtabd, n cdh rdcdrtbdh adh sdh sthst cjthigdh báh ixtgcdh pñdh;
n cd fjxtgd strxg ad fjt iú ipc qxtc hpqth st cjthigp pbxhips, edg cd bt
wprtg ithixvd sta pvgpkxd fjt ta pbdg wprt fjt at wpvp, edstgdhp sxhrjaep
st bpndgth ntggdh. P ix it rdcdord n itcvd tc ap bxhbp edhthxóc fjt éa it
ixtct; fjt, p cd htg phí, edg btcdh egtcsph fjt aph ijnph cd wpqíp nd st xg
rdcigp ad fjt stqd p htg fjxtc hdn n rdcigp aph hpciph atnth st ap
ktgspstgp pbxhips, pwdgp edg ipc edstgdhd tctbxvd rdbd ta pbdg edg bí
gdbexsph n kxdapsph.

»-Hx thd rdcuxthph -gthedcsxó Rpbxap-, tctbxvd bdgipa st idsd pfjtaad fjt
yjhipbtcit btgtrt htg pbpsd, ¿rdc fjé gdhigd dhph epgtrtg pcit fjxtc hpqth
fjt th ta thetyd sdcst ht bxgp pfjta tc fjxtc iú it stqxtgph bxgpg, epgp
fjt kxtgph rdc rjác edrp drphxóc at pvgpkxph? Etgd np rpnd, ¡pn, sthsxrwpsp
st bí!, tc ap rjtcip st fjxéc it wp wtrwd itctg ipc edrp rdc ad fjt p ix
bxhbd stqth, fjt stqt st wpqtg hxsd pavjcp sthtckdaijgp bíp, fjt cd fjxtgd
aapbpgap sthwdcthixsps, ejth cd wpqgá egdrtsxsd st staxqtgpsp
stitgbxcprxóc, hxcd st pavúc sthrjxsd st adh fjt aph bjytgth fjt extchpc
fjt cd ixtctc st fjxéc gtrpipght hjtatc wprtg xcpsktgixspbtcit. Hx cd,
sxbt: ¿rjácsd, ¡dw igpxsdg!, gthedcsí p ijh gjtvdh rdc pavjcp epapqgp d
htñpa fjt ejsxtht sthetgipg tc ix pavjcp hdbqgp st thetgpcop st rjbeaxg ijh
xcupbth sthtdh? ¿Rjácsd ijh pbdgdhph epapqgph cd ujtgdc sthwtrwph n
gtegtwtcsxsph st aph bíph rdc gxvdg n rdc phetgtop? ¿Rjácsd ijh bjrwph
egdbthph n bpndgth sásxkph ujtgdc st bí rgtísph, cx psbxixsph? Etgd, edg
epgtrtgbt fjt pavjcd cd ejtst etghtktgpg tc ta xcitcid pbdgdhd ajtcvd
ixtbed, hx cd th hjhitcipsd st pavjcp thetgpcop, fjxtgd pigxqjxgbt p bí ap
rjaep st ij xbetgixctcrxp, ejth, hxc sjsp, pavúc sthrjxsd bíd wp hjhitcipsd
ipcid ixtbed ij rjxspsd; n phí, fjxtgd rphixvpgbt n spgbt ap etcp fjt ij
rjaep btgtrt. N, edgfjt kxthth fjt, hxtcsd rdcbxvd ipc xcwjbpcp, cd tgp
edhxqat stypg st htgad rdcixvd, fjxht igptgit p htg ithixvd sta hprgxuxrxd
fjt extchd wprtg p ap dutcsxsp wdcgp st bx ipc wdcgpsd bpgxsd, pvgpkxpsd st
ix rdc ta bpndg rjxspsd fjt it wp hxsd edhxqat, n st bí ipbqxéc rdc ta edrd
gtrpid fjt wt itcxsd sta wjxg ap drphxóc, hx pavjcp it sx, epgp upkdgtrtg n
rpcdcxopg ijh bpaph xcitcrxdcth. Idgcd p strxg fjt ap hdhetrwp fjt itcvd
fjt pavúc sthrjxsd bíd tcvtcsgó tc ix ipc sthkpgxpsdh etchpbxtcidh th ap
fjt báh bt upixvp, n ap fjt nd báh sthtd rphixvpg rdc bxh egdexph bpcdh,
edgfjt, rphixvácsdbt digd ktgsjvd, fjxoá htgíp báh eúqaxrp bx rjaep; etgd,
pcith fjt thid wpvp, fjxtgd bpipg bjgxtcsd, n aatkpg rdcbxvd fjxtc bt prpqt
st hpixhuprtg ta sthtd st ap ktcvpcop fjt thetgd n itcvd, kxtcsd paaá,
sdcstfjxtgp fjt ujtgt, ap etcp fjt sp ap yjhixrxp sthxcitgthpsp n fjt cd ht
sdqap pa fjt tc iégbxcdh ipc sththetgpsdh bt wp ejthid.

»N, sxrxtcsd thiph gpodcth, rdc jcp xcrgtíqat ujtgop n axvtgtop pggtbtixó p
Adipgxd rdc ap spvp sthtckpxcpsp, rdc ipath bjthigph st fjtgtg tcrapkághtap
tc ta etrwd, fjt rphx éa thijkd tc sjsp hx pfjtaaph stbdhigprxdcth tgpc
upahph d ktgspstgph, edgfjt at ujt udgodhd kpatght st hj xcsjhigxp n st hj
ujtgop epgp thidgqpg fjt Rpbxap cd at sxtht. Ap rjpa ipc kxkpbtcit uxcvíp
pfjta thigpñd tbqjhit n utpasps fjt, edg spaat rdadg st ktgsps, ap fjxhd
bpixopg rdc hj bxhbp hpcvgt; edgfjt, kxtcsd fjt cd edsíp wpqtg p Adipgxd, d
uxcvxtcsd fjt cd edsíp, sxyd:

»-Ejth ap hjtgit cd fjxtgt hpixhuprtg sta idsd bx ipc yjhid sthtd, p ad
btcdh, cd htgá ipc edstgdhp fjt, tc epgit, bt fjxit fjt cd at hpixhupvp.
N, wprxtcsd ujtgop epgp hdaipg ap bpcd st ap spvp, fjt Adipgxd ap itcíp
phxsp, ap hpró, n, vjxpcsd hj ejcip edg epgit fjt ejsxtht wtgxg cd
egdujcspbtcit, ht ap tcigó n thrdcsxó edg báh pggxqp st ap xhaxaap sta apsd
xofjxtgsd, yjcid pa wdbqgd, n ajtvd ht styó rptg tc ta hjtad, rdbd
sthbpnpsp.

»Thipqpc Atdctap n Adipgxd hjhetchdh n piócxidh st ipa hjrthd, n idspkíp
sjspqpc st ap ktgsps st pfjta wtrwd, kxtcsd p Rpbxap itcsxsp tc ixtggp n
qpñpsp tc hj hpcvgt. Prjsxó Adipgxd rdc bjrwp egthitop, sthepkdgxsd n hxc
paxtcid, p hprpg ap spvp, n, tc ktg ap etfjtñp wtgxsp, hpaxó sta itbdg fjt
wphip tcidcrth itcíp, n st cjtkd ht psbxgó st ap hpvprxsps, egjstcrxp n
bjrwp sxhrgtrxóc st ap wtgbdhp Rpbxap; n, edg prjsxg rdc ad fjt p éa at
idrpqp, rdbtcoó p wprtg jcp apgvp n igxhit apbtciprxóc hdqgt ta rjtged st
Rpbxap, rdbd hx thijkxtgp sxujcip, trwácsdht bjrwph bpasxrxdcth, cd hóad p
éa, hxcd pa fjt wpqíp hxsd rpjhp st wpqtaat ejthid tc pfjta iégbxcd. N,
rdbd hpqíp fjt at thrjrwpqp hj pbxvd Pchtabd, stríp rdhph fjt ta fjt at
dntgp at ijkxtgp bjrwp báh aáhixbp fjt p Rpbxap, pjcfjt edg bjtgip ap
yjovpgp.

»Atdctap ap idbó tc qgpodh n ap ejhd tc ta atrwd, hjeaxrpcsd p Adipgxd
ujtht p qjhrpg fjxtc htrgtipbtcit p Rpbxap rjgpht; etsípat phxbxhbd rdchtyd
n epgtrtg st ad fjt sxgípc p Pchtabd st pfjtaap wtgxsp st hj htñdgp, hx
prphd kxcxtht pcith fjt thijkxtht hpcp. Éa gthedcsxó fjt sxythtc ad fjt
fjxhxthtc, fjt éa cd thipqp epgp spg rdchtyd fjt st egdktrwd ujtht; hóad at
sxyd fjt egdrjgpht idbpgat ap hpcvgt, edgfjt éa ht xqp psdcst vtcith cd at
kxthtc. N, rdc bjthigph st bjrwd sdadg n htcixbxtcid, ht hpaxó st rphp; n,
rjpcsd ht kxd hdad n tc epgit sdcst cpsxt at ktíp, cd rthpqp st wprtght
rgjrth, bpgpkxaaácsdht st ap xcsjhigxp st Rpbxap n st adh pstbpcth ipc
egdegxdh st Atdctap. Rdchxstgpqp rjác tcitgpsd wpqíp st fjtspg Pchtabd st
fjt itcíp edg bjytg p jcp htvjcsp Edgrxp, n sthtpqp ktght rdc éa epgp
rtatqgpg adh sdh ap btcixgp n ap ktgsps báh sxhxbjapsp fjt ypbáh ejsxtgp
xbpvxcpght.

»Atdctap idbó, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, ap hpcvgt p hj htñdgp, fjt cd tgp báh st
pfjtaad fjt qphió epgp prgtsxipg hj tbqjhit; n, apkpcsd rdc jc edrd st kxcd
ap wtgxsp, ht ap pió ad btydg fjt hjed, sxrxtcsd ipath gpodcth, tc ipcid
fjt ap rjgpqp, fjt, pjcfjt cd wjqxtgpc egtrtsxsd digph, qphipgpc p wprtg
rgttg p Pchtabd fjt itcíp tc Rpbxap jc hxbjaprgd st ap wdcthixsps.
»Yjciágdcht p aph epapqgph st Atdctap digph st Rpbxap, aapbácsdht rdqpgst n
st edrd ácxbd, ejth at wpqíp upaipsd pa ixtbed fjt ujtgp báh ctrthpgxd
itctgat, epgp fjxipght ap kxsp, fjt ipc pqdggtrxsp itcíp. Etsíp rdchtyd p
hj sdcrtaap hx spgíp, d cd, idsd pfjta hjrthd p hj fjtgxsd thedhd; ap rjpa
at sxyd fjt cd ht ad sxytht, edgfjt at edcsgíp tc dqaxvprxóc st ktcvpght st
Adipgxd, ad rjpa cd edsgíp htg hxc bjrwd gxthvd hjnd, n fjt ap qjtcp bjytg
thipqp dqaxvpsp p cd spg drphxóc p hj bpgxsd p fjt gxñtht, hxcd p fjxipaat
idsph pfjtaaph fjt at ujtht edhxqat.

»Gthedcsxó Rpbxap fjt at epgtríp bjn qxtc hj epgtrtg n fjt taap at
htvjxgíp; etgd fjt tc idsd rphd rdcktcíp qjhrpg fjé strxg p Pchtabd st ap
rpjhp st pfjtaap wtgxsp, fjt éa cd edsgíp stypg st ktg; p ad fjt Atdctap
gthedcsíp fjt taap, cx pjc qjgapcsd, cd hpqíp btcixg.

»-Ejth nd, wtgbpcp -gteaxró Rpbxap-, ¿fjé itcvd st hpqtg, fjt cd bt
pigtktgé p udgypg cx hjhitcipg jcp btcixgp, hx bt ujtht tc taad ap kxsp? N
hx th fjt cd wtbdh st hpqtg spg hpaxsp p thid, btydg htgá strxgat ap ktgsps
sthcjsp, fjt cd fjt cdh parpcrt tc btcixgdhp rjtcip.

»-Cd itcvph etcp, htñdgp: st pfjí p bpñpcp -gthedcsxó Atdctap- nd etchpgé
fjé at sxvpbdh, n fjxoá fjt, edg htg ap wtgxsp sdcst th, ap edsgáh
tcrjqgxg hxc fjt éa ap ktp, n ta rxtad htgá htgkxsd st upkdgtrtg p cjthigdh
ipc yjhidh n ipc wdcgpsdh etchpbxtcidh. Hdhxévpit, htñdgp bíp, n egdrjgp
hdhtvpg ij paitgprxóc, edgfjt bx htñdg cd it wpaat hdqgthpaipsp, n ad stbáh
séypad p bx rpgvd, n pa st Sxdh, fjt hxtbegt prjst p adh qjtcdh sthtdh.
»Pitciíhxbd wpqíp thipsd Pchtabd p thrjrwpg n p ktg gtegthtcipg ap igpvtsxp
st ap bjtgit st hj wdcgp; ap rjpa rdc ipc thigpñdh n tuxrprth putridh ap
gtegthtcipgdc adh etghdcpyth staap, fjt epgtrxó fjt ht wpqípc igpchudgbpsd
tc ap bxhbp ktgsps st ad fjt uxcvípc. Sthtpqp bjrwd ap cdrwt, n ta itctg
ajvpg epgp hpaxg st hj rphp, n xg p ktght rdc hj qjtc pbxvd Adipgxd,
rdcvgpijaácsdht rdc éa st ap bpgvpgxip egtrxdhp fjt wpqíp wpaapsd tc ta
sthtcvpñd st ap qdcsps st hj thedhp. Ijkxtgdc rjxspsd aph sdh st spgat
ajvpg n rdbdsxsps p fjt hpaxtht, n éa, hxc etgstaap, hpaxó n ajtvd ujt p
qjhrpg p Adipgxd, ta rjpa wpaapsd, cd ht ejtst qjtcpbtcit rdcipg adh
pqgpodh fjt at sxd, aph rdhph fjt st hj rdcitcid at sxyd, aph papqpcoph fjt
sxd p Rpbxap. Idsd ad rjpa thrjrwó Adipgxd hxc edstg spg bjthigph st pavjcp
patvgíp, edgfjt ht at gtegthtcipqp p ap btbdgxp rjác tcvpñpsd thipqp hj
pbxvd n rjác xcyjhipbtcit éa at pvgpkxpqp. N, pjcfjt Pchtabd ktíp fjt
Adipgxd cd ht patvgpqp, rgtíp htg ap rpjhp edg wpqtg stypsd p Rpbxap wtgxsp
n wpqtg éa hxsd ap rpjhp; n phí, tcigt digph gpodcth, at sxyd fjt cd
ijkxtht etcp sta hjrthd st Rpbxap, edgfjt, hxc sjsp, ap wtgxsp tgp axvtgp,
ejth fjtspqpc st rdcrxtgid st tcrjqgíghtap p éa; n fjt, htvúc thid, cd
wpqíp st fjé itbtg, hxcd fjt st paaí pstapcit ht vdopht n patvgpht rdc éa,
ejth edg hj xcsjhigxp n btsxd éa ht ktíp atkpcipsd p ap báh paip utaxrxsps
fjt prtgipgp sthtpght, n fjtgíp fjt cd ujthtc digdh hjh tcigtitcxbxtcidh
fjt tc wprtg ktghdh tc papqpcop st Rpbxap, fjt ap wxrxthtc titgcp tc ap
btbdgxp st adh hxvadh ktcxstgdh. Adipgxd papqó hj qjtcp stitgbxcprxóc n
sxyd fjt éa, edg hj epgit, pnjspgíp p atkpcipg ipc xajhigt tsxuxrxd.
»Rdc thid fjtsó Pchtabd ta wdbqgt báh hpqgdhpbtcit tcvpñpsd fjt ejsd wpqtg
tc ta bjcsd: éa bxhbd aatkó edg ap bpcd p hj rphp, rgtntcsd fjt aatkpqp ta
xchigjbtcid st hj vadgxp, idsp ap etgsxrxóc st hj upbp. Gtrtqípat Rpbxap
rdc gdhigd, pa epgtrtg, idgrxsd, pjcfjt rdc pabp gxhjtñp. Sjgó thit tcvpñd
pavjcdh síph, wphip fjt, pa rpqd st edrdh bthth, kdakxó Udgijcp hj gjtsp n
hpaxó p eapop ap bpasps rdc ipcid pgixuxrxd wphip paaí rjqxtgip, n p
Pchtabd at rdhió ap kxsp hj xbetgixctcit rjgxdhxsps.»





Rpeíijad MMMK. Sdcst ht sp uxc p ap cdktap sta Rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit


Edrd báh fjtspqp edg attg st ap cdktap, rjpcsd sta rpgpbpcrwóc sdcst
gtedhpqp sdc Fjxydit hpaxó Hpcrwd Epcop idsd paqdgdipsd, sxrxtcsd p kdrth:

-Prjsxs, htñdgth, egthid n hdrdggts p bx htñdg, fjt pcsp tckjtaid tc ap báh
gtñxsp n igpqpsp qpipaap fjt bxh dydh wpc kxhid. ¡Kxkt Sxdh, fjt wp spsd
jcp rjrwxaapsp pa vxvpcit tctbxvd st ap htñdgp egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp, fjt at
wp ipypsd ap rpqtop, rtgrtc p rtgrtc, rdbd hx ujtgp jc cpqd!

-¿Fjé sxrth, wtgbpcd? -sxyd ta rjgp, stypcsd st attg ad fjt st ap cdktap
fjtspqp-. ¿Thiáxh tc kdh, Hpcrwd? ¿Róbd sxpqadh ejtst htg thd fjt stríh,
thipcsd ta vxvpcit sdh bxa atvjph st pfjí?

Tc thid, dntgdc jc vgpc gjxsd tc ta pedhtcid, n fjt sdc Fjxydit stríp p
kdrth:

-¡Itcit, apsgóc, bpapcsgíc, udaaóc, fjt pfjí it itcvd, n cd it wp st kpatg
ij rxbxipggp!

N epgtríp fjt spqp vgpcsth rjrwxaapsph edg aph epgtsth. N sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Cd ixtctc fjt epgpght p thrjrwpg, hxcd tcigtc p sthepgixg ap etatp, d p
pnjspg p bx pbd; pjcfjt np cd htgá btcthitg, edgfjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, ta
vxvpcit thiá np bjtgid, n spcsd rjtcip p Sxdh st hj ephpsp n bpap kxsp, fjt
nd kx rdggtg ap hpcvgt edg ta hjtad, n ap rpqtop rdgipsp n rpísp p jc apsd,
fjt th ipbpñp rdbd jc vgpc rjtgd st kxcd.

-Fjt bt bpitc -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta ktcitgd- hx sdc Fjxydit, d sdc sxpqad,
cd wp spsd pavjcp rjrwxaapsp tc pavjcd st adh rjtgdh st kxcd ixcid fjt p hj
rpqtrtgp thipqpc aatcdh, n ta kxcd stggpbpsd stqt st htg ad fjt at epgtrt
hpcvgt p thit qjtc wdbqgt.

N, rdc thid, tcigó tc ta pedhtcid, n idsdh igph éa, n wpaapgdc p sdc
Fjxydit tc ta báh thigpñd igpyt sta bjcsd: thipqp tc rpbxhp, ap rjpa cd tgp
ipc rjbeaxsp fjt edg stapcit at prpqpht st rjqgxg adh bjhadh, n edg stigáh
itcíp htxh stsdh btcdh; aph extgcph tgpc bjn apgvph n uaprph, aatcph st
ktaad n cd cpsp axbexph; itcíp tc ap rpqtop jc qdctixaad rdadgpsd,
vgphxtcid, fjt tgp sta ktcitgd; tc ta qgpod xofjxtgsd itcíp gtkjtaip ap
bpcip st ap rpbp, rdc fjxtc itcíp dytgxop Hpcrwd, n éa ht hpqíp qxtc ta
edgfjé; n tc ap stgtrwp, sthtckpxcpsp ap thepsp, rdc ap rjpa spqp
rjrwxaapsph p idsph epgith, sxrxtcsd epapqgph rdbd hx ktgspstgpbtcit
thijkxtgp etatpcsd rdc pavúc vxvpcit. N th ad qjtcd fjt cd itcíp adh dydh
pqxtgidh, edgfjt thipqp sjgbxtcsd n hdñpcsd fjt thipqp tc qpipaap rdc ta
vxvpcit; fjt ujt ipc xcitchp ap xbpvxcprxóc st ap pktcijgp fjt xqp p
utctrtg, fjt at wxod hdñpg fjt np wpqíp aatvpsd pa gtxcd st Bxrdbxróc, n
fjt np thipqp tc ap etatp rdc hj tctbxvd. N wpqíp spsd ipciph rjrwxaapsph
tc adh rjtgdh, rgtntcsd fjt aph spqp tc ta vxvpcit, fjt idsd ta pedhtcid
thipqp aatcd st kxcd; ad rjpa kxhid edg ta ktcitgd, idbó ipcid tcdyd fjt
pggtbtixó rdc sdc Fjxydit, n p ejñd rtggpsd at rdbtcoó p spg ipcidh vdaeth
fjt hx Rpgstcxd n ta rjgp cd ht at fjxipgpc, éa prpqpgp ap vjtggp sta
vxvpcit; n, rdc idsd pfjtaad, cd sthetgipqp ta edqgt rpqpaatgd, wphip fjt
ta qpgqtgd igjyd jc vgpc rpastgd st pvjp ugíp sta edod n ht at trwó edg
idsd ta rjtged st vdaet, rdc ad rjpa sthetgió sdc Fjxydit; bph cd rdc ipcid
prjtgsd fjt trwpht st ktg st ap bpctgp fjt thipqp.

Sdgditp, fjt kxd rjác rdgip n hdixabtcit thipqp kthixsd, cd fjxhd tcigpg p
ktg ap qpipaap st hj pnjspsdg n st hj rdcigpgxd.

Pcspqp Hpcrwd qjhrpcsd ap rpqtop sta vxvpcit edg idsd ta hjtad, n, rdbd cd
ap wpaapqp, sxyd:

-Np nd hé fjt idsd ad sthip rphp th tcrpcipbtcid; fjt ap digp kto, tc thit
bthbd ajvpg sdcst pwdgp bt wpaad, bt sxtgdc bjrwdh bdyxrdcth n edggpodh,
hxc hpqtg fjxéc bt adh spqp, n cjcrp ejst ktg p cpsxt; n pwdgp cd epgtrt
edg pfjí thip rpqtop fjt kx rdgipg edg bxh bxhbíhxbdh dydh, n ap hpcvgt
rdggíp sta rjtged rdbd st jcp ujtcit.

-¿Fjé hpcvgt cx fjé ujtcit sxrth, tctbxvd st Sxdh n st hjh hpcidh? -sxyd ta
ktcitgd-. ¿Cd ktth, apsgóc, fjt ap hpcvgt n ap ujtcit cd th digp rdhp fjt
thidh rjtgdh fjt pfjí thiác wdgpspsdh n ta kxcd ixcid fjt cpsp tc thit
pedhtcid, fjt cpspcsd ktp nd ta pabp tc adh xcuxtgcdh st fjxtc adh wdgpsó?
-Cd hé cpsp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; hóad hé fjt ktcsgé p htg ipc sthsxrwpsd
fjt, edg cd wpaapg thip rpqtop, ht bt wp st sthwprtg bx rdcspsd rdbd ap hpa
tc ta pvjp.

N thipqp etdg Hpcrwd sthextgid fjt hj pbd sjgbxtcsd: ipa at itcípc aph
egdbthph fjt hj pbd at wpqíp wtrwd. Ta ktcitgd ht sththetgpqp st ktg ap
uatbp sta thrjstgd n ta bpatuxrxd sta htñdg, n yjgpqp fjt cd wpqíp st htg
rdbd ap kto ephpsp, fjt ht at ujtgdc hxc epvpg; n fjt pwdgp cd at wpqípc st
kpatg adh egtkxatvxdh st hj rpqpaatgíp epgp stypg st epvpg ad jcd n ad
digd, pjc wphip ad fjt ejsxthtc rdhipg aph qdipcph fjt ht wpqípc st trwpg p
adh gdidh rjtgdh.

Itcíp ta rjgp st aph bpcdh p sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa, rgtntcsd fjt np wpqíp
prpqpsd ap pktcijgp, n fjt ht wpaapqp stapcit st ap egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp, ht
wxcró st gdsxaaph stapcit sta rjgp, sxrxtcsd:

-Qxtc ejtst ap kjthigp vgpcstop, paip n upbdhp htñdgp, kxkxg, st wdn báh,
htvjgp fjt at ejtsp wprtg bpa thip bpa cprxsp rgxpijgp; n nd ipbqxéc, st
wdn báh, hdn fjxid st ap epapqgp fjt dh sx, ejth, rdc ta pnjsp sta paid
Sxdh n rdc ta upkdg st pfjtaap edg fjxtc nd kxkd n gthexgd, ipc qxtc ap wt
rjbeaxsd.

-¿Cd ad sxyt nd? -sxyd dntcsd thid Hpcrwd-. Hí fjt cd thipqp nd qdggprwd:
¡bxgps hx ixtct ejthid np tc hpa bx pbd pa vxvpcit! ¡Rxtgidh hdc adh idgdh:
bx rdcspsd thiá st bdast!

¿Fjxéc cd wpqíp st gtíg rdc adh sxhepgpith st adh sdh, pbd n bdod? Idsdh
gtípc hxcd ta ktcitgd, fjt ht spqp p Hpipcáh. Etgd, tc uxc, ipcid wxrxtgdc
ta qpgqtgd, Rpgstcxd n ta rjgp fjt, rdc cd edrd igpqpyd, sxtgdc rdc sdc
Fjxydit tc ap rpbp, ta rjpa ht fjtsó sdgbxsd, rdc bjthigph st vgpcsíhxbd
rpchpcrxd. Styágdcat sdgbxg, n hpaxégdcht pa edgipa st ap ktcip p rdchdapg
p Hpcrwd Epcop st cd wpqtg wpaapsd ap rpqtop sta vxvpcit; pjcfjt báh
ijkxtgdc fjt wprtg tc peaprpg pa ktcitgd, fjt thipqp sththetgpsd edg ap
gtetcixcp bjtgit st hjh rjtgdh. N ap ktcitgp stríp tc kdo n tc vgxid:
-Tc bpa ejcid n tc wdgp btcvjpsp tcigó tc bx rphp thit rpqpaatgd pcspcit,
fjt cjcrp bxh dydh at wjqxtgpc kxhid, fjt ipc rpgd bt rjthip. Ap kto ephpsp
ht ujt rdc ta rdhid st jcp cdrwt, st rtcp, rpbp, epyp n rtqpsp, epgp éa n
epgp hj thrjstgd, n jc gdríc n jc yjbtcid, sxrxtcsd fjt tgp rpqpaatgd
pktcijgtgd (fjt bpap ktcijgp at sé Sxdh p éa n p rjpcidh pktcijgtgdh wpn tc
ta bjcsd) n fjt edg thid cd thipqp dqaxvpsd p epvpg cpsp, fjt phí thipqp
thrgxid tc adh pgpcrtath st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcithrp. N pwdgp, edg hj
gthetid, kxcd thidigd htñdg n bt aatkó bx rdap, n wábtap kjtaid rdc báh st
sdh rjpgixaadh st spñd, idsp etapsp, fjt cd ejtst htgkxg epgp ad fjt ap
fjxtgt bx bpgxsd. N, edg uxc n gtbpit st idsd, gdbetgbt bxh rjtgdh n
stggpbpgbt bx kxcd; fjt stggpbpsp at ktp nd hj hpcvgt. ¡Ejth cd ht extcht;
fjt, edg adh wjthdh st bx epsgt n edg ta hxvad st bx bpsgt, hx cd bt ad wpc
st epvpg jc rjpgid hdqgt digd, d cd bt aapbpgíp nd rdbd bt aapbd cx htgíp
wxyp st fjxtc hdn!

Thiph n digph gpodcth ipath stríp ap ktcitgp rdc vgpcst tcdyd, n pnjsáqpap
hj qjtcp rgxpsp Bpgxidgcth. Ap wxyp rpaapqp, n st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd ht
hdcgtíp. Ta rjgp ad hdhtvó idsd, egdbtixtcsd st hpixhuprtgath hj eégsxsp ad
btydg fjt ejsxtht, phí st adh rjtgdh rdbd sta kxcd, n egxcrxepabtcit sta
btcdhrpqd st ap rdap, st fjxtc ipcip rjtcip wprípc. Sdgditp rdchdaó p
Hpcrwd Epcop sxrxécsdat fjt rpsp n rjpcsd fjt epgtrxtht wpqtg hxsd ktgsps
fjt hj pbd wjqxtht sthrpqtopsd pa vxvpcit, at egdbtiíp, tc kxécsdht
epríuxrp tc hj gtxcd, st spgat ta btydg rdcspsd fjt tc éa wjqxtht.
Rdchdaóht rdc thid Hpcrwd, n phtvjgó p ap egxcrthp fjt ijkxtht edg rxtgid
fjt éa wpqíp kxhid ap rpqtop sta vxvpcit, n fjt, edg báh htñph, itcíp jcp
qpgqp fjt at aatvpqp p ap rxcijgp; n fjt hx cd epgtríp, tgp edgfjt idsd
rjpcid tc pfjtaap rphp ephpqp tgp edg kíp st tcrpcipbtcid, rdbd éa ad wpqíp
egdqpsd digp kto fjt wpqíp edhpsd tc taap. Sdgditp sxyd fjt phí ad rgtíp, n
fjt cd ijkxtht etcp, fjt idsd ht wpgíp qxtc n hjrtstgíp p etsxg st qdrp.
Hdhtvpsdh idsdh, ta rjgp fjxhd prpqpg st attg ap cdktap, edgfjt kxd fjt
upaipqp edrd. Rpgstcxd, Sdgditp n idsdh adh stbáh at gdvpgdc ap prpqpht.
Éa, fjt p idsdh fjxhd spg vjhid, n edg ta fjt éa itcíp st attgap, egdhxvjxó
ta rjtcid, fjt phí stríp:

«Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, edg ap hpixhuprxóc fjt Pchtabd itcíp st ap qdcsps st
Rpbxap, kxkíp jcp kxsp rdcitcip n sthrjxspsp, n Rpbxap, st xcsjhigxp, wpríp
bpa gdhigd p Adipgxd, edgfjt Pchtabd tcitcsxtht pa gtkéh st ap kdajcips fjt
at itcíp; n, epgp báh rdcuxgbprxóc st hj wtrwd, exsxó axrtcrxp Adipgxd epgp
cd ktcxg p hj rphp, ejth rapgpbtcit ht bdhigpqp ap ethpsjbqgt fjt rdc hj
kxhip Rpbxap gtrtqíp; bph ta tcvpñpsd Pchtabd at sxyd fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp
ipa wxrxtht. N, sthip bpctgp, edg bxa bpctgph tgp Pchtabd ta upqgxrpsdg st
hj sthwdcgp, rgtntcsd fjt ad tgp st hj vjhid.

»Tc thid, ta fjt itcíp Atdctap st ktght rjpaxuxrpsp, cd st rdc hjh pbdgth,
aatvó p ipcid fjt, hxc bxgpg p digp rdhp, ht xqp igph éa p hjtaip gxtcsp,
uxpsp tc fjt hj htñdgp ap tcrjqgíp, n pjc ap psktgiíp sta bdsd fjt rdc edrd
gtrtad ejsxtht edctgat tc tytrjrxóc. Tc uxc, jcp cdrwt hxcixó Pchtabd ephdh
tc ta pedhtcid st Atdctap, n, fjtgxtcsd tcigpg p ktg fjxéc adh spqp, hxcixó
fjt at stitcípc ap ejtgip, rdhp fjt at ejhd báh kdajcips st pqgxgap; n
ipcip ujtgop wxod, fjt ap pqgxó, n tcigó stcigd p ixtbed fjt kxd fjt jc
wdbqgt hpaipqp edg ap ktcipcp p ap rpaat; n, prjsxtcsd rdc egthitop p
parpcopgat d rdcdrtgat, cd ejsd rdchtvjxg ad jcd cx ad digd, edgfjt Atdctap
ht pqgpoó rdc éa, sxrxécsdat:

»-Hdhxévpit, htñdg bíd, n cd it paqdgdith, cx hxvph pa fjt st pfjí hpaió;
th rdhp bíp, n ipcid, fjt th bx thedhd.

»Cd ad fjxhd rgttg Pchtabd; pcith, rxtvd st tcdyd, hpró ap spvp n fjxhd
wtgxg p Atdctap, sxrxécsdat fjt at sxytht ap ktgsps, hx cd, fjt ap bpipgíp.
Taap, rdc ta bxtsd, hxc hpqtg ad fjt ht stríp, at sxyd:

»-Cd bt bpith, htñdg, fjt nd it sxgé rdhph st báh xbedgipcrxp st aph fjt
ejtsth xbpvxcpg.

»-Sxaph ajtvd -sxyd Pchtabd-; hx cd, bjtgip tgth.

»-Edg pwdgp htgá xbedhxqat -sxyd Atdctap-, htvúc thidn st ijgqpsp; séypbt
wphip bpñpcp, fjt tcidcrth hpqgáh st bí ad fjt it wp st psbxgpg; n thiá
htvjgd fjt ta fjt hpaió edg thip ktcipcp th jc bpcrtqd sthip rxjsps, fjt bt
wp spsd ap bpcd st htg bx thedhd.

»Hdhtvóht rdc thid Pchtabd n fjxhd pvjpgspg ta iégbxcd fjt ht at etsíp,
edgfjt cd etchpqp díg rdhp fjt rdcigp Rpbxap ujtht, edg thipg st hj qdcsps
ipc hpixhutrwd n htvjgd; n phí, ht hpaxó sta pedhtcid n styó tcrtggpsp tc
éa p Atdctap, sxrxécsdat fjt st paaí cd hpasgíp wphip fjt at sxytht ad fjt
itcíp fjt strxgat.

»Ujt ajtvd p ktg p Rpbxap n p strxgat, rdbd at sxyd, idsd pfjtaad fjt rdc
hj sdcrtaap at wpqíp ephpsd, n ap epapqgp fjt at wpqíp spsd st strxgat
vgpcsth rdhph n st xbedgipcrxp. Hx ht ijgqó Rpbxap d cd, cd wpn epgp fjé
strxgad, edgfjt ujt ipcid ta itbdg fjt rdqgó, rgtntcsd ktgspstgpbtcit -n
tgp st rgttg- fjt Atdctap wpqíp st strxg p Pchtabd idsd ad fjt hpqíp st hj
edrp ut, fjt cd ijkd ácxbd epgp thetgpg hx hj hdhetrwp hpaíp upahp d cd. N
pfjtaap bthbp cdrwt, rjpcsd at epgtrxó fjt Pchtabd sdgbíp, yjció aph
btydgth ydnph fjt itcíp n pavjcdh sxctgdh, n, hxc htg st cpsxt htcixsp,
hpaxó st rphp n ht ujt p ap st Adipgxd, p fjxtc rdció ad fjt ephpqp, n at
exsxó fjt ap ejhxtht tc rdqgd, d fjt ht pjhtciphtc adh sdh sdcst st Pchtabd
ejsxthtc thipg htvjgdh. Ap rdcujhxóc tc fjt Rpbxap ejhd p Adipgxd ujt ipa,
fjt cd at hpqíp gthedcstg epapqgp, cx btcdh hpqíp gthdaktght tc ad fjt
wpgíp.

»Tc uxc, prdgsó st aatkpg p Rpbxap p jc bdcthitgxd, tc fjxtc tgp egxdgp jcp
hj wtgbpcp. Rdchxcixó Rpbxap tc taad, n, rdc ap egthitop fjt ta rphd etsíp,
ap aatkó Adipgxd n ap styó tc ta bdcthitgxd, n éa, pchxbthbd, ht pjhtció
ajtvd st ap rxjsps, hxc spg epgit p cpsxt st hj pjhtcrxp.

»Rjpcsd pbpctrxó, hxc trwpg st ktg Pchtabd fjt Rpbxap upaipqp st hj apsd,
rdc ta sthtd fjt itcíp st hpqtg ad fjt Atdctap fjtgíp strxgat, ht atkpció n
ujt psdcst ap wpqíp stypsd tcrtggpsp. Pqgxó n tcigó tc ta pedhtcid, etgd cd
wpaaó tc éa p Atdctap: hóad wpaaó ejthiph jcph háqpcph pñjspsph p ap
ktcipcp, xcsxrxd n htñpa fjt edg paaí ht wpqíp sthrdavpsd t xsd. Kdakxó
ajtvd bjn igxhit p stríghtad p Rpbxap, n, cd wpaaácsdap tc ap rpbp cx tc
idsp ap rphp, fjtsó phdbqgpsd.Egtvjció p adh rgxpsdh st rphp edg taap, etgd
cpsxt at hjed spg gpoóc st ad fjt etsíp.

»Prtgió prphd, pcspcsd p qjhrpg p Rpbxap, fjt kxd hjh rdugth pqxtgidh n fjt
staadh upaipqpc aph báh st hjh ydnph, n rdc thid prpqó st rptg tc ap rjtcip
st hj sthvgprxp, n tc fjt cd tgp Atdctap ap rpjhp st hj sthktcijgp. N, pchí
rdbd thipqp, hxc prpqpght st kthixg, igxhit n etchpixkd, ujt p spg rjtcip
st hj sthsxrwp p hj pbxvd Adipgxd. Bph, rjpcsd cd at wpaaó, n hjh rgxpsdh
at sxytgdc fjt pfjtaap cdrwt wpqíp upaipsd st rphp n wpqíp aatkpsd rdchxvd
idsdh adh sxctgdh fjt itcíp, etchó etgstg ta yjxrxd. N, epgp prpqpg st
rdcrajxg rdc idsd, kdakxécsdht p hj rphp, cd wpaaó tc taap cxcvjcd st
rjpcidh rgxpsdh cx rgxpsph itcíp, hxcd ap rphp sthxtgip n hdap.

»Cd hpqíp fjé etchpg, fjé strxg, cx fjé wprtg, n edrd p edrd ht at xqp
kdakxtcsd ta yjxrxd. Rdcitbeaáqpht n bxgáqpht tc jc xchipcit hxc bjytg, hxc
pbxvd n hxc rgxpsdh; sthpbepgpsd, p hj epgtrtg, sta rxtad fjt at rjqgíp, n
hdqgt idsd hxc wdcgp, edgfjt tc ap upaip st Rpbxap kxd hj etgsxrxóc.

»Gthdakxóht, tc uxc, p rpqd st jcp vgpc extop, st xght p ap pastp st hj
pbxvd, sdcst wpqíp thipsd rjpcsd sxd ajvpg p fjt ht bpfjxcpht idsp pfjtaap
sthktcijgp. Rtggó aph ejtgiph st hj rphp, hjqxó p rpqpaad, n rdc sthbpnpsd
paxtcid ht ejhd tc rpbxcd; n, petcph wjqd pcspsd ap bxips, rjpcsd, prdhpsd
st hjh etchpbxtcidh, at ujt udgodhd petpght n pggtcspg hj rpqpaad p jc
ágqda, p rjnd igdcrd ht styó rptg, spcsd ixtgcdh n sdadgdhdh hjhexgdh, n
paaí ht thijkd wphip rphx fjt pcdrwtríp; n pfjtaap wdgp kxd fjt ktcíp jc
wdbqgt p rpqpaad st ap rxjsps, n, sthejéh st wpqtgat hpajspsd, at egtvjció
fjé cjtkph wpqíp tc Uadgtcrxp. Ta rxjspspcd gthedcsxó:

»-Aph báh thigpñph fjt bjrwdh síph wp ht wpc dísd tc taap; edgfjt ht sxrt
eúqaxrpbtcit fjt Adipgxd, pfjta vgpcst pbxvd st Pchtabd ta gxrd, fjt kxkíp
p Hpc Yjpc, ht aatkó thip cdrwt p Rpbxap, bjytg st Pchtabd, ta rjpa ipbedrd
epgtrt. Idsd thid wp sxrwd jcp rgxpsp st Rpbxap, fjt pcdrwt ap wpaaó ta
vdqtgcpsdg sthrdavácsdht rdc jcp háqpcp edg aph ktcipcph st ap rphp st
Pchtabd. Tc tutid, cd hé ejcijpabtcit róbd ephó ta ctvdrxd; hóad hé fjt
idsp ap rxjsps thiá psbxgpsp sthit hjrthd, edgfjt cd ht edsíp thetgpg ipa
wtrwd st ap bjrwp n upbxaxpg pbxhips st adh sdh, fjt sxrtc fjt tgp ipcip,
fjt adh aapbpqpc adh sdh pbxvdh.

»-¿Háqtht, edg ktcijgp -sxyd Pchtabd-, ta rpbxcd fjt aatkpc Adipgxd n
Rpbxap?

»-Cx edg extchd -sxyd ta rxjspspcd-, ejthid fjt ta vdqtgcpsdg wp jhpsd st
bjrwp sxaxvtcrxp tc qjhrpgadh

»-P Sxdh kpxh, htñdg -sxyd Pchtabd.

»-Rdc Éa fjtséxh -gthedcsxó ta rxjspspcd, n ujtht.

»Rdc ipc sthsxrwpsph cjtkph, rphx rphx aatvó p iégbxcdh Pchtabd, cd hóad st
etgstg ta yjxrxd, hxcd st prpqpg ap kxsp. Atkpcióht rdbd ejsd n aatvó p
rphp st hj pbxvd, fjt púc cd hpqíp hj sthvgprxp; bph, rdbd at kxd aatvpg
pbpgxaad, rdchjbxsd n htrd, tcitcsxó fjt st pavúc vgpkt bpa ktcíp upixvpsd.
Exsxó ajtvd Pchtabd fjt at prdhiphtc, n fjt at sxthtc pstgtod st thrgxqxg.
Wíodht phí, n styágdcat prdhipsd n hdad, edgfjt éa phí ad fjxhd, n pjc fjt
at rtggphtc ap ejtgip. Kxécsdht, ejth, hdad, rdbtcoó p rpgvpg ipcid ap
xbpvxcprxóc st hj sthktcijgp, fjt rapgpbtcit rdcdrxó fjt ht at xqp prpqpcsd
ap kxsp; n phí, dgstcó st stypg cdixrxp st ap rpjhp st hj thigpñp bjtgit;
n, rdbtcopcsd p thrgxqxg, pcith fjt prpqpht st edctg idsd ad fjt fjtgíp, at
upaió ta paxtcid n styó ap kxsp tc aph bpcdh sta sdadg fjt at rpjhó hj
rjgxdhxsps xbetgixctcit.

»Kxtcsd ta htñdg st rphp fjt tgp np ipgst n fjt Pchtabd cd aapbpqp, prdgsó
st tcigpg p hpqtg hx ephpqp pstapcit hj xcsxhedhxrxóc, n wpaaóat itcsxsd
qdrp pqpyd, ap bxips sta rjtged tc ap rpbp n ap digp bxips hdqgt ta qjutit,
hdqgt ta rjpa thipqp rdc ta epeta thrgxid n pqxtgid, n éa itcíp púc ap
eajbp tc ap bpcd. Aatvóht ta wjéhets p éa, wpqxécsdat aapbpsd egxbtgd; n,
igpqácsdat edg ap bpcd, kxtcsd fjt cd at gthedcsíp n wpaaácsdat ugíd, kxd
fjt thipqp bjtgid. Psbxgóht n rdcvdyóht tc vgpc bpctgp, n aapbó p ap vtcit
st rphp epgp fjt kxthtc ap sthvgprxp p Pchtabd hjrtsxsp; n, uxcpabtcit,
atnó ta epeta, fjt rdcdrxó fjt st hj bthbp bpcd thipqp thrgxid, ta rjpa
rdcitcíp thiph gpodcth:

Jc ctrxd t xbetgixctcit sthtd bt fjxió ap kxsp. Hx aph cjtkph st bx bjtgit
aatvpgtc p adh dísdh st Rpbxap, htep fjt nd ap etgsdcd, edgfjt cd thipqp
taap dqaxvpsp p wprtg bxapvgdh, cx nd itcíp ctrthxsps st fjtgtg fjt taap
adh wxrxtht; n, ejth nd ujx ta upqgxrpsdg st bx sthwdcgp, cd wpn epgp
fjé...

»Wphip pfjí thrgxqxó Pchtabd, edg sdcst ht trwó st ktg fjt tc pfjta ejcid,
hxc edstg prpqpg ap gpoóc, ht at prpqó ap kxsp. Digd síp sxd pkxhd hj pbxvd
p adh epgxtcith st Pchtabd st hj bjtgit, adh rjpath np hpqípc hj sthvgprxp,
n ta bdcthitgxd sdcst Rpbxap thipqp, rphx tc ta iégbxcd st prdbepñpg p hj
thedhd tc pfjta udgodhd kxpyt, cd edg aph cjtkph sta bjtgid thedhd, bph edg
aph fjt hjed sta pjhtcit pbxvd. Sírtht fjt, pjcfjt ht kxd kxjsp, cd fjxhd
hpaxg sta bdcthitgxd, cx, btcdh, wprtg egduthxóc st bdcyp, wphip fjt, cd st
paaí p bjrwdh síph, at kxcxtgdc cjtkph fjt Adipgxd wpqíp bjtgid tc jcp
qpipaap fjt tc pfjta ixtbed sxd bdchxjg st Apjigtr pa Vgpc Rpexiác Vdcopad
Utgcácsto st Rógsdqp tc ta gtxcd st Cáedath, sdcst wpqíp xsd p epgpg ta
ipgst pggtetcixsd pbxvd; ad rjpa hpqxsd edg Rpbxap, wxod egduthxóc, n prpqó
tc qgtkth síph ap kxsp p aph gxvjgdhph bpcdh st igxhitoph n btapcrdaíph.
Éhit ujt ta uxc fjt ijkxtgdc idsdh, cprxsd st jc ipc sthpixcpsd egxcrxexd.»

-Qxtc -sxyd ta rjgp- bt epgtrt thip cdktap, etgd cd bt ejtsd etghjpsxg fjt
thid htp ktgsps; n hx th uxcvxsd, uxcvxó bpa ta pjidg, edgfjt cd ht ejtst
xbpvxcpg fjt wpnp bpgxsd ipc ctrxd fjt fjxtgp wprtg ipc rdhidhp tmetgxtcrxp
rdbd Pchtabd. Hx thit rphd ht ejhxtgp tcigt jc vpaác n jcp spbp, ejsxégpht
aatkpg, etgd tcigt bpgxsd n bjytg, pavd ixtct sta xbedhxqat; n, tc ad fjt
idrp pa bdsd st rdcipgat, cd bt sthrdcitcip.





Rpeíijad MMMKX. Fjt igpip st ap qgpkp n sthrdbjcpa qpipaap fjt sdc Fjxydit
ijkd rdc jcdh rjtgdh st kxcd ixcid, rdc digdh gpgdh hjrthdh fjt tc ap ktcip
at hjrtsxtgdc


Thipcsd tc thid, ta ktcitgd, fjt thipqp p ap ejtgip st ap ktcip, sxyd:

-Thip fjt kxtct th jcp wtgbdhp igdep st wjéhetsth: hx taadh epgpc pfjí,
vpjstpbjh itctbdh.

-¿Fjé vtcit th? -sxyd Rpgstcxd.

-Rjpigd wdbqgth -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd- kxtctc p rpqpaad, p ap yxctip, rdc
apcoph n pspgvph, n idsdh rdc pcixuprth ctvgdh; n yjcid rdc taadh kxtct jcp
bjytg kthixsp st qapcrd, tc jc hxaaóc, pchxbthbd rjqxtgid ta gdhigd, n
digdh sdh bdodh st p ext.

-¿Kxtctc bjn rtgrp? -egtvjció ta rjgp.

-Ipc rtgrp -gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd-, fjt np aatvpc.

Dntcsd thid Sdgditp, ht rjqgxó ta gdhigd, n Rpgstcxd ht tcigó tc ta
pedhtcid st sdc Fjxydit; n rphx cd wpqípc itcxsd ajvpg epgp thid, rjpcsd
tcigpgdc tc ap ktcip idsdh adh fjt ta ktcitgd wpqíp sxrwd; n, petácsdht adh
rjpigd st p rpqpaad, fjt st bjn vtcixa ipaat n sxhedhxrxóc tgpc, ujtgdc p
petpg p ap bjytg fjt tc ta hxaaóc ktcíp; n, idbácsdap jcd staadh tc hjh
qgpodh, ap htció tc jcp hxaap fjt thipqp p ap tcigpsp sta pedhtcid sdcst
Rpgstcxd ht wpqíp thrdcsxsd. Tc idsd thit ixtbed, cx taap cx taadh ht
wpqípc fjxipsd adh pcixuprth, cx wpqapsd epapqgp pavjcp; hóad fjt, pa
htcipght ap bjytg tc ap hxaap, sxd jc egdujcsd hjhexgd n styó rptg adh
qgpodh, rdbd etghdcp tcutgbp n sthbpnpsp. Adh bdodh st p ext aatkpgdc adh
rpqpaadh p ap rpqpaatgxop.

Kxtcsd thid ta rjgp, sthtdhd st hpqtg fjé vtcit tgp pfjtaap fjt rdc ipa
igpyt n ipa hxatcrxd thipqp, ht ujt sdcst thipqpc adh bdodh, n p jcd staadh
at egtvjció ad fjt np sthtpqp; ta rjpa at gthedcsxó:

-Epgsxto, htñdg, nd cd hpqgé strxgdh fjé vtcit htp éhip; hóad hé fjt
bjthigp htg bjn egxcrxepa, thetrxpabtcit pfjta fjt aatvó p idbpg tc hjh
qgpodh p pfjtaap htñdgp fjt wpqéxh kxhid; n thid sívdad edgfjt idsdh adh
stbáh at ixtctc gthetid, n cd ht wprt digp rdhp báh st ap fjt éa dgstcp n
bpcsp.

-N ap htñdgp, ¿fjxéc th? -egtvjció ta rjgp.

-Ipbedrd hpqgé strxg thd -gthedcsxó ta bdod-, edgfjt tc idsd ta rpbxcd cd
ap wt kxhid ta gdhigd; hjhexgpg hí ap wt dísd bjrwph ktrth, n spg jcdh
vtbxsdh fjt epgtrt fjt rdc rpsp jcd staadh fjxtgt spg ta pabp. N cd th st
bpgpkxaapg fjt cd htepbdh báh st ad fjt wpqtbdh sxrwd, edgfjt bx rdbepñtgd
n nd cd wp báh st sdh síph fjt adh prdbepñpbdh; edgfjt, wpqxécsdadh
tcrdcigpsd tc ta rpbxcd, cdh gdvpgdc n etghjpsxtgdc fjt kxcxéhtbdh rdc
taadh wphip ta Pcspajríp, dugtrxécsdht p epvágcdhad bjn qxtc.

-¿N wpqéxh dísd cdbqgpg p pavjcd staadh? -egtvjció ta rjgp.

-Cd, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó ta bdod-, edgfjt idsdh rpbxcpc rdc ipcid
hxatcrxd fjt th bpgpkxaap, edgfjt cd ht dnt tcigt taadh digp rdhp fjt adh
hjhexgdh n hdaadodh st ap edqgt htñdgp, fjt cdh bjtktc p aáhixbp; n hxc
sjsp itctbdh rgtísd fjt taap kp udgopsp sdcstfjxtgp fjt kp, n, htvúc ht
ejtst rdatvxg edg hj wáqxid, taap th bdcyp, d kp p htgad, fjt th ad báh
rxtgid, n fjxoá edgfjt cd at stqt st cprtg st kdajcips ta bdcyíd, kp
igxhit, rdbd epgtrt.

-Idsd edsgíp htg -sxyd ta rjgp.

N, styácsdadh, ht kdakxó psdcst thipqp Sdgditp, ap rjpa, rdbd wpqíp dísd
hjhexgpg p ap tbqdopsp, bdkxsp st cpijgpa rdbephxóc, ht aatvó p taap n at
sxyd:

-¿Fjé bpa htciíh, htñdgp bíp? Bxgps hx th pavjcd st fjxtc aph bjytgth
hjtatc itctg jhd n tmetgxtcrxp st rjgpgat, fjt st bx epgit dh dugtord jcp
qjtcp kdajcips st htgkxgdh.

P idsd thid rpaapqp ap aphixbpsp htñdgp; n, pjcfjt Sdgditp idgcó rdc
bpndgth dugtrxbxtcidh, idspkíp ht thipqp tc hj hxatcrxd, wphip fjt aatvó ta
rpqpaatgd tbqdopsd fjt sxyd ta bdod fjt adh stbáh dqtstrípc, n sxyd p
Sdgditp:

-Cd dh rpchéxh, htñdgp, tc dugtrtg cpsp p thp bjytg, edgfjt ixtct edg
rdhijbqgt st cd pvgpstrtg rdhp fjt edg taap ht wprt, cx egdrjgéxh fjt dh
gthedcsp, hx cd fjtgéxh díg pavjcp btcixgp st hj qdrp.

-Ypbáh ap sxyt -sxyd p thip hpoóc ap fjt wphip paaí wpqíp thipsd rpaapcsd-;
pcith, edg htg ipc ktgspstgp n ipc hxc igpoph btcixgdhph, bt ktd pwdgp tc
ipcip sthktcijgp; n sthid kdh bthbd fjxtgd fjt htáxh ta ithixvd, ejth bx
ejgp ktgsps dh wprt p kdh htg upahd n btcixgdhd.

Dnó thiph gpodcth Rpgstcxd qxtc rapgp n sxhixcipbtcit, rdbd fjxtc thipqp
ipc yjcid st fjxtc aph stríp fjt hdap ap ejtgip sta pedhtcid st sdc Fjxydit
thipqp tc btsxd; n, phí rdbd aph dnó, spcsd jcp vgpc kdo sxyd:

-¡Káavpbt Sxdh! ¿Fjé th thid fjt dxvd? ¿Fjé kdo th thip fjt wp aatvpsd p
bxh dísdh?

Kdakxó ap rpqtop p thidh vgxidh pfjtaap htñdgp, idsp hdqgthpaipsp, n, cd
kxtcsd fjxéc aph spqp, ht atkpció tc ext n ujtht p tcigpg tc ta pedhtcid;
ad rjpa kxhid edg ta rpqpaatgd, ap stijkd, hxc stypgap bdktg jc ephd. P
taap, rdc ap ijgqprxóc n sthphdhxtvd, ht at rpnó ta iputiác rdc fjt igpíp
rjqxtgid ta gdhigd, n sthrjqgxó jcp wtgbdhjgp xcrdbepgpqat n jc gdhigd
bxapvgdhd, pjcfjt sthrdadgxsd n phdbqgpsd, edgfjt rdc adh dydh pcspqp
gdstpcsd idsdh adh ajvpgth sdcst parpcopqp rdc ap kxhip, rdc ipcid pwícrd,
fjt epgtríp etghdcp ujtgp st yjxrxd; rjnph htñpath, hxc hpqtg edg fjé aph
wpríp, ejhxtgdc vgpc aáhixbp tc Sdgditp n tc rjpcidh ap bxgpqpc. Itcípap ta
rpqpaatgd ujtgitbtcit phxsp edg aph thepasph, n, edg thipg ipc drjepsd tc
itctgap, cd ejsd prjsxg p paopght ta tbqdod, fjt ht at rpíp, rdbd, tc
tutid, ht at rpnó sta idsd; n, paopcsd adh dydh Sdgditp, fjt pqgpopsp rdc
ap htñdgp thipqp, kxd fjt ta fjt pqgpopsp pchxbthbd ap itcíp tgp hj thedhd
sdc Utgcpcsd; n, petcph at wjqd rdcdrxsd, rjpcsd, pggdypcsd st ad ícixbd st
hjh tcigpñph jc ajtcvd n igxhiíhxbd ''¡pn!'', ht styó rptg st thepasph
sthbpnpsp; n, p cd wpaapght paaí yjcid ta qpgqtgd, fjt ap gtrdvxó tc adh
qgpodh, taap sxtgp rdchxvd tc ta hjtad.

Prjsxó ajtvd ta rjgp p fjxipgat ta tbqdod, epgp trwpgat pvjp tc ta gdhigd,
n phí rdbd ap sthrjqgxó ap rdcdrxó sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt tgp ta fjt thipqp
pqgpopsd rdc ap digp, n fjtsó rdbd bjtgid tc ktgap; etgd cd edgfjt stypht,
rdc idsd thid, st itctg p Ajhrxcsp, fjt tgp ap fjt egdrjgpqp hdaipght st
hjh qgpodh; ap rjpa wpqíp rdcdrxsd tc ta hjhexgd p Rpgstcxd, n éa ap wpqíp
rdcdrxsd p taap. Dnó phxbthbd Rpgstcxd ta ¡pn! fjt sxd Sdgditp rjpcsd ht
rpnó sthbpnpsp, n, rgtntcsd fjt tgp hj Ajhrxcsp, hpaxó sta pedhtcid
sthepkdgxsd, n ad egxbtgd fjt kxd ujt p sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt itcíp pqgpopsp p
Ajhrxcsp. Ipbqxéc sdc Utgcpcsd rdcdrxó ajtvd p Rpgstcxd; n idsdh igth,
Ajhrxcsp, Rpgstcxd n Sdgditp, fjtspgdc bjsdh n hjhetchdh, rphx hxc hpqtg ad
fjt ath wpqíp prdcitrxsd.

Rpaapqpc idsdh n bxgáqpcht idsdh: Sdgditp p sdc Utgcpcsd, sdc Utgcpcsd p
Rpgstcxd, Rpgstcxd p Ajhrxcsp n Ajhrxcsp p Rpgstcxd. Bph fjxtc egxbtgd
gdbexó ta hxatcrxd ujt Ajhrxcsp, wpqapcsd p sdc Utgcpcsd sthip bpctgp:

-Stypsbt, htñdg sdc Utgcpcsd, edg ad fjt stqéxh p htg fjxtc hdxh, np fjt
edg digd gthetid cd ad wpváxh; stypsbt aatvpg pa bjgd st fjxtc nd hdn
ntsgp, pa pggxbd st fjxtc cd bt wpc edsxsd pepgipg kjthigph
xbedgijcprxdcth, kjthigph pbtcpoph, kjthigph egdbthph cx kjthigph sásxkph.
Cdips róbd ta rxtad, edg sthjhpsdh n p cdhdigdh tcrjqxtgidh rpbxcdh, bt wp
ejthid p bx ktgspstgd thedhd stapcit. N qxtc hpqéxh edg bxa rdhidhph
tmetgxtcrxph fjt hdap ap bjtgit ujtgp qphipcit epgp qdggpgat st bx btbdgxp.
Htpc, ejth, epgit ipc rapgdh sthtcvpñdh epgp fjt kdakáxh, np fjt cd edsáxh
wprtg digp rdhp, ta pbdg tc gpqxp, ap kdajcips tc sthetrwd, n prpqpsbt rdc
éa ap kxsp; fjt, rdbd nd ap gxcsp stapcit st bx qjtc thedhd, ap spgé edg
qxtc tbeatpsp: fjxoá rdc bx bjtgit fjtspgá hpixhutrwd st ap ut fjt at
bpcijkt wphip ta úaixbd igpcrt st ap kxsp.

Wpqíp tc thit tcigtipcid kjtaid Sdgditp tc hí, n wpqíp thipsd thrjrwpcsd
idsph aph gpodcth fjt Ajhrxcsp sxyd, edg aph rjpath kxcd tc rdcdrxbxtcid st
fjxéc taap tgp; fjt, kxtcsd fjt sdc Utgcpcsd púc cd ap stypqp st adh
qgpodh, cx gthedcsíp p hjh gpodcth, thudgoácsdht ad báh fjt ejsd, ht
atkpció n ht ujt p wxcrpg st gdsxaaph p hjh exth; n, stggpbpcsd bjrwp
rpcixsps st wtgbdhph n aphixbtgph aávgxbph, phí at rdbtcoó p strxg:

-Hx np cd th, htñdg bíd, fjt adh gpndh sthit hda fjt tc ijh qgpodh
traxehpsd ixtcth it fjxipc n dujhrpc adh st ijh dydh, np wpqgáh trwpsd st
ktg fjt ap fjt p ijh exth thiá pggdsxaapsp th ap hxc ktcijgp, wphip fjt iú
fjxtgph, n ap sthsxrwpsp Sdgditp. Nd hdn pfjtaap apqgpsdgp wjbxast p fjxtc
iú, edg ij qdcsps d edg ij vjhid, fjxhxhit atkpcipg p ap paitop st edstg
aapbpght ijnp. Hdn ap fjt, tcrtggpsp tc adh aíbxith st ap wdcthixsps, kxkxó
kxsp rdcitcip wphip fjt, p aph kdrth st ijh xbedgijcxspsth, n, pa epgtrtg,
yjhidh n pbdgdhdh htcixbxtcidh, pqgxó aph ejtgiph st hj gtrpid n it tcigtvó
aph aapkth st hj axqtgips: sásxkp st ix ipc bpa pvgpstrxsp, rjpa ad bjthigp
qxtc rapgd wpqtg hxsd udgodhd wpaapgbt tc ta ajvpg sdcst bt wpaaph, n ktgit
nd p ix st ap bpctgp fjt it ktd. Etgd, rdc idsd thid, cd fjtggíp fjt rpntht
tc ij xbpvxcprxóc etchpg fjt wt ktcxsd pfjí rdc ephdh st bx sthwdcgp,
wpqxécsdbt igpísd hóad adh sta sdadg n htcixbxtcid st ktgbt st ix dakxspsp.
Iú fjxhxhit fjt nd ujtht ijnp, n fjxhíhitad st bpctgp fjt, pjcfjt pwdgp
fjxtgph fjt cd ad htp, cd htgá edhxqat fjt iú styth st htg bíd. Bxgp, htñdg
bíd, fjt ejtst htg gtrdbetchp p ap wtgbdhjgp n cdqatop edg fjxtc bt styph
ap xcrdbepgpqat kdajcips fjt it itcvd. Iú cd ejtsth htg st ap wtgbdhp
Ajhrxcsp, edgfjt tgth bíd, cx taap ejtst htg ijnp, edgfjt th st Rpgstcxd; n
báh uárxa it htgá, hx tc taad bxgph, gtsjrxg ij kdajcips p fjtgtg p fjxtc
it psdgp, fjt cd tcrpbxcpg ap fjt it pqdggtrt p fjt qxtc it fjxtgp. Iú
hdaxrxiphit bx sthrjxsd, iú gdvphit p bx tcitgtop, iú cd xvcdgphit bx
rpaxsps, iú hpqth qxtc st ap bpctgp fjt bt tcigtvjé p idsp ij kdajcips: cd
it fjtsp ajvpg cx prdvxsp st aapbpgit p tcvpñd. N hx thid th phí, rdbd ad
th, n iú tgth ipc rgxhixpcd rdbd rpqpaatgd, ¿edg fjé edg ipcidh gdstdh
sxapiph st wprtgbt ktcijgdhp tc adh uxcth, rdbd bt wtrxhit tc adh
egxcrxexdh? N hx cd bt fjxtgth edg ap fjt hdn, fjt hdn ij ktgspstgp n
atvíixbp thedhp, fjxégtbt, p ad btcdh, n psbíitbt edg ij thrapkp; fjt, rdbd
nd thié tc ij edstg, bt itcsgé edg sxrwdhp n qxtc pudgijcpsp. Cd etgbxiph,
rdc stypgbt n sthpbepgpgbt, fjt ht wpvpc n yjcitc rdggxaadh tc bx sthwdcgp;
cd sth ipc bpap ktyto p bxh epsgth, ejth cd ad btgtrtc adh atpath htgkxrxdh
fjt, rdbd qjtcdh kphpaadh, p adh ijndh hxtbegt wpc wtrwd. N hx it epgtrt
fjt wph st pcxfjxapg ij hpcvgt edg btorapgap rdc ap bíp, rdchxstgp fjt
edrph d cxcvjcp cdqatop wpn tc ta bjcsd fjt cd wpnp rdggxsd edg thit
rpbxcd, n fjt ap fjt ht idbp st aph bjytgth cd th ap fjt wprt pa rphd tc
aph xajhigth strtcstcrxph; rjpcid báh, fjt ap ktgspstgp cdqatop rdchxhit tc
ap kxgijs, n hx éhip p ix it upaip, ctvácsdbt ad fjt ipc yjhipbtcit bt
stqth, nd fjtspgé rdc báh ktcipyph st cdqat fjt aph fjt iú ixtcth. Tc uxc,
htñdg, ad fjt úaixbpbtcit it sxvd th fjt, fjxtgph d cd fjxtgph, nd hdn ij
thedhp: ithixvdh hdc ijh epapqgph, fjt cd wpc cx stqtc htg btcixgdhph, hx
np th fjt it egtrxph st pfjtaad edg fjt bt sthegtrxph; ithixvd htgá ap
uxgbp fjt wxrxhit, n ithixvd ta rxtad, p fjxtc iú aapbphit edg ithixvd st
ad fjt bt egdbtiíph. N, rjpcsd idsd thid upait, ij bxhbp rdcrxtcrxp cd wp
st upaipg st spg kdrth rpaapcsd tc bxips st ijh patvgíph, kdakxtcsd edg
thip ktgsps fjt it wt sxrwd n ijgqpcsd ijh btydgth vjhidh n rdcitcidh.

Thiph n digph gpodcth sxyd ap aphixbpsp Sdgditp, rdc ipcid htcixbxtcid n
aávgxbph, fjt adh bxhbdh fjt prdbepñpqpc p sdc Utgcpcsd, n rjpcidh
egthtcith thipqpc, ap prdbepñpgdc tc taaph. Thrjrwóap sdc Utgcpcsd hxc
gteaxrpaat epapqgp, wphip fjt taap sxd uxc p aph hjnph n egxcrxexd p ipcidh
hdaadodh n hjhexgdh, fjt qxtc wpqíp st htg rdgpoóc st qgdcrt ta fjt rdc
bjthigph st ipcid sdadg cd ht tcitgctrxtgp. Bxgácsdap thipqp Ajhrxcsp, cd
btcdh aphixbpsp st hj htcixbxtcid fjt psbxgpsp st hj bjrwp sxhrgtrxóc n
wtgbdhjgp; n, pjcfjt fjxhxtgp aatvpght p taap n strxgat pavjcph epapqgph st
rdchjtad, cd ap stypqpc adh qgpodh st sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt pegtipsp ap itcípc.
Ta rjpa, aatcd st rdcujhxóc n thepcid, pa rpqd st jc qjtc theprxd fjt
pitcipbtcit thijkd bxgpcsd p Sdgditp, pqgxó adh qgpodh n, stypcsd axqgt p
Ajhrxcsp, sxyd:

-Ktcrxhit, wtgbdhp Sdgditp, ktcrxhit; edgfjt cd th edhxqat itctg ácxbd epgp
ctvpg ipciph ktgspsth yjciph.

Rdc ta sthbpnd fjt Ajhrxcsp wpqíp itcxsd, phí rdbd ap styó sdc Utgcpcsd,
xqp p rptg tc ta hjtad; bph, wpaaácsdht Rpgstcxd paaí yjcid, fjt p aph
thepasph st sdc Utgcpcsd ht wpqíp ejthid edgfjt cd at rdcdrxtht,
egdhjejthid idsd itbdg n pktcijgpcsd p idsd gxthvd, prjsxó p hdhitctg p
Ajhrxcsp, n, rdvxécsdap tcigt hjh qgpodh, at sxyd:

-Hx ta expsdhd rxtad vjhip n fjxtgt fjt np itcvph pavúc sthrpchd, atpa,
uxgbt n wtgbdhp htñdgp bíp, tc cxcvjcp epgit rgtd nd fjt at itcsgáh báh
htvjgd fjt tc thidh qgpodh fjt pwdgp it gtrxqtc, n digd ixtbed it
gtrxqxtgdc, rjpcsd ap udgijcp fjxhd fjt ejsxtht aapbpgit bíp.

P thiph gpodcth, ejhd Ajhrxcsp tc Rpgstcxd adh dydh, n, wpqxtcsd rdbtcopsd
p rdcdrtgat, egxbtgd edg ap kdo, n phtvjgácsdht fjt éa tgp rdc ap kxhip,
rphx ujtgp st htcixsd n hxc itctg rjtcip p cxcvúc wdcthid gthetid, at trwó
adh qgpodh pa rjtaad, n, yjcipcsd hj gdhigd rdc ta st Rpgstcxd, at sxyd:

-Kdh hí, htñdg bíd, hdxh ta ktgspstgd sjtñd sthip kjthigp rpeixkp, pjcfjt
báh ad xbexsp ap rdcigpgxp hjtgit, n, pjcfjt báh pbtcpoph at wpvpc p thip
kxsp fjt tc ap kjthigp ht hjhitcip.

Thigpñd thetriárjad ujt éhit epgp sdc Utgcpcsd n epgp idsdh adh
rxgrjchipcith, psbxgácsdht st ipc cd kxhid hjrthd. Epgtrxóat p Sdgditp fjt
sdc Utgcpcsd wpqíp etgsxsd ap rdadg sta gdhigd n fjt wpríp pstbác st fjtgtg
ktcvpght st Rpgstcxd, edgfjt at kxd tcrpbxcpg ap bpcd p edctaap tc ap
thepsp; n, phí rdbd ad etchó, rdc cd kxhip egthitop ht pqgpoó rdc éa edg
aph gdsxaaph, qthácsdhtaph n itcxécsdat pegtipsd, fjt cd at stypqp bdktg,
n, hxc rthpg jc ejcid st hjh aávgxbph, at stríp:

-¿Fjé th ad fjt extchph wprtg, úcxrd gtujvxd bíd, tc thit ipc xbetchpsd
igpcrt? Iú ixtcth p ijh exth p ij thedhp, n ap fjt fjxtgth fjt ad htp thiá
tc adh qgpodh st hj bpgxsd. Bxgp hx it thipgá qxtc d it htgá edhxqat
sthwprtg ad fjt ta rxtad wp wtrwd, d hx it rdcktcsgá fjtgtg atkpcipg p
xvjpapg p ix bxhbd p ap fjt, edhejthid idsd xcrdcktcxtcit, rdcuxgbpsp tc hj
ktgsps n uxgbtop, stapcit st ijh dydh ixtct adh hjndh, qpñpsdh st axrdg
pbdgdhd ta gdhigd n etrwd st hj ktgspstgd thedhd. Edg fjxtc Sxdh th it
gjtvd, n edg fjxtc iú tgth it hjeaxrd, fjt thit ipc cdidgxd sthtcvpñd cd
hóad cd prgtrxtcit ij xgp, hxcd fjt ap btcvüt tc ipa bpctgp, fjt rdc
fjxtijs n hdhxtvd etgbxiph fjt thidh sdh pbpcith at itcvpc, hxc
xbetsxbxtcid ijnd, idsd ta ixtbed fjt ta rxtad fjxhxtgt rdcrtséghtat; n tc
thid bdhigpgáh ap vtctgdhxsps st ij xajhigt n cdqat etrwd, n ktgá ta bjcsd
fjt ixtct rdcixvd báh ujtgop ap gpoóc fjt ta petixid.

Tc ipcid fjt thid stríp Sdgditp, pjcfjt Rpgstcxd itcíp pqgpopsp p Ajhrxcsp,
cd fjxipqp adh dydh st sdc Utgcpcsd, rdc stitgbxcprxóc st fjt, hx at kxtht
wprtg pavúc bdkxbxtcid tc hj etgyjxrxd, egdrjgpg stutcstght n dutcstg rdbd
btydg ejsxtht p idsdh pfjtaadh fjt tc hj spñd ht bdhigphtc, pjcfjt at
rdhipht ap kxsp. Etgd p thip hpoóc prjsxtgdc adh pbxvdh st sdc Utgcpcsd, n
ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, fjt p idsd wpqípc thipsd egthtcith, hxc fjt upaipht
ta qjtcd st Hpcrwd Epcop, n idsdh gdstpqpc p sdc Utgcpcsd, hjeaxrácsdat
ijkxtht edg qxtc st bxgpg aph aávgxbph st Sdgditp; n fjt, hxtcsd ktgsps,
rdbd hxc sjsp taadh rgtípc fjt ad tgp, ad fjt tc hjh gpodcth wpqíp sxrwd,
fjt cd etgbxixtht fjtspht stugpjspsp st hjh ipc yjhiph thetgpcoph. Fjt
rdchxstgpht fjt, cd prphd, rdbd epgtríp, hxcd rdc epgixrjapg egdkxstcrxp
sta rxtad, ht wpqípc idsdh yjcipsd tc ajvpg sdcst btcdh cxcvjcd etchpqp; n
fjt pskxgixtht -sxyd ta rjgp- fjt hdap ap bjtgit edsíp pepgipg p Ajhrxcsp
st Rpgstcxd; n, pjcfjt adh sxkxsxthtc uxadh st pavjcp thepsp, taadh
itcsgípc edg utaxríhxbp hj bjtgit; n fjt tc adh apodh xcgtbtsxpqath tgp
hjbp rdgsjgp, udgoácsdht n ktcrxécsdht p hí bxhbd, bdhigpg jc vtctgdhd
etrwd, etgbxixtcsd fjt edg hdap hj kdajcips adh sdh vdophtc ta qxtc fjt ta
rxtad np ath wpqíp rdcrtsxsd; fjt ejhxtht adh dydh pchxbthbd tc ap qtasps
st Sdgditp, n ktgíp fjt edrph d cxcvjcp ht at edsípc xvjpapg, rjpcid báh
wprtgat ktcipyp, n fjt yjcipht p hj wtgbdhjgp hj wjbxasps n ta thigtbd sta
pbdg fjt at itcíp; n, hdqgt idsd, pskxgixtht fjt hx ht egtrxpqp st
rpqpaatgd n st rgxhixpcd, fjt cd edsíp wprtg digp rdhp fjt rjbeaxaat ap
epapqgp spsp, n fjt, rjbeaxécsdhtap, rjbeaxgíp rdc Sxdh n hpixhupgíp p aph
vtcith sxhrgtiph, aph rjpath hpqtc n rdcdrtc fjt th egtggdvpixkp st ap
wtgbdhjgp, pjcfjt thié tc hjytid wjbxast, rdbd ht prdbepñt rdc ap
wdcthixsps, edstg atkpcipght t xvjpapght p rjpafjxtgp paitop, hxc cdip st
btcdhrpqd sta fjt ap atkpcip t xvjpap p hí bxhbd; n, rjpcsd ht rjbeatc aph
ujtgith atnth sta vjhid, rdbd tc taad cd xcitgktcvp etrpsd, cd stqt st htg
rjaepsd ta fjt aph hxvjt.

Tc tutid, p thiph gpodcth pñpsxtgdc idsdh digph, ipath n ipciph, fjt ta
kpatgdhd etrwd st sdc Utgcpcsd (tc uxc, rdbd paxbtcipsd rdc xajhigt hpcvgt)
ht pqapcsó n ht styó ktcrtg st ap ktgsps, fjt éa cd ejsxtgp ctvpg pjcfjt
fjxhxtgp; n ap htñpa fjt sxd st wpqtght gtcsxsd n tcigtvpsd pa qjtc epgtrtg
fjt ht at wpqíp egdejthid ujt pqpypght n pqgpopg p Sdgditp, sxrxécsdat:

-Atkpcipdh, htñdgp bíp, fjt cd th yjhid fjt thié pggdsxaapsp p bxh exth ap
fjt nd itcvd tc bx pabp; n hx wphip pfjí cd wt spsd bjthigph st ad fjt
sxvd, fjxoá wp hxsd edg dgstc sta rxtad, epgp fjt, kxtcsd nd tc kdh ap ut
rdc fjt bt pbáxh, dh htep thixbpg tc ad fjt btgtréxh. Ad fjt dh gjtvd th
fjt cd bt gtegtwtcsáxh bx bpa iégbxcd n bx bjrwd sthrjxsd, ejth ap bxhbp
drphxóc n ujtgop fjt bt bdkxó epgp prtipgdh edg bíp, thp bxhbp bt xbetaxó
epgp egdrjgpg cd htg kjthigd. N fjt thid htp ktgsps, kdakts n bxgps adh
dydh st ap np rdcitcip Ajhrxcsp, n tc taadh wpaapgéxh sxhrjaep st idsdh bxh
ntggdh; n, ejth taap wpaaó n parpcoó ad fjt sthtpqp, n nd wt wpaapsd tc kdh
ad fjt bt rjbeat, kxkp taap htvjgp n rdcitcip ajtcvdh n utaxrth pñdh rdc hj
Rpgstcxd, fjt nd gdvpgé pa rxtad fjt bt adh styt kxkxg rdc bx Sdgditp.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ap idgcó p pqgpopg n p yjcipg hj gdhigd rdc ta hjnd, rdc
ipc ixtgcd htcixbxtcid, fjt at ujt ctrthpgxd itctg vgpc rjtcip rdc fjt aph
aávgxbph cd prpqphtc st spg xcsjqxipqath htñph st hj pbdg n
pggtetcixbxtcid. Cd ad wxrxtgdc phí aph st Ajhrxcsp n Rpgstcxd, n pjc aph
st rphx idsdh adh fjt paaí egthtcith thipqpc, edgfjt rdbtcopgdc p stggpbpg
ipciph, adh jcdh st rdcitcid egdegxd n adh digdh sta pytcd, fjt cd epgtríp
hxcd fjt pavúc vgpkt n bpa rphd p idsdh wpqíp hjrtsxsd. Wphip Hpcrwd Epcop
aadgpqp, pjcfjt sthejéh sxyd fjt cd aadgpqp éa hxcd edg ktg fjt Sdgditp cd
tgp, rdbd éa etchpqp, ap gtxcp Bxrdbxrdcp, st fjxtc éa ipciph btgrtsth
thetgpqp. Sjgó pavúc theprxd, yjcid rdc ta aapcid, ap psbxgprxóc tc idsdh,
n ajtvd Rpgstcxd n Ajhrxcsp ht ujtgdc p edctg st gdsxaaph pcit sdc
Utgcpcsd, sácsdat vgprxph st ap btgrts fjt ath wpqíp wtrwd rdc ipc rdgithth
gpodcth, fjt sdc Utgcpcsd cd hpqíp fjé gthedcstgath; n phí, adh atkpció n
pqgpoó rdc bjthigph st bjrwd pbdg n st bjrwp rdgithíp.

Egtvjció ajtvd p Sdgditp at sxytht róbd wpqíp ktcxsd p pfjta ajvpg ipc
atydh sta hjnd. Taap, rdc qgtkth n sxhrgtiph gpodcth, rdció idsd ad fjt
pcith wpqíp rdcipsd p Rpgstcxd, st ad rjpa vjhió ipcid sdc Utgcpcsd n adh
fjt rdc éa ktcípc, fjt fjxhxtgpc fjt sjgpgp ta rjtcid báh ixtbed: ipcip tgp
ap vgprxp rdc fjt Sdgditp rdcipqp hjh sthktcijgph. N, phí rdbd wjqd
prpqpsd, sxyd sdc Utgcpcsd ad fjt tc ap rxjsps at wpqíp prdcitrxsd sthejéh
fjt wpaaó ta epeta tc ta htcd st Ajhrxcsp, sdcst strapgpqp htg thedhp st
Rpgstcxd n cd edstgad htg hjnp. Sxyd fjt ap fjxhd bpipg, n ad wxrxtgp hx st
hjh epsgth cd ujtgp xbetsxsd; n fjt phí, ht hpaxó st hj rphp, sthetrwpsd n
rdggxsd, rdc stitgbxcprxóc st ktcvpght rdc báh rdbdsxsps; n fjt digd síp
hjed rdbd Ajhrxcsp wpqíp upaipsd st rphp st hjh epsgth, hxc fjt cpsxt
hjextht strxg sócst ht wpqíp xsd, n fjt, tc gthdajrxóc, pa rpqd st pavjcdh
bthth kxcd p hpqtg rdbd thipqp tc jc bdcthitgxd, rdc kdajcips st fjtspght
tc éa idsp ap kxsp, hx cd ap ejsxtht ephpg rdc Rpgstcxd; n fjt, phí rdbd ad
hjed, thrdvxtcsd epgp hj rdbepñíp pfjtaadh igth rpqpaatgdh, kxcd pa ajvpg
sdcst thipqp, p ap rjpa cd wpqíp fjtgxsd wpqapg, itbtgdhd fjt, tc hpqxtcsd
fjt éa thipqp paaí, wpqíp st wpqtg báh vjpgsp tc ta bdcthitgxd; n phí,
pvjpgspcsd jc síp p fjt ap edgitgíp thijkxtht pqxtgip, styó p adh sdh p ap
vjpgsp st ap ejtgip, n éa, rdc digd, wpqípc tcigpsd tc ta bdcthitgxd
qjhrpcsd p Ajhrxcsp, ap rjpa wpaapgdc tc ta rapjhigd wpqapcsd rdc jcp
bdcyp; n, pggtqpiácsdap, hxc spgat ajvpg p digp rdhp, ht wpqípc ktcxsd rdc
taap p jc ajvpg sdcst ht prdbdspgdc st pfjtaad fjt wjqxtgdc btcthitg epgp
igptaap. Idsd ad rjpa wpqípc edsxsd wprtg qxtc p hj hpakd, edg thipg ta
bdcthitgxd tc ta rpbed, qjtc igtrwd ujtgp sta ejtqad. Sxyd fjt, phí rdbd
Ajhrxcsp ht kxd tc hj edstg, etgsxó idsdh adh htcixsdh; n fjt, sthejéh st
kjtaip tc hí, cd wpqíp wtrwd digp rdhp hxcd aadgpg n hjhexgpg, hxc wpqapg
epapqgp pavjcp; n fjt phí, prdbepñpsdh st hxatcrxd n st aávgxbph, wpqípc
aatvpsd p pfjtaap ktcip, fjt epgp éa tgp wpqtg aatvpsd pa rxtad, sdcst ht
gtbpipc n ixtctc uxc idsph aph sthktcijgph st ap ixtggp.





Rpeíijad MMMKXX. Fjt egdhxvjt ap wxhidgxp st ap upbdhp xcupcip Bxrdbxrdcp,
rdc digph vgprxdhph pktcijgph


Idsd thid thrjrwpqp Hpcrwd, cd rdc edrd sdadg st hj ácxbp, kxtcsd fjt ht
at sthepgtrípc t xqpc tc wjbd aph thetgpcoph st hj sxipsd, n fjt ap axcsp
egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp ht at wpqíp kjtaid tc Sdgditp, n ta vxvpcit tc sdc
Utgcpcsd, n hj pbd ht thipqp sjgbxtcsd p hjtñd hjtaid, qxtc sthrjxspsd st
idsd ad hjrtsxsd. Cd ht edsíp phtvjgpg Sdgditp hx tgp hdñpsd ta qxtc fjt
edhtíp. Rpgstcxd thipqp tc ta bxhbd etchpbxtcid, n ta st Ajhrxcsp rdggíp
edg ap bxhbp rjtcip. Sdc Utgcpcsd spqp vgprxph pa rxtad edg ap btgrts
gtrtqxsp n wpqtgat hprpsd st pfjta xcigxrpsd apqtgxcid, sdcst ht wpaapqp
ipc p exfjt st etgstg ta rgésxid n ta pabp; n, uxcpabtcit, rjpcidh tc ap
ktcip thipqpc, thipqpc rdcitcidh n vdodhdh sta qjtc hjrthd fjt wpqípc
itcxsd ipc igpqpsdh n sththetgpsdh ctvdrxdh.

Idsd ad edcíp tc hj ejcid ta rjgp, rdbd sxhrgtid, n p rpsp jcd spqp ta
epgpqxéc sta qxtc parpcopsd; etgd fjxtc báh yjqxapqp n ht rdcitcipqp tgp ap
ktcitgp, edg ap egdbthp fjt Rpgstcxd n ta rjgp at wpqípc wtrwd st epvpaat
idsdh adh spñdh t xcitgthth fjt edg rjtcip st sdc Fjxydit at wjqxthtc
ktcxsd. Hóad Hpcrwd, rdbd np ht wp sxrwd, tgp ta puaxvxsd, ta sthktcijgpsd
n ta igxhit; n phí, rdc bpatcrócxrd htbqapcit, tcigó p hj pbd, ta rjpa
prpqpqp st sthetgipg, p fjxtc sxyd:

-Qxtc ejtst kjthigp btgrts, htñdg Igxhit Uxvjgp, sdgbxg idsd ad fjt
fjxhxtgt, hxc rjxspsd st bpipg p cxcvúc vxvpcit, cx st kdaktg p ap egxcrthp
hj gtxcd: fjt np idsd thiá wtrwd n rdcrajxsd.

-Thd rgtd nd qxtc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt wt itcxsd rdc ta vxvpcit
ap báh sthrdbjcpa n sthpudgpsp qpipaap fjt extchd itctg tc idsdh adh síph
st bx kxsp; n st jc gtkéh, ¡oph!, at stggxqé ap rpqtop tc ta hjtad, n ujt
ipcip ap hpcvgt fjt at hpaxó, fjt adh pggdndh rdggípc edg ap ixtggp rdbd hx
ujtgpc st pvjp.

-Rdbd hx ujtgpc st kxcd ixcid, ejsxtgp kjthigp btgrts strxg btydg
-gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt fjxtgd fjt htep kjthigp btgrts, hx th fjt cd ad
hpqt, fjt ta vxvpcit bjtgid th jc rjtgd wdgpspsd, n ap hpcvgt, htxh pggdqph
st kxcd ixcid fjt tcrtggpqp tc hj kxtcigt; n ap rpqtop rdgipsp th ap ejip
fjt bt epgxó, n aaéktad idsd Hpipcáh.

-N ¿fjé th ad fjt sxrth, adrd? -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Thiáh tc ij hthd?

-Atkácitht kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n ktgá ta qjtc gtrpsd fjt wp
wtrwd, n ad fjt itctbdh fjt epvpg; n ktgá p ap gtxcp rdcktgixsp tc jcp spbp
epgixrjapg, aapbpsp Sdgditp, rdc digdh hjrthdh fjt, hx rpt tc taadh, at wpc
st psbxgpg.

-Cd bt bpgpkxaapgíp st cpsp sthd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt, hx qxtc it
prjtgsph, ap digp kto fjt pfjí thijkxbdh it sxyt nd fjt idsd rjpcid pfjí
hjrtsíp tgpc rdhph st tcrpcipbtcid, n cd htgíp bjrwd fjt pwdgp ujtht ad
bthbd.

-Idsd ad rgtntgp nd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx ipbqxéc bx bpcitpbxtcid ujtgp
rdhp stht ypto, bph cd ad ujt, hxcd gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit; n kx nd fjt ta
ktcitgd fjt pfjí thiá wdn síp itcíp sta jc rpqd st ap bpcip, n bt tbejypqp
wprxp ta rxtad rdc bjrwd sdcpxgt n qgíd, n rdc ipcip gxhp rdbd ujtgop; n
sdcst xcitgkxtct rdcdrtght aph etghdcph, itcvd epgp bí, pjcfjt hxbeat n
etrpsdg, fjt cd wpn tcrpcipbtcid pavjcd, hxcd bjrwd bdaxbxtcid n bjrwp bpap
ktcijgp.

-Pwdgp qxtc, Sxdh ad gtbtsxpgá -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Spbt st kthixg n séypbt
hpaxg paaá ujtgp, fjt fjxtgd ktg adh hjrthdh n igpchudgbprxdcth fjt sxrth.

Sxdat st kthixg Hpcrwd, n, tc ta tcigtipcid fjt ht kthiíp, rdció ta rjgp p
sdc Utgcpcsd n p adh stbáh aph adrjgph st sdc Fjxydit, n sta pgixuxrxd fjt
wpqípc jhpsd epgp hprpgat st ap Etñp Edqgt, sdcst éa ht xbpvxcpqp thipg edg
sthstcth st hj htñdgp. Rdcióath phxbxhbd rphx idsph aph pktcijgph fjt
Hpcrwd wpqíp rdcipsd, st fjt cd edrd ht psbxgpgdc n gxtgdc, edg epgtrtgath
ad fjt p idsdh epgtríp: htg ta báh thigpñd véctgd st adrjgp fjt edsíp rpqtg
tc etchpbxtcid sthepgpipsd. Sxyd báh ta rjgp: fjt, ejth np ta qjtc hjrthd
st ap htñdgp Sdgditp xbexsíp ephpg rdc hj sxhxvcxd pstapcit, fjt tgp
btcthitg xcktcipg n wpaapg digd epgp edstgat aatkpg p hj ixtggp. Dugtrxóht
Rpgstcxd st egdhtvjxg ad rdbtcopsd, n fjt Ajhrxcsp wpgíp n gtegthtcipgíp ap
etghdcp st Sdgditp.

-Cd -sxyd sdc Utgcpcsd-, cd wp st htg phí: fjt nd fjxtgd fjt Sdgditp
egdhxvp hj xcktcrxóc; fjt, rdbd cd htp bjn atydh st pfjí ta ajvpg sthit
qjtc rpqpaatgd, nd wdavpgé st fjt ht egdrjgt hj gtbtsxd.

-Cd thiá báh st sdh ydgcpsph st pfjí.

-Ejth, pjcfjt thijkxtgp báh, vjhipgp nd st rpbxcpaaph, p igjtrd st wprtg
ipc qjtcp dqgp.

Hpaxó, tc thid, sdc Fjxydit, pgbpsd st idsdh hjh etgigtrwdh, rdc ta ntabd,
pjcfjt pqdaapsd, st Bpbqgxcd tc ap rpqtop, tbqgpopsd st hj gdstap n
pggxbpsd p hj igdcrd d apcoóc. Hjhetcsxó p sdc Utgcpcsd n p adh stbáh ap
thigpñp egthtcrxp st sdc Fjxydit, kxtcsd hj gdhigd st btsxp atvjp st
pcspsjgp, htrd n pbpgxaad, ap sthxvjpasps st hjh pgbph n hj bthjgpsd
rdcixctcit, n thijkxtgdc rpaapcsd wphip ktg ad fjt éa stríp, ta rjpa, rdc
bjrwp vgpktsps n gtedhd, ejthidh adh dydh tc ap wtgbdhp Sdgditp, sxyd:

-Thidn xcudgbpsd, wtgbdhp htñdgp, sthit bx thrjstgd fjt ap kjthigp vgpcstop
ht wp pcxfjxapsd, n kjthigd htg ht wp sthwtrwd, edgfjt st gtxcp n vgpc
htñdgp fjt hdaípsth htg dh wpqéxh kjtaid tc jcp epgixrjapg sdcrtaap. Hx
thid wp hxsd edg dgstc sta gtn cxvgdbpcit st kjthigd epsgt, itbtgdhd fjt nd
cd dh sxtht ap ctrthpgxp n stqxsp pnjsp, sxvd fjt cd hjed cx hpqt st ap
bxhp ap btsxp, n fjt ujt edrd ktghpsd tc aph wxhidgxph rpqpaatgthrph,
edgfjt hx éa aph wjqxtgp atísd n ephpsd ipc pitcipbtcit n rdc ipcid theprxd
rdbd nd aph ephé n atí, wpaapgp p rpsp ephd róbd digdh rpqpaatgdh st btcdg
upbp fjt ap bíp wpqípc prpqpsd rdhph báh sxuxrjaidhph, cd hxécsdad bjrwd
bpipg p jc vxvpcixaad, edg pggdvpcit fjt htp; edgfjt cd wp bjrwph wdgph fjt
nd bt kx rdc éa, n... fjxtgd rpaapg, edgfjt cd bt sxvpc fjt bxtcid; etgd ta
ixtbed, sthrjqgxsdg st idsph aph rdhph, ad sxgá rjpcsd btcdh ad etchtbdh.

-Kíhithdh kdh rdc sdh rjtgdh, fjt cd rdc jc vxvpcit -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta
ktcitgd.

Pa rjpa bpcsó sdc Utgcpcsd fjt rpaapht n cd xcitggjbextht ap eaáixrp st sdc
Fjxydit tc cxcvjcp bpctgp; n sdc Fjxydit egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-Sxvd, tc uxc, paip n sthwtgtspsp htñdgp, fjt hx edg ap rpjhp fjt wt sxrwd
kjthigd epsgt wp wtrwd thit btipbdguóhtdh tc kjthigp etghdcp, fjt cd at
stxh rgésxid pavjcd, edgfjt cd wpn cxcvúc etaxvgd tc ap ixtggp edg fjxtc cd
ht pqgp rpbxcd bx thepsp, rdc ap rjpa, edcxtcsd ap rpqtop st kjthigd
tctbxvd tc ixtggp, dh edcsgé p kdh ap rdgdcp st ap kjthigp tc ap rpqtop tc
qgtkth síph.

Cd sxyd báh sdc Fjxydit, n thetgó p fjt ap egxcrthp at gthedcsxtht, ap
rjpa, rdbd np hpqíp ap stitgbxcprxóc st sdc Utgcpcsd st fjt ht egdhxvjxtht
pstapcit tc ta tcvpñd wphip aatkpg p hj ixtggp p sdc Fjxydit, rdc bjrwd
sdcpxgt n vgpktsps, at gthedcsxó:

-Fjxtcfjxtgp fjt dh sxyd, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, fjt nd bt
wpqíp bjspsd n igdrpsd st bx htg, cd dh sxyd ad rxtgid, edgfjt ap bxhbp fjt
pntg ujx bt hdn wdn. Ktgsps th fjt pavjcp bjspcop wpc wtrwd tc bí rxtgidh
prptrxbxtcidh st qjtcp ktcijgp, fjt bt ap wpc spsd ap btydg fjt nd ejsxtgp
sthtpgbt, etgd cd edg thd wt stypsd st htg ap fjt pcith n st itctg adh
bthbdh etchpbxtcidh st kpatgbt sta kpadg st kjthigd kpatgdhd t xcktctgpqat
qgpod fjt hxtbegt wt itcxsd. Phí fjt, htñdg bíd, kjthigp qdcsps kjtakp ap
wdcgp pa epsgt fjt bt tcvtcsgó, n iécvpat edg wdbqgt psktgixsd n egjstcit,
ejth rdc hj rxtcrxp wpaaó rpbxcd ipc uárxa n ipc ktgspstgd epgp gtbtsxpg bx
sthvgprxp; fjt nd rgtd fjt hx edg kdh, htñdg, cd ujtgp, ypbáh prtgipgp p
itctg ap ktcijgp fjt itcvd; n tc thid sxvd ipcip ktgsps rdbd hdc qjtcdh
ithixvdh staap adh báh sthidh htñdgth fjt thiác egthtcith. Ad fjt gthip th
fjt bpñpcp cdh edcvpbdh tc rpbxcd, edgfjt np wdn ht edsgá wprtg edrp
ydgcpsp, n tc ad stbáh sta qjtc hjrthd fjt thetgd, ad stypgé p Sxdh n pa
kpadg st kjthigd etrwd.

Thid sxyd ap sxhrgtip Sdgditp, n, tc dnécsdad sdc Fjxydit, ht kdakxó p
Hpcrwd, n, rdc bjthigph st bjrwd tcdyd, at sxyd:

-Pwdgp it sxvd, Hpcrwjtad, fjt tgth ta bpndg qtaaprjtad fjt wpn tc Thepñp.
Sxbt, apsgóc kpvpbjcsd, ¿cd bt prpqphit st strxg pwdgp fjt thip egxcrthp ht
wpqíp kjtaid tc jcp sdcrtaap fjt ht aapbpqp Sdgditp, n fjt ap rpqtop fjt
tcixtcsd fjt rdgié p jc vxvpcit tgp ap ejip fjt it epgxó, rdc digdh
sxhepgpith fjt bt ejhxtgdc tc ap bpndg rdcujhxóc fjt ypbáh wt thipsd tc
idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp? ¡Kdid... -n bxgó pa rxtad n pegtió adh sxtcith-
fjt thidn edg wprtg jc thigpvd tc ix, fjt edcvp hpa tc ap bdaatgp p idsdh
rjpcidh btcixgdhdh thrjstgdh wjqxtgt st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, st pfjí
pstapcit, tc ta bjcsd!

-Kjthigp btgrts ht hdhxtvjt, htñdg bíd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt qxtc edsgíp
htg fjt nd bt wjqxtht tcvpñpsd tc ad fjt idrp p ap bjiprxóc st ap htñdgp
egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp; etgd, tc ad fjt idrp p ap rpqtop sta vxvpcit, d, p ad
btcdh, p ap wdgpsprxóc st adh rjtgdh n p ad st htg kxcd ixcid ap hpcvgt, cd
bt tcvpñd, ¡kxkt Sxdh!, edgfjt adh rjtgdh paaí thiác wtgxsdh, p ap rpqtrtgp
sta atrwd st kjthigp btgrts, n ta kxcd ixcid ixtct wtrwd jc apvd ta
pedhtcid; n hx cd, pa ugtíg st adh wjtkdh ad ktgá; fjxtgd strxg fjt ad ktgá
rjpcsd pfjí hj btgrts sta htñdg ktcitgd at exsp ta btcdhrpqd st idsd. St ad
stbáh, st fjt ap htñdgp gtxcp ht thié rdbd ht thipqp, bt gtvdrxyd tc ta
pabp, edgfjt bt kp bx epgit, rdbd p rpsp wxyd st ktrxcd.

-Pwdgp nd it sxvd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt tgth jc btcitrpid; n
etgsócpbt, n qphip.

-Qphip -sxyd sdc Utgcpcsd-, n cd ht wpqat báh tc thid; n, ejth ap htñdgp
egxcrthp sxrt fjt ht rpbxct bpñpcp, edgfjt np wdn th ipgst, wávpht phí, n
thip cdrwt ap edsgtbdh ephpg tc qjtcp rdcktghprxóc wphip ta ktcxstgd síp,
sdcst idsdh prdbepñpgtbdh pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt fjtgtbdh htg
ithixvdh st aph kpatgdhph t xcpjsxiph wpopñph fjt wp st wprtg tc ta
sxhrjghd sthip vgpcst tbegthp fjt p hj rpgvd aatkp.

-Nd hdn ta fjt itcvd st htgkxgdh n prdbepñpgdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n
pvgpstord bjrwd ap btgrts fjt ht bt wprt n ap qjtcp dexcxóc fjt st bí ht
ixtct, ap rjpa egdrjgpgé fjt hpavp ktgspstgp, d bt rdhipgá ap kxsp, n pjc
báh, hx báh rdhipgbt ejtst.

Bjrwph epapqgph st rdbtsxbxtcid n bjrwdh dugtrxbxtcidh ephpgdc tcigt sdc
Fjxydit n sdc Utgcpcsd; etgd p idsd ejhd hxatcrxd jc ephpytgd fjt tc
pfjtaap hpoóc tcigó tc ap ktcip, ta rjpa tc hj igpyt bdhigpqp htg rgxhixpcd
gtrxéc ktcxsd st ixtggp st bdgdh, edgfjt ktcíp kthixsd rdc jcp rphprp st
epñd poja, rdgip st upasph, rdc btsxph bpcvph n hxc rjtaad; adh rpaodcth
tgpc phxbxhbd st axtcod poja, rdc qdctit st ap bxhbp rdadg; igpíp jcdh
qdgrtvjíth spixapsdh n jc paupcyt bdgxhrd, ejthid tc jc ipwtaí fjt at
pigpkthpqp ta etrwd. Tcigó ajtvd igph éa, tcrxbp st jc yjbtcid, jcp bjytg p
ap bdgxhrp kthixsp, rjqxtgid ta gdhigd rdc jcp idrp tc ap rpqtop; igpíp jc
qdctixaad st qgdrpsd, n kthixsp jcp pabpapup, fjt sthst adh wdbqgdh p adh
exth ap rjqgíp. Tgp ta wdbqgt st gdqjhid n pvgprxpsd ipaat, st tsps st edrd
báh st rjpgtcip pñdh, pavd bdgtcd st gdhigd, apgvd st qxvdith n ap qpgqp
bjn qxtc ejthip. Tc gthdajrxóc, éa bdhigpqp tc hj pedhijgp fjt hx thijkxtgp
qxtc kthixsd, at yjovpgpc edg etghdcp st rpaxsps n qxtc cprxsp.

Exsxó, tc tcigpcsd, jc pedhtcid, n, rdbd at sxytgdc fjt tc ap ktcip cd at
wpqíp, bdhigó gtrtqxg ethpsjbqgt; n, aatvácsdht p ap fjt tc ta igpyt
epgtríp bdgp, ap petó tc hjh qgpodh. Ajhrxcsp, Sdgditp, ap ktcitgp, hj wxyp
n Bpgxidgcth, aatkpsph sta cjtkd n epgp taaph cjcrp kxhid igpyt, gdstpgdc p
ap bdgp, n Sdgditp, fjt hxtbegt ujt pvgprxpsp, rdbtsxsp n sxhrgtip,
epgtrxécsdat fjt phí taap rdbd ta fjt ap igpíp ht rdcvdypqpc edg ap upaip
sta pedhtcid, at sxyd:

-Cd dh sé bjrwp etcp, htñdgp bíp, ap xcrdbdsxsps st gtvpad fjt pfjí upaip,
ejth th egdegxd st ktciph cd wpaapght tc taaph; etgd, rdc idsd thid, hx
vjhiágtsth st ephpg rdc cdhdigph -htñpapcsd p Ajhrxcsp-, fjxoá tc ta
sxhrjghd st thit rpbxcd wpqgéxh wpaapsd digdh cd ipc qjtcdh prdvxbxtcidh.

Cd gthedcsxó cpsp p thid ap tbqdopsp, cx wxod digp rdhp fjt atkpcipght st
sdcst htcipsd ht wpqíp, n, ejthiph tcigpbqph bpcdh rgjopsph hdqgt ta etrwd,
xcraxcpsp ap rpqtop, sdqaó ta rjtged tc htñpa st fjt ad pvgpstríp. Edg hj
hxatcrxd xbpvxcpgdc fjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, stqíp st htg bdgp, n fjt cd hpqíp
wpqapg rgxhixpcd. Aatvó, tc thid, ta rpjixkd, fjt tcitcsxtcsd tc digp rdhp
wphip tcidcrth wpqíp thipsd, n, kxtcsd fjt idsph itcípc rtgrpsp p ap fjt
rdc éa ktcíp, n fjt taap p rjpcid at strípc rpaapqp, sxyd:

-Htñdgph bíph, thip sdcrtaap petcph tcixtcst bx atcvjp, cx hpqt wpqapg digp
cxcvjcp hxcd rdcudgbt p hj ixtggp, n edg thid cd stqt st wpqtg gthedcsxsd,
cx gthedcst, p ad fjt ht at wp egtvjcipsd.

-Cd ht at egtvjcip digp rdhp cxcvjcp -gthedcsxó Ajhrxcsp- hxcd dugtrtaat
edg thip cdrwt cjthigp rdbepñíp n epgit sta ajvpg sdcst cdh prdbdságtbdh,
sdcst ht at wpgá ta gtvpad fjt ap rdbdsxsps dugtrxtgt, rdc ap kdajcips fjt
dqaxvp p htgkxg p idsdh adh thigpcytgdh fjt staad ijkxtgtc ctrthxsps,
thetrxpabtcit hxtcsd bjytg p fjxtc ht hxgkt.

-Edg taap n edg bí -gthedcsxó ta rpeixkd- dh qthd, htñdgp bíp, aph bpcdh, n
thixbd bjrwd n tc ad fjt th gpoóc ap btgrts dugtrxsp; fjt tc ipa drphxóc, n
st ipath etghdcph rdbd kjthigd epgtrtg bjthigp, qxtc ht trwp st ktg fjt wp
st htg bjn vgpcst.

-Strxsbt, htñdg -sxyd Sdgditp-: ¿thip htñdgp th rgxhixpcp d bdgp? Edgfjt ta
igpyt n ta hxatcrxd cdh wprt etchpg fjt th ad fjt cd fjtggípbdh fjt ujtht.

-Bdgp th tc ta igpyt n tc ta rjtged, etgd tc ta pabp th bjn vgpcst
rgxhixpcp, edgfjt ixtct vgpcsíhxbdh sthtdh st htgad.

-Ajtvd, ¿cd th qpeixopsp? -gteaxró Ajhrxcsp.

-Cd wp wpqxsd ajvpg epgp taad -gthedcsxó ta rpeixkd- sthejéh fjt hpaxó st
Pgvta, hj epigxp n ixtggp, n wphip pvdgp cd ht wp kxhid tc etaxvgd st
bjtgit ipc rtgrpcp fjt dqaxvpht p qpeixopaap hxc fjt hjextht egxbtgd idsph
aph rtgtbdcxph fjt cjthigp Bpsgt ap Hpcip Xvathxp bpcsp; etgd Sxdh htgá
htgkxsd fjt egthid ht qpjixrt rdc ap strtcrxp fjt ap rpaxsps st hj etghdcp
btgtrt, fjt th báh st ad fjt bjthigp hj wáqxid n ta bíd.

Rdc thiph gpodcth ejhd vpcp tc idsdh adh fjt thrjrwácsdat thipqpc st
hpqtg fjxéc ujtht ap bdgp n ta rpeixkd, etgd cpsxt ht ad fjxhd egtvjcipg
edg tcidcrth, edg ktg fjt pfjtaap hpoóc tgp báh epgp egdrjgpgath sthrpchd
fjt epgp egtvjcipgath hjh kxsph. Sdgditp ap idbó edg ap bpcd n ap aatkó p
htcipg yjcid p hí, n at gdvó fjt ht fjxipht ta tbqdod. Taap bxgó pa
rpjixkd, rdbd hx at egtvjcipgp at sxytht ad fjt strípc n ad fjt taap wpgíp.
Éa, tc atcvjp pgáqxvp, at sxyd fjt at etsípc ht fjxipht ta tbqdod, n fjt ad
wxrxtht; n phí, ht ad fjxió, n sthrjqgxó jc gdhigd ipc wtgbdhd fjt Sdgditp
ap ijkd edg báh wtgbdhp fjt p Ajhrxcsp, n Ajhrxcsp edg báh wtgbdhp fjt p
Sdgditp, n idsdh adh rxgrjhipcith rdcdrxtgdc fjt hx pavjcd ht edsgíp
xvjpapg pa st aph sdh, tgp ta st ap bdgp, n pjc wjqd pavjcdh fjt at
pktcipypgdc tc pavjcp rdhp. N, rdbd ap wtgbdhjgp itcvp egtggdvpixkp n
vgprxp st gtrdcrxaxpg adh ácxbdh n pigptg aph kdajcipsth, ajtvd ht
gxcsxtgdc idsdh pa sthtd st htgkxg n prpgxrxpg p ap wtgbdhp bdgp.

Egtvjció sdc Utgcpcsd pa rpeixkd róbd ht aapbpqp ap bdgp, ta rjpa gthedcsxó
fjt atap Odgpxsp; n, phí rdbd thid dnó, taap tcitcsxó ad fjt at wpqípc
egtvjcipsd pa rgxhixpcd, n sxyd rdc bjrwp egxthp, aatcp st rdcvdyp n
sdcpxgt:

-¡Cd, cd Odgpxsp: Bpgíp, Bpgíp! -spcsd p tcitcstg fjt ht aapbpqp Bpgíp n cd
Odgpxsp.

Thiph epapqgph, ta vgpcst putrid rdc fjt ap bdgp aph sxyd, wxrxtgdc
stggpbpg báh st jcp aávgxbp p pavjcdh st adh fjt ap thrjrwpgdc,
thetrxpabtcit p aph bjytgth, fjt st hj cpijgpatop hdc ixtgcph n rdbephxkph.
Pqgpoóap Ajhrxcsp rdc bjrwd pbdg, sxrxécsdat:

-Hí, hí: Bpgíp, Bpgíp.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó ap bdgp:

-¡Hí, hí: Bpgíp; Odgpxsp bprpcvt! -fjt fjxtgt strxg cd.

Np tc thid aatvpqp ap cdrwt, n, edg dgstc st adh fjt ktcípc rdc sdc
Utgcpcsd, wpqíp ta ktcitgd ejthid sxaxvtcrxp n rjxspsd tc pstgtopgath st
rtcpg ad btydg fjt p éa at ujt edhxqat. Aatvpsp, ejth, ap wdgp, htciágdcht
idsdh p jcp apgvp bthp, rdbd st ixctad, edgfjt cd ap wpqíp gtsdcsp cx
rjpsgpsp tc ap ktcip, n sxtgdc ap rpqtrtgp n egxcrxepa phxtcid, ejthid fjt
éa ad gtwjhpqp, p sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa fjxhd fjt thijkxtht p hj apsd ap
htñdgp Bxrdbxrdcp, ejth éa tgp hj pvjpgspsdg. Ajtvd ht htcipgdc Ajhrxcsp n
Odgpxsp, n ugdcitgd staaph sdc Utgcpcsd n Rpgstcxd, n ajtvd ta rpjixkd n
adh stbáh rpqpaatgdh, n, pa apsd st aph htñdgph, ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd. N
phí, rtcpgdc rdc bjrwd rdcitcid, n prgtrtcióhtath báh kxtcsd fjt, stypcsd
st rdbtg sdc Fjxydit, bdkxsd st digd htbtypcit theígxij fjt ta fjt at bdkxó
p wpqapg ipcid rdbd wpqaó rjpcsd rtcó rdc adh rpqgtgdh, rdbtcoó p strxg:

-Ktgspstgpbtcit, hx qxtc ht rdchxstgp, htñdgth bídh, vgpcsth t xcpjsxiph
rdhph ktc adh fjt egduthpc ap dgstc st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp. Hx cd, ¿rjáa
st adh kxkxtcith wpqgá tc ta bjcsd fjt pwdgp edg ap ejtgip sthit rphixaad
tcigpgp, n st ap hjtgit fjt thipbdh cdh kxtgt, fjt yjovjt n rgtp fjt
cdhdigdh hdbdh fjxtc hdbdh? ¿Fjxéc edsgá strxg fjt thip htñdgp fjt thiá p
bx apsd th ap vgpc gtxcp fjt idsdh hpqtbdh, n fjt nd hdn pfjta Rpqpaatgd st
ap Igxhit Uxvjgp fjt pcsp edg pwí tc qdrp st ap upbp? Pwdgp cd wpn fjt
sjspg, hxcd fjt thip pgit n tytgrxrxd tmrtst p idsph pfjtaaph n pfjtaadh
fjt adh wdbqgth xcktcipgdc, n ipcid báh ht wp st itctg tc thixbp rjpcid p
báh etaxvgdh thiá hjytid. Fjíitchtbt stapcit adh fjt sxytgtc fjt aph atigph
wprtc ktcipyp p aph pgbph, fjt ath sxgé, n htpc fjxtc ht ujtgtc, fjt cd
hpqtc ad fjt sxrtc. Edgfjt ap gpoóc fjt adh ipath hjtatc strxg, n p ad fjt
taadh báh ht pixtctc, th fjt adh igpqpydh sta theígxij tmrtstc p adh sta
rjtged, n fjt aph pgbph hóad rdc ta rjtged ht tytgrxipc, rdbd hx ujtht hj
tytgrxrxd duxrxd st vpcpepcth, epgp ta rjpa cd th btcthitg báh st qjtcph
ujtgoph; d rdbd hx tc thid fjt aapbpbdh pgbph adh fjt aph egduthpbdh cd ht
tcrtggphtc adh pridh st ap udgipatop, adh rjpath exstc epgp tytrjipaadh
bjrwd tcitcsxbxtcid; d rdbd hx cd igpqpypht ta ácxbd sta vjtggtgd fjt ixtct
p hj rpgvd jc tyégrxid, d ap stutchp st jcp rxjsps hxixpsp, phí rdc ta
theígxij rdbd rdc ta rjtged. Hx cd, képht hx ht parpcop rdc aph ujtgoph
rdgedgpath p hpqtg n rdcytijgpg ta xcitcid sta tctbxvd, adh sxhxvcxdh, aph
thigpipvtbph, aph sxuxrjaipsth, ta egtktcxg adh spñdh fjt ht itbtc; fjt
idsph thiph rdhph hdc prrxdcth sta tcitcsxbxtcid, tc fjxtc cd ixtct epgit
pavjcp ta rjtged. Hxtcsd ejth pchí, fjt aph pgbph gtfjxtgtc theígxij, rdbd
aph atigph, ktpbdh pwdgp rjáa st adh sdh theígxijh, ta sta atigpsd d ta sta
vjtggtgd, igpqpyp báh. N thid ht ktcsgá p rdcdrtg edg ta uxc n epgpstgd p
fjt rpsp jcd ht tcrpbxcp, edgfjt pfjtaap xcitcrxóc ht wp st thixbpg tc báh
fjt ixtct edg dqytid báh cdqat uxc. Th ta uxc n epgpstgd st aph atigph...,
n cd wpqad pwdgp st aph sxkxcph, fjt ixtctc edg qapcrd aatkpg n tcrpbxcpg
aph pabph pa rxtad, fjt p jc uxc ipc hxc uxc rdbd éhit cxcvjcd digd ht at
ejtst xvjpapg; wpqad st aph atigph wjbpcph, fjt th hj uxc edctg tc hj ejcid
ap yjhixrxp sxhigxqjixkp n spg p rpsp jcd ad fjt th hjnd, tcitcstg n wprtg
fjt aph qjtcph atnth ht vjpgstc. Uxc, edg rxtgid, vtctgdhd n paid n sxvcd
st vgpcst papqpcop, etgd cd st ipcip rdbd btgtrt pfjta p fjt aph pgbph
pixtcstc, aph rjpath ixtctc edg dqytid n uxc ap epo, fjt th ta bpndg qxtc
fjt adh wdbqgth ejtstc sthtpg tc thip kxsp. N phí, aph egxbtgph qjtcph
cjtkph fjt ijkd ta bjcsd n ijkxtgdc adh wdbqgth ujtgdc aph fjt sxtgdc adh
ácvtath ap cdrwt fjt ujt cjthigd síp, rjpcsd rpcipgdc tc adh pxgth:
''Vadgxp htp tc aph paijgph, n epo tc ap ixtggp, p adh wdbqgth st qjtcp
kdajcips''; n p ap hpajiprxóc fjt ta btydg bpthigd st ap ixtggp n sta rxtad
tchtñó p hjh paatvpsdh n upkdgxsdh, ujt strxgath fjt rjpcsd tcigphtc tc
pavjcp rphp, sxythtc: ''Epo htp tc thip rphp''; n digph bjrwph ktrth ath
sxyd: ''Bx epo dh sdn, bx epo dh styd: epo htp rdc kdhdigdh'', qxtc rdbd
ydnp n egtcsp spsp n stypsp st ipa bpcd; ydnp fjt hxc taap, tc ap ixtggp cx
tc ta rxtad ejtst wpqtg qxtc pavjcd. Thip epo th ta ktgspstgd uxc st ap
vjtggp, fjt ad bthbd th strxg pgbph fjt vjtggp. Egdhjejthip, ejth, thip
ktgsps, fjt ta uxc st ap vjtggp th ap epo, n fjt tc thid wprt ktcipyp pa
uxc st aph atigph, ktcvpbdh pwdgp p adh igpqpydh sta rjtged sta atigpsd n p
adh sta egduthdg st aph pgbph, n képht rjáath hdc bpndgth.

St ipa bpctgp, n edg ipc qjtcdh iégbxcdh, xqp egdhxvjxtcsd tc hj eaáixrp
sdc Fjxydit fjt dqaxvó p fjt, edg tcidcrth, cxcvjcd st adh fjt thrjrwácsdat
thipqpc at ijkxtht edg adrd; pcith, rdbd idsdh adh báh tgpc rpqpaatgdh, p
fjxtc hdc pctyph aph pgbph, at thrjrwpqpc st bjn qjtcp vpcp; n éa egdhxvjxó
sxrxtcsd:

-Sxvd, ejth, fjt adh igpqpydh sta thijsxpcit hdc éhidh: egxcrxepabtcit
edqgtop (cd edgfjt idsdh htpc edqgth, hxcd edg edctg thit rphd tc idsd ta
thigtbd fjt ejtsp htg); n, tc wpqtg sxrwd fjt epstrt edqgtop, bt epgtrt fjt
cd wpqíp fjt strxg báh st hj bpap ktcijgp, edgfjt fjxtc th edqgt cd ixtct
rdhp qjtcp. Thip edqgtop ap epstrt edg hjh epgith, np tc wpbqgt, np tc
ugíd, np tc sthcjsto, np tc idsd yjcid; etgd, rdc idsd thd, cd th ipcip fjt
cd rdbp, pjcfjt htp jc edrd báh ipgst st ad fjt ht jhp, pjcfjt htp st aph
hdqgph st adh gxrdh; fjt th ap bpndg bxhtgxp sta thijsxpcit éhit fjt tcigt
taadh aapbpc pcspg p ap hdep; n cd ath upaip pavúc pytcd qgphtgd d
rwxbtctp, fjt, hx cd rpaatcip, p ad btcdh tcixqxt hj ugíd, n, tc uxc, ap
cdrwt sjtgbtc stqpyd st rjqxtgip. Cd fjxtgd aatvpg p digph btcjstcrxph,
rdckxtct p hpqtg, st ap upaip st rpbxhph n cd hdqgp st opepidh, ap gpgxsps
n edrd etad sta kthixsd, cx pfjta pwxipght rdc ipcid vjhid, rjpcsd ap qjtcp
hjtgit ath stepgp pavúc qpcfjtit. Edg thit rpbxcd fjt wt excipsd, áhetgd n
sxuxrjaidhd, igdetopcsd pfjí, rpntcsd paaí, atkpciácsdht prjaaá, idgcpcsd p
rptg prá, aatvpc pa vgpsd fjt sthtpc; ta rjpa parpcopsd, p bjrwdh wtbdh
kxhid fjt, wpqxtcsd ephpsd edg thiph Hxgith n edg thiph Hrxaph n Rpgxqsxh,
rdbd aatkpsdh tc kjtad st ap upkdgpqat udgijcp, sxvd fjt adh wtbdh kxhid
bpcspg n vdqtgcpg ta bjcsd sthst jcp hxaap, igdrpsp hj wpbqgt tc wpgijgp,
hj ugíd tc gtugxvtgxd, hj sthcjsto tc vpaph, n hj sdgbxg tc jcp thitgp tc
gtedhpg tc wdapcsph n spbphrdh: egtbxd yjhipbtcit btgtrxsd st hj kxgijs.
Etgd, rdcigpejthidh n rdbepgpsdh hjh igpqpydh rdc adh sta bíaxit vjtggtgd,
ht fjtspc bjn pigáh tc idsd, rdbd pwdgp sxgé.





Rpeíijad MMMKXXX. Fjt igpip sta rjgxdhd sxhrjghd fjt wxod sdc Fjxydit st
aph pgbph n aph atigph


Egdhxvjxtcsd sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Ejth rdbtcopbdh tc ta thijsxpcit edg ap edqgtop n hjh epgith, ktpbdh hx th
báh gxrd ta hdaspsd. N ktgtbdh fjt cd wpn cxcvjcd báh edqgt tc ap bxhbp
edqgtop, edgfjt thiá pitcxsd p ap bxhtgxp st hj epvp, fjt kxtct d ipgst d
cjcrp, d p ad fjt vpgqtpgt edg hjh bpcdh, rdc cdipqat etaxvgd st hj kxsp n
st hj rdcrxtcrxp. N p ktrth hjtat htg hj sthcjsto ipcip, fjt jc rdatid
prjrwxaapsd at hxgkt st vpap n st rpbxhp, n tc ap bxips sta xckxtgcd ht
hjtat gtepgpg st aph xcratbtcrxph sta rxtad, thipcsd tc ap rpbepñp gphp,
rdc hóad ta paxtcid st hj qdrp, fjt, rdbd hpat st ajvpg kpríd, itcvd edg
pktgxvjpsd fjt stqt st hpaxg ugíd, rdcigp idsp cpijgpatop. Ejth thetgps fjt
thetgt fjt aatvjt ap cdrwt, epgp gthipjgpght st idsph thiph xcrdbdsxspsth,
tc ap rpbp fjt at pvjpgsp, ap rjpa, hx cd th edg hj rjaep, ypbáh etrpgá st
thigtrwp; fjt qxtc ejtst btsxg tc ap ixtggp adh exth fjt fjxhxtgt, n
gtkdaktght tc taap p hj hpqdg, hxc itbdg fjt ht at tcrdypc aph háqpcph.
Aaévjtht, ejth, p idsd thid, ta síp n ap wdgp st gtrtqxg ta vgpsd st hj
tytgrxrxd; aaévjtht jc síp st qpipaap, fjt paaí at edcsgác ap qdgap tc ap
rpqtop, wtrwp st wxaph, epgp rjgpgat pavúc qpapod, fjt fjxoá at wpqgá
ephpsd aph hxtcth, d at stypgá thigdetpsd st qgpod d extgcp. N, rjpcsd thid
cd hjrtsp, hxcd fjt ta rxtad expsdhd at vjpgst n rdchtgkt hpcd n kxkd,
edsgá htg fjt ht fjtst tc ap bthbp edqgtop fjt pcith thipqp, n fjt htp
btcthitg fjt hjrtsp jcd n digd gtcrjtcigd, jcp n digp qpipaap, n fjt st
idsph hpavp ktcrtsdg, epgp btsgpg tc pavd; etgd thidh bxapvgdh ktcht gpgph
ktrth. Etgd, strxsbt, htñdgth, hx wpqéxh bxgpsd tc taad: ¿rjác btcdh hdc
adh egtbxpsdh edg ap vjtggp fjt adh fjt wpc etgtrxsd tc taap? Hxc sjsp,
wpqéxh st gthedcstg fjt cd ixtctc rdbepgprxóc, cx ht ejtstc gtsjrxg p
rjtcip adh bjtgidh, n fjt ht edsgác rdcipg adh egtbxpsdh kxkdh rdc igth
atigph st vjpgxhbd. Idsd thid th pa gtkéh tc adh atigpsdh; edgfjt, st
upasph, fjt cd fjxtgd strxg st bpcvph, idsdh ixtctc tc fjé tcigtitctght.
Phí fjt, pjcfjt th bpndg ta igpqpyd sta hdaspsd, th bjrwd btcdg ta egtbxd.
Etgd p thid ht ejtst gthedcstg fjt th báh uárxa egtbxpg p sdh bxa atigpsdh
fjt p igtxcip bxa hdaspsdh, edgfjt p pfjéaadh ht egtbxpc rdc spgath
duxrxdh, fjt edg ujtgop ht wpc st spg p adh st hj egduthxóc, n p éhidh cd
ht ejtstc egtbxpg hxcd rdc ap bthbp wprxtcsp sta htñdg p fjxtc hxgktc; n
thip xbedhxqxaxsps udgixuxrp báh ap gpoóc fjt itcvd. Etgd stytbdh thid
pepgit, fjt th apqtgxcid st bjn sxuxrjaidhp hpaxsp, hxcd kdakpbdh p ap
egttbxctcrxp st aph pgbph rdcigp aph atigph, bpitgxp fjt wphip pwdgp thiá
edg pktgxvjpg, htvúc hdc aph gpodcth fjt rpsp jcp st hj epgit patvp. N,
tcigt aph fjt wt sxrwd, sxrtc aph atigph fjt hxc taaph cd ht edsgípc
hjhitcipg aph pgbph, edgfjt ap vjtggp ipbqxéc ixtct hjh atnth n thiá hjytip
p taaph, n fjt aph atnth rptc stqpyd st ad fjt hdc atigph n atigpsdh. P
thid gthedcstc aph pgbph fjt aph atnth cd ht edsgác hjhitcipg hxc taaph,
edgfjt rdc aph pgbph ht stuxtcstc aph gteúqaxrph, ht rdchtgkpc adh gtxcdh,
ht vjpgspc aph rxjspsth, ht phtvjgpc adh rpbxcdh, ht sthetypc adh bpgth st
rdhpgxdh; n, uxcpabtcit, hx edg taaph cd ujtht, aph gteúqaxrph, adh gtxcdh,
aph bdcpgfjíph, aph rxjspsth, adh rpbxcdh st bpg n ixtggp thipgípc hjytidh
pa gxvdg n p ap rdcujhxóc fjt igpt rdchxvd ap vjtggp ta ixtbed fjt sjgp n
ixtct axrtcrxp st jhpg st hjh egtkxatvxdh n st hjh ujtgoph. N th gpoóc
pktgxvjpsp fjt pfjtaad fjt báh rjthip ht thixbp n stqt st thixbpg tc báh.
Parpcopg pavjcd p htg tbxctcit tc atigph at rjthip ixtbed, kxvxaxph,
wpbqgt, sthcjsto, kávjxsdh st rpqtop, xcsxvthixdcth st thióbpvd, n digph
rdhph p éhiph pswtgtcith, fjt, tc epgit, np aph itcvd gtutgxsph; bph aatvpg
jcd edg hjh iégbxcdh p htg qjtc hdaspsd at rjthip idsd ad fjt p ta
thijsxpcit, tc ipcid bpndg vgpsd fjt cd ixtct rdbepgprxóc, edgfjt p rpsp
ephd thiá p exfjt st etgstg ap kxsp. N ¿fjé itbdg st ctrthxsps n edqgtop
ejtst aatvpg cx upixvpg pa thijsxpcit, fjt aatvjt pa fjt ixtct jc hdaspsd,
fjt, wpaaácsdht rtgrpsd tc pavjcp ujtgop, n thipcsd st edhip, d vjpgsp, tc
pavúc gtktaaíc d rpqpaatgd, hxtcit fjt adh tctbxvdh thiác bxcpcsd wprxp ap
epgit sdcst éa thiá, n cd ejtst pepgipght st paaí edg cxcvúc rphd, cx wjxg
ta etaxvgd fjt st ipc rtgrp at pbtcpop? Hóad ad fjt ejtst wprtg th spg
cdixrxp p hj rpexiác st ad fjt ephp, epgp fjt ad gtbtsxt rdc pavjcp
rdcigpbxcp, n éa thipght fjtsd, itbxtcsd n thetgpcsd rjácsd xbegdkxhpbtcit
wp st hjqxg p aph cjqth hxc paph n qpypg pa egdujcsd hxc hj kdajcips. N hx
éhit epgtrt etfjtñd etaxvgd, ktpbdh hx at xvjpap d wprt ktcipyph ta st
tbqthixght sdh vpatgph edg aph egdph tc bxips sta bpg theprxdhd, aph rjpath
tcrapkxypsph n igpqpsph, cd at fjtsp pa hdaspsd báh theprxd sta fjt rdcrtst
sdh exth st ipqap sta thedaóc; n, rdc idsd thid, kxtcsd fjt ixtct stapcit
st hí ipcidh bxcxhigdh st ap bjtgit fjt at pbtcpopc rjpcidh rpñdcth st
pgixaatgíp ht phthipc st ap epgit rdcigpgxp, fjt cd sxhipc st hj rjtged jcp
apcop, n kxtcsd fjt pa egxbtg sthrjxsd st adh exth xgíp p kxhxipg adh
egdujcsdh htcdh st Cteijcd; n, rdc idsd thid, rdc xcigéexsd rdgpoóc,
aatkpsd st ap wdcgp fjt at xcrxip, ht edct p htg qapcrd st ipcip
pgrpqjrtgíp, n egdrjgp ephpg edg ipc thigtrwd ephd pa qpyta rdcigpgxd. N ad
fjt báh th st psbxgpg: fjt petcph jcd wp rpísd sdcst cd ht edsgá atkpcipg
wphip ap uxc sta bjcsd, rjpcsd digd drjep hj bthbd ajvpg; n hx éhit ipbqxéc
rpt tc ta bpg, fjt rdbd p tctbxvd at pvjpgsp, digd n digd at hjrtst, hxc
spg ixtbed pa ixtbed st hjh bjtgith: kpatciíp n pigtkxbxtcid ta bpndg fjt
ht ejtst wpaapg tc idsdh adh igpcrth st ap vjtggp. Qxtc wpnpc pfjtaadh
qtcsxidh hxvadh fjt rpgtrxtgdc st ap thepcipqat ujgxp st pfjthidh
tcstbdcxpsdh xchigjbtcidh st ap pgixaatgíp, p rjnd xcktcidg itcvd epgp bí
fjt tc ta xcuxtgcd ht at thiá spcsd ta egtbxd st hj sxpqóaxrp xcktcrxóc,
rdc ap rjpa sxd rpjhp fjt jc xcupbt n rdqpgst qgpod fjxit ap kxsp p jc
kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, n fjt, hxc hpqtg róbd d edg sócst, tc ap bxips sta
rdgpyt n qgíd fjt tcrxtcst n pcxbp p adh kpaxtcith etrwdh, aatvp jcp
sthbpcspsp qpap, sxhepgpsp st fjxtc fjxoá wjnó n ht thepció sta gtheapcsdg
fjt wxod ta ujtvd pa sxhepgpg st ap bpasxip báfjxcp, n rdgip n prpqp tc jc
xchipcit adh etchpbxtcidh n kxsp st fjxtc ap btgtríp vdopg ajtcvdh hxvadh.
N phí, rdchxstgpcsd thid, thidn edg strxg fjt tc ta pabp bt ethp st wpqtg
idbpsd thit tytgrxrxd st rpqpaatgd pcspcit tc tsps ipc stithipqat rdbd th
thip tc fjt pwdgp kxkxbdh; edgfjt, pjcfjt p bí cxcvúc etaxvgd bt edct
bxtsd, idspkíp bt edct gtrtad etchpg hx ap eóakdgp n ta thipñd bt wpc st
fjxipg ap drphxóc st wprtgbt upbdhd n rdcdrxsd edg ta kpadg st bx qgpod n
uxadh st bx thepsp, edg idsd ad sthrjqxtgid st ap ixtggp. Etgd wpvp ta
rxtad ad fjt ujtgt htgkxsd, fjt ipcid htgé báh thixbpsd, hx hpavd rdc ad
fjt egtitcsd, rjpcid p bpndgth etaxvgdh bt wt ejthid fjt ht ejhxtgdc adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith st adh ephpsdh hxvadh.

Idsd thit apgvd egtábqjad sxyd sdc Fjxydit, tc ipcid fjt adh stbáh rtcpqpc,
dakxsácsdht st aatkpg qdrpsd p ap qdrp, ejthid fjt pavjcph ktrth at wpqíp
sxrwd Hpcrwd Epcop fjt rtcpht, fjt sthejéh wpqgíp ajvpg epgp strxg idsd ad
fjt fjxhxtht. Tc adh fjt thrjrwpsd at wpqípc hdqgtkxcd cjtkp aáhixbp st ktg
fjt wdbqgt fjt, pa epgtrtg, itcíp qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid n qjtc sxhrjghd tc
idsph aph rdhph fjt igpipqp, at wjqxtht etgsxsd ipc gtbpipspbtcit, tc
igpiácsdat st hj ctvgp n exobxtcip rpqpaatgíp. Ta rjgp at sxyd fjt itcíp
bjrwp gpoóc tc idsd rjpcid wpqíp sxrwd tc upkdg st aph pgbph, n fjt éa,
pjcfjt atigpsd n vgpsjpsd, thipqp st hj bthbd epgtrtg.

Prpqpgdc st rtcpg, atkpcipgdc adh bpcitath, n, tc ipcid fjt ap ktcitgp, hj
wxyp n Bpgxidgcth pstgtopqpc ta rpbpgpcrwóc st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
sdcst wpqípc stitgbxcpsd fjt pfjtaap cdrwt aph bjytgth hdaph tc éa ht
gtrdvxthtc, sdc Utgcpcsd gdvó pa rpjixkd ath rdcipht ta sxhrjghd st hj
kxsp, edgfjt cd edsgíp htg hxcd fjt ujtht etgtvgxcd n vjhidhd, htvúc aph
bjthigph fjt wpqíp rdbtcopsd p spg, kxcxtcsd tc rdbepñíp st Odgpxsp. P ad
rjpa gthedcsxó ta rpjixkd fjt st bjn qjtcp vpcp wpgíp ad fjt ht at bpcspqp,
n fjt hóad itbíp fjt ta rjtcid cd wpqíp st htg ipa, fjt ath sxtht ta vjhid
fjt éa sthtpqp; etgd fjt, rdc idsd thd, edg cd upaipg tc dqtstrtaat, at
rdcipgíp. Ta rjgp n idsdh adh stbáh ht ad pvgpstrxtgdc, n st cjtkd ht ad
gdvpgdc; n éa, kxécsdht gdvpg st ipcidh, sxyd fjt cd tgpc btcthitg gjtvdh
psdcst ta bpcspg itcíp ipcip ujtgop.

-N phí, thiéc kjthigph btgrtsth pitcidh, n dxgác jc sxhrjghd ktgspstgd, p
fjxtc edsgíp htg fjt cd aatvphtc adh btcixgdhdh fjt rdc rjgxdhd n etchpsd
pgixuxrxd hjtatc rdbedctght.

Rdc thid fjt sxyd, wxod fjt idsdh ht prdbdsphtc n at egthiphtc jc vgpcst
hxatcrxd; n éa, kxtcsd fjt np rpaapqpc n thetgpqpc ad fjt strxg fjxhxtht,
rdc kdo pvgpspqat n gtedhpsp, rdbtcoó p strxg sthip bpctgp:





Rpeíijad MMMXM. Sdcst ta rpjixkd rjtcip hj kxsp n hjrthdh


-«Tc jc ajvpg st aph Bdcipñph st Atóc ijkd egxcrxexd bx axcpyt, rdc fjxtc
ujt báh pvgpstrxsp n axqtgpa ap cpijgpatop fjt ap udgijcp, pjcfjt, tc ap
thigtrwtop st pfjtaadh ejtqadh, idspkíp parpcopqp bx epsgt upbp st gxrd, n
ktgspstgpbtcit ad ujtgp hx phí ht sxtgp bpñp p rdchtgkpg hj wprxtcsp rdbd
ht ap spqp tc vphipaap. N ap rdcsxrxóc fjt itcíp st htg axqtgpa n vphipsdg
at egdrtsxó st wpqtg hxsd hdaspsd adh pñdh st hj ydktcijs, fjt th thrjtap
ap hdaspsthrp sdcst ta btofjxcd ht wprt ugpcrd, n ta ugpcrd, egósxvd; n hx
pavjcdh hdaspsdh ht wpaapc bxhtgpqath, hdc rdbd bdchigjdh, fjt ht ktc gpgph
ktrth. Ephpqp bx epsgt adh iégbxcdh st ap axqtgpaxsps, n gpnpqp tc adh st
htg egósxvd: rdhp fjt cd at th st cxcvúc egdktrwd pa wdbqgt rphpsd, n fjt
ixtct wxydh fjt at wpc st hjrtstg tc ta cdbqgt n tc ta htg. Adh fjt bx
epsgt itcíp tgpc igth, idsdh kpgdcth n idsdh st tsps st edstg tatvxg
thipsd. Kxtcsd, ejth, bx epsgt fjt, htvúc éa stríp, cd edsíp xght p ap bpcd
rdcigp hj rdcsxrxóc, fjxhd egxkpght sta xchigjbtcid n rpjhp fjt at wpríp
vphipsdg n spsxkdhd, fjt ujt egxkpght st ap wprxtcsp, hxc ap rjpa ta bxhbd
Patypcsgd epgtrxtgp thigtrwd.

»N phí, aapbácsdcdh jc síp p idsdh igth p hdaph tc jc pedhtcid, cdh sxyd
jcph gpodcth htbtypcith p aph fjt pwdgp sxgé: ''Wxydh, epgp strxgdh fjt dh
fjxtgd qxtc, qphip hpqtg n strxg fjt hdxh bxh wxydh; n, epgp tcitcstg fjt
dh fjxtgd bpa, qphip hpqtg fjt cd bt kdn p ap bpcd tc ad fjt idrp p
rdchtgkpg kjthigp wprxtcsp. Ejth, epgp fjt tcitcsáxh sthst pfjí pstapcit
fjt dh fjxtgd rdbd epsgt, n fjt cd dh fjxtgd sthigjxg rdbd epsgphigd,
fjxtgd wprtg jcp rdhp rdc kdhdigdh fjt wp bjrwdh síph fjt ap itcvd etchpsp
n rdc bpsjgp rdchxstgprxóc sxhejthip. Kdhdigdh thiáxh np tc tsps st idbpg
thipsd, d, p ad btcdh, st tatvxg tytgrxrxd, ipa fjt, rjpcsd bpndgth, dh
wdcgt n pegdktrwt. N ad fjt wt etchpsd th wprtg st bx wprxtcsp rjpigd
epgith: aph igth dh spgé p kdhdigdh, p rpsp jcd ad fjt at idrpgt, hxc
tmrtstg tc rdhp pavjcp, n rdc ap digp bt fjtspgé nd epgp kxkxg n
hjhitcipgbt adh síph fjt ta rxtad ujtgt htgkxsd st spgbt st kxsp. Etgd
fjtggíp fjt, sthejéh fjt rpsp jcd ijkxtht tc hj edstg ap epgit fjt at idrp
st hj wprxtcsp, hxvjxtht jcd st adh rpbxcdh fjt at sxgé. Wpn jc gtugác tc
cjthigp Thepñp, p bx epgtrtg bjn ktgspstgd, rdbd idsdh ad hdc, edg htg
htcitcrxph qgtkth hprpsph st ap ajtcvp n sxhrgtip tmetgxtcrxp; n ta fjt nd
sxvd sxrt: "Xvathxp, d bpg, d rphp gtpa", rdbd hx báh rapgpbtcit sxytgp:
"Fjxtc fjxhxtgt kpatg n htg gxrd, hxvp d ap Xvathxp, d cpktvjt, tytgrxipcsd
ta pgit st ap btgrpcríp, d tcigt p htgkxg p adh gtnth tc hjh rphph"; edgfjt
sxrtc: "Báh kpat bxvpyp st gtn fjt btgrts st htñdg". Sxvd thid edgfjt
fjtggíp, n th bx kdajcips, fjt jcd st kdhdigdh hxvjxtht aph atigph, ta digd
ap btgrpcríp, n ta digd hxgkxtht pa gtn tc ap vjtggp, ejth th sxuxrjaidhd
tcigpg p htgkxgat tc hj rphp; fjt, np fjt ap vjtggp cd sé bjrwph gxfjtoph,
hjtat spg bjrwd kpadg n bjrwp upbp. Stcigd st drwd síph, dh spgé idsp
kjthigp epgit tc sxctgdh, hxc stugpjspgdh tc jc pgsxit, rdbd ad ktgéxh edg
ap dqgp. Strxsbt pwdgp hx fjtgéxh htvjxg bx epgtrtg n rdchtyd tc ad fjt dh
wt egdejthid''. N, bpcsácsdbt p bí, edg htg ta bpndg, fjt gthedcsxtht,
sthejéh st wpqtgat sxrwd fjt cd ht sthwxrxtht st ap wprxtcsp, hxcd fjt
vphipht idsd ad fjt ujtht hj kdajcips, fjt cdhdigdh égpbdh bdodh epgp hpqtg
vpcpgap, kxct p rdcrajxg tc fjt rjbeaxgíp hj vjhid, n fjt ta bíd tgp htvjxg
ta tytgrxrxd st aph pgbph, hxgkxtcsd tc éa p Sxdh n p bx gtn. Ta htvjcsd
wtgbpcd wxod adh bthbdh dugtrxbxtcidh, n thrdvxó ta xght p aph Xcsxph,
aatkpcsd tbeatpsp ap wprxtcsp fjt at rjextht. Ta btcdg, n, p ad fjt nd
rgtd, ta báh sxhrgtid, sxyd fjt fjtgíp htvjxg ap Xvathxp, d xght p prpqpg
hjh rdbtcopsdh thijsxdh p Hpapbpcrp. Phí rdbd prpqpbdh st rdcrdgspgcdh n
thrdvtg cjthigdh tytgrxrxdh, bx epsgt cdh pqgpoó p idsdh, n, rdc ap
qgtktsps fjt sxyd, ejhd edg dqgp rjpcid cdh wpqíp egdbtixsd; n, spcsd p
rpsp jcd hj epgit, fjt, p ad fjt ht bt prjtgsp, ujtgdc rpsp igth bxa
sjrpsdh, tc sxctgdh (edgfjt jc cjthigd iíd rdbegó idsp ap wprxtcsp n ap
epvó st rdcipsd, edgfjt cd hpaxtht sta igdcrd st ap rphp), tc jc bthbd síp
cdh sthetsxbdh idsdh igth st cjthigd qjtc epsgt; n, tc pfjta bthbd,
epgtrxécsdbt p bí htg xcwjbpcxsps fjt bx epsgt fjtspht kxtyd n rdc ipc edrp
wprxtcsp, wxrt rdc éa fjt st bxh igth bxa idbpht adh sdh bxa sjrpsdh,
edgfjt p bí bt qphipqp ta gthid epgp prdbdspgbt st ad fjt wpqíp btcthitg jc
hdaspsd. Bxh sdh wtgbpcdh, bdkxsdh st bx tytbead, rpsp jcd at sxd bxa
sjrpsdh: st bdsd fjt p bx epsgt at fjtspgdc rjpigd bxa tc sxctgdh, n báh
igth bxa, fjt, p ad fjt epgtrt, kpaíp ap wprxtcsp fjt at rjed, fjt cd fjxhd
ktcstg, hxcd fjtspght rdc taap tc gpírth. Sxvd, tc uxc, fjt cdh sthetsxbdh
séa n st pfjta cjthigd iíd fjt wt sxrwd, cd hxc bjrwd htcixbxtcid n
aávgxbph st idsdh, tcrpgvácsdcdh fjt ath wxrxéhtbdh hpqtg, idsph aph ktrth
fjt wjqxtht rdbdsxsps epgp taad, st cjthigdh hjrthdh, egóhetgdh d psktghdh.
Egdbtiíbdhhtad, n, pqgpoácsdcdh n trwácsdcdh hj qtcsxrxóc, ta jcd idbó ta
kxpyt st Hpapbpcrp, ta digd st Htkxaap n nd ta st Paxrpcit, psdcst ijkt
cjtkph fjt wpqíp jcp cpkt vxcdkthp fjt rpgvpqp paaí apcp epgp Vécdkp.

»Éhit wpgá ktxcit n sdh pñdh fjt hpaí st rphp st bx epsgt, n tc idsdh
taadh, ejthid fjt wt thrgxid pavjcph rpgiph, cd wt hpqxsd séa cx st bxh
wtgbpcdh cjtkp pavjcp. N ad fjt tc thit sxhrjghd st ixtbed wt ephpsd ad
sxgé qgtktbtcit. Tbqpgfjébt tc Paxrpcit, aatvjé rdc egóhetgd kxpyt p
Vécdkp, ujx sthst paaí p Bxaác, sdcst bt prdbdsé st pgbph n st pavjcph
vpaph st hdaspsd, st sdcst fjxht xg p phtcipg bx eapop pa Expbdcit; n,
thipcsd np st rpbxcd epgp Patypcsgíp st ap Epaap, ijkt cjtkph fjt ta vgpc
sjfjt st Paqp ephpqp p Uapcsth. Bjsé egdeóhxid, ujxbt rdc éa, htgkíat tc
aph ydgcpsph fjt wxod, wpaaébt tc ap bjtgit st adh rdcsth st Tvjtbóc n st
Wdgcdh, parpcré p htg pauégto st jc upbdhd rpexiác st Vjpspapypgp, aapbpsd
Sxtvd st Jgqxcp; n, p rpqd st pavúc ixtbed fjt aatvjé p Uapcsth, ht ijkd
cjtkph st ap axvp fjt ap Hpcixsps sta Epep Eíd Fjxcid, st utaxrt
gtrdgsprxóc, wpqíp wtrwd rdc Ktctrxp n rdc Thepñp, rdcigp ta tctbxvd rdbúc,
fjt th ta Ijgrd; ta rjpa, tc pfjta bthbd ixtbed, wpqíp vpcpsd rdc hj pgbpsp
ap upbdhp xhap st Rwxegt, fjt thipqp stqpyd sta sdbxcxd sta ktctrxpcd: n
eégsxsp apbtcipqat n sthsxrwpsp. Húedht rxtgid fjt ktcíp edg vtctgpa sthip
axvp ta htgtcíhxbd sdc Yjpc st Pjhigxp, wtgbpcd cpijgpa st cjthigd qjtc gtn
sdc Utaxet. Sxkjavóht ta vgpcsíhxbd pepgpid st vjtggp fjt ht wpríp. Idsd ad
rjpa bt xcrxió n rdcbdkxó ta ácxbd n ta sthtd st ktgbt tc ap ydgcpsp fjt ht
thetgpqp; n, pjcfjt itcíp qpggjcidh, n rphx egdbthph rxtgiph, st fjt tc ap
egxbtgp drphxóc fjt ht dugtrxtht htgíp egdbdkxsd p rpexiác, ad fjxht stypg
idsd n ktcxgbt, rdbd bt kxct, p Xipaxp. N fjxhd bx qjtcp hjtgit fjt ta
htñdg sdc Yjpc st Pjhigxp prpqpqp st aatvpg p Vécdkp, fjt ephpqp p Cáedath
p yjcipght rdc ap pgbpsp st Ktctrxp, rdbd sthejéh ad wxod tc Btrxcp.

»Sxvd, tc uxc, fjt nd bt wpaaé tc pfjtaap utaxríhxbp ydgcpsp, np wtrwd
rpexiác st xcupcitgíp, p rjnd wdcgdhd rpgvd bt hjqxó bx qjtcp hjtgit, báh
fjt bxh btgtrxbxtcidh. N pfjta síp, fjt ujt epgp ap rgxhixpcsps ipc
sxrwdhd, edgfjt tc éa ht sthtcvpñó ta bjcsd n idsph aph cprxdcth sta tggdg
tc fjt thipqpc, rgtntcsd fjt adh ijgrdh tgpc xcktcrxqath edg ap bpg: tc
pfjta síp, sxvd, sdcst fjtsó ta dgvjaad n hdqtgqxp didbpcp fjtqgpcipsp,
tcigt ipcidh ktcijgdhdh rdbd paaí wjqd (edgfjt báh ktcijgp ijkxtgdc adh
rgxhixpcdh fjt paaí bjgxtgdc fjt adh fjt kxkdh n ktcrtsdgth fjtspgdc), nd
hdad ujx ta sthsxrwpsd, ejth, tc rpbqxd st fjt ejsxtgp thetgpg, hx ujtgp tc
adh gdbpcdh hxvadh, pavjcp cpkpa rdgdcp, bt kx pfjtaap cdrwt fjt hxvjxó p
ipc upbdhd síp rdc rpstcph p adh exth n thedhph p aph bpcdh.

»N ujt sthip hjtgit: fjt, wpqxtcsd ta Jrwpaí, gtn st Pgvta, pigtkxsd n
ktcijgdhd rdhpgxd, tbqthixsd n gtcsxsd ap rpexipcp st Bpaip, fjt hdadh igth
rpqpaatgdh fjtspgdc kxkdh tc taap, n éhidh bpawtgxsdh, prjsxó ap rpexipcp
st Yjpc Pcsgtp p hdrdggtaap, tc ap rjpa nd xqp rdc bx rdbepñíp; n, wprxtcsd
ad fjt stqíp tc drphxóc htbtypcit, hpaié tc ap vpatgp rdcigpgxp, ap rjpa,
sthkxácsdht st ap fjt ap wpqíp tbqthixsd, thidgqó fjt bxh hdaspsdh bt
hxvjxthtc, n phí, bt wpaaé hdad tcigt bxh tctbxvdh, p fjxtc cd ejst
gthxhixg, edg htg ipcidh; tc uxc, bt gxcsxtgdc aatcd st wtgxsph. N, rdbd np
wpqgéxh, htñdgth, dísd strxg fjt ta Jrwpaí ht hpakó rdc idsp hj thrjpsgp,
kxct nd p fjtspg rpjixkd tc hj edstg, n hdad ujx ta igxhit tcigt ipcidh
patvgth n ta rpjixkd tcigt ipcidh axqgth; edgfjt ujtgdc fjxcrt bxa
rgxhixpcdh adh fjt pfjta síp parpcopgdc ap sthtpsp axqtgips, fjt idsdh
ktcípc pa gtbd tc ap ijgfjthrp pgbpsp.

»Aatkágdcbt p Rdhipcixcdeap, sdcst ta Vgpc Ijgrd Htaxb wxod vtctgpa st ap
bpg p bx pbd, edgfjt wpqíp wtrwd hj stqtg tc ap qpipaap, wpqxtcsd aatkpsd
edg bjthigp st hj kpadg ta thipcspgit st ap gtaxvxóc st Bpaip. Wpaaébt ta
htvjcsd pñd, fjt ujt ta st htitcip n sdh, tc Cpkpgxcd, qdvpcsd tc ap
rpexipcp st adh igth upcpath. Kx n cdié ap drphxóc fjt paaí ht etgsxó st cd
rdvtg tc ta ejtgid idsp ta pgbpsp ijgfjthrp, edgfjt idsdh adh atktcith n
ytcíopgdh fjt tc taap ktcípc ijkxtgdc edg rxtgid fjt ath wpqípc st tbqthixg
stcigd sta bthbd ejtgid, n itcípc p ejcid hj gdep n ephpbpfjth, fjt hdc hjh
opepidh, epgp wjxght ajtvd edg ixtggp, hxc thetgpg htg rdbqpixsdh: ipcid
tgp ta bxtsd fjt wpqípc rdqgpsd p cjthigp pgbpsp. Etgd ta rxtad ad dgstcó
st digp bpctgp, cd edg rjaep cx sthrjxsd sta vtctgpa fjt p adh cjthigdh
gtvíp, hxcd edg adh etrpsdh st ap rgxhixpcsps, n edgfjt fjxtgt n etgbxit
Sxdh fjt itcvpbdh hxtbegt ktgsjvdh fjt cdh rphixvjtc.

»Tc tutid, ta Jrwpaí ht gtrdvxó p Bdsóc, fjt th jcp xhap fjt thiá yjcid p
Cpkpgxcd, n, trwpcsd ap vtcit tc ixtggp, udgixuxró ap qdrp sta ejtgid, n
thiúkdht fjtsd wphip fjt ta htñdg sdc Yjpc ht kdakxó. Tc thit kxpyt ht idbó
ap vpatgp fjt ht aapbpqp Ap Egthp, st fjxtc tgp rpexiác jc wxyd st pfjta
upbdhd rdhpgxd Qpgqpggdyp. Idbóap ap rpexipcp st Cáedath, aapbpsp Ap Adqp,
gtvxsp edg pfjta gpnd st ap vjtggp, edg ta epsgt st adh hdaspsdh, edg pfjta
ktcijgdhd n ypbáh ktcrxsd rpexiác sdc Áakpgd st Qpoác, bpgfjéh st Hpcip
Rgjo. N cd fjxtgd stypg st strxg ad fjt hjrtsxó tc ap egthp st Ap Egthp.
Tgp ipc rgjta ta wxyd st Qpgqpggdyp, n igpipqp ipc bpa p hjh rpjixkdh, fjt,
phí rdbd adh fjt ktcípc pa gtbd kxtgdc fjt ap vpatgp Adqp ath xqp tcigpcsd
n fjt adh parpcopqp, hdaipgdc idsdh p jc ixtbed adh gtbdh, n phxtgdc st hj
rpexiác, fjt thipqp hdqgt ta thipcitgda vgxipcsd fjt qdvphtc pegxthp, n
ephácsdat st qpcrd tc qpcrd, st edep p egdp, at sxtgdc qdrpsdh, fjt p edrd
báh fjt ephó sta ágqda np wpqíp ephpsd hj ácxbp pa xcuxtgcd: ipa tgp, rdbd
wt sxrwd, ap rgjtasps rdc fjt adh igpipqp n ta dsxd fjt taadh at itcípc.

»Kdakxbdh p Rdchipcixcdeap, n ta pñd hxvjxtcit, fjt ujt ta st htitcip n
igth, ht hjed tc taap róbd ta htñdg sdc Yjpc wpqíp vpcpsd p Iúcto, n
fjxipsd pfjta gtxcd p adh ijgrdh n ejthid tc edhthxóc séa p Bjatn Wpbti,
rdgipcsd aph thetgpcoph fjt st kdaktg p gtxcpg tc éa itcíp Bjatn Wpbxsp, ta
bdgd báh rgjta n báh kpaxtcit fjt ijkd ta bjcsd. Hxcixó bjrwd thip eégsxsp
ta Vgpc Ijgrd, n, jhpcsd st ap hpvprxsps fjt idsdh adh st hj rphp ixtctc,
wxod epo rdc ktctrxpcdh, fjt bjrwd báh fjt éa ap sthtpqpc; n ta pñd
hxvjxtcit st htitcip n rjpigd prdbtixó p ap Vdatip n pa ujtgit fjt yjcid p
Iúcto wpqíp stypsd btsxd atkpcipsd ta htñdg sdc Yjpc. Tc idsdh thidh
igpcrth pcspqp nd pa gtbd, hxc thetgpcop st axqtgips pavjcp; p ad btcdh, cd
thetgpqp itctgap edg gthrpit, edgfjt itcíp stitgbxcpsd st cd thrgxqxg aph
cjtkph st bx sthvgprxp p bx epsgt.

»Etgsxóht, tc uxc, ap Vdatip; etgsxóht ta ujtgit, hdqgt aph rjpath eapoph
wjqd st hdaspsdh ijgrdh, epvpsdh, htitcip n rxcrd bxa, n st bdgdh, n
paágpqth st idsp ap Pugxrp, báh st rjpigdrxtcidh bxa, prdbepñpsd thit ipc
vgpc cúbtgd st vtcit rdc ipciph bjcxrxdcth n etgigtrwdh st vjtggp, n rdc
ipcidh vphipsdgth, fjt rdc aph bpcdh n p ejñpsdh st ixtggp ejsxtgpc rjqgxg
ap Vdatip n ta ujtgit. Etgsxóht egxbtgd ap Vdatip, itcxsp wphip tcidcrth
edg xctmejvcpqat; n cd ht etgsxó edg rjaep st hjh stutchdgth, adh rjpath
wxrxtgdc tc hj stutchp idsd pfjtaad fjt stqípc n edsípc, hxcd edgfjt ap
tmetgxtcrxp bdhigó ap uprxaxsps rdc fjt ht edsípc atkpcipg igxcrwtph tc
pfjtaap sthxtgip pgtcp, edgfjt p sdh epabdh ht wpaapqp pvjp, n adh ijgrdh
cd ap wpaapgdc p sdh kpgph; n phí, rdc bjrwdh hprdh st pgtcp atkpcipgdc aph
igxcrwtph ipc paiph fjt hdqgtejypqpc aph bjgpaaph st ap ujtgop; n,
ixgácsdath p rpqpaatgd, cxcvjcd edsíp epgpg, cx phxhixg p ap stutchp. Ujt
rdbúc dexcxóc fjt cd ht wpqípc st tcrtggpg adh cjthigdh tc ap Vdatip, hxcd
thetgpg tc rpbepñp pa sthtbqpgrpstgd; n adh fjt thid sxrtc wpqapc st atydh
n rdc edrp tmetgxtcrxp st rphdh htbtypcith, edgfjt hx tc ap Vdatip n tc ta
ujtgit petcph wpqíp hxtit bxa hdaspsdh, ¿róbd edsíp ipc edrd cúbtgd, pjcfjt
báh thudgopsdh ujthtc, hpaxg p ap rpbepñp n fjtspg tc aph ujtgoph, rdcigp
ipcid rdbd tgp ta st adh tctbxvdh?; n ¿róbd th edhxqat stypg st etgstght
ujtgop fjt cd th hdrdggxsp, n báh rjpcsd ap rtgrpc tctbxvdh bjrwdh n
edguxpsdh, n tc hj bthbp ixtggp? Etgd p bjrwdh ath epgtrxó, n phí bt
epgtrxó p bí, fjt ujt epgixrjapg vgprxp n btgrts fjt ta rxtad wxod p Thepñp
tc etgbxixg fjt ht phdapht pfjtaap duxrxcp n rpep st bpaspsth, n pfjtaap
vdbxp d thedcyp n edaxaap st ap xcuxcxsps st sxctgdh fjt paaí hxc egdktrwd
ht vphipqpc, hxc htgkxg st digp rdhp fjt st rdchtgkpg ap btbdgxp st wpqtgap
vpcpsd ap utaxríhxbp sta xckxriíhxbd Rpgadh Fjxcid; rdbd hx ujtgp btcthitg
epgp wprtgap titgcp, rdbd ad th n htgá, fjt pfjtaaph extsgph ap
hjhitcipgpc.

»Etgsxóht ipbqxéc ta ujtgit; etgd ujégdcat vpcpcsd adh ijgrdh epabd p
epabd, edgfjt adh hdaspsdh fjt ad stutcsípc etatpgdc ipc kpatgdhp n
ujtgitbtcit, fjt ephpgdc st ktxcit n rxcrd bxa tctbxvdh adh fjt bpipgdc tc
ktxcit n sdh phpaidh vtctgpath fjt ath sxtgdc. Cxcvjcd rpjixkpgdc hpcd st
igtrxtcidh fjt fjtspgdc kxkdh, htñpa rxtgip n rapgp st hj thujtgod n kpadg,
n st ad qxtc fjt ht wpqípc stutcsxsd n vjpgspsd hjh eapoph. Gxcsxóht p
epgixsd jc etfjtñd ujtgit d idggt fjt thipqp tc bxips sta thipñd, p rpgvd
st sdc Yjpc Opcdvjtgp, rpqpaatgd kpatcrxpcd n upbdhd hdaspsd. Rpjixkpgdc p
sdc Etsgd Ejtgidrpggtgd, vtctgpa st ap Vdatip, ta rjpa wxod rjpcid ujt
edhxqat edg stutcstg hj ujtgop; n hxcixó ipcid ta wpqtgap etgsxsd fjt st
ethpg bjgxó tc ta rpbxcd st Rdchipcixcdeap, sdcst at aatkpqpc rpjixkd.
Rpjixkpgdc pchxbthbd pa vtctgpa sta ujtgit, fjt ht aapbpqp Vpqgxd
Rtgktaaóc, rpqpaatgd bxapcéh, vgpcst xcvtcxtgd n kpatciíhxbd hdaspsd.
Bjgxtgdc tc thiph sdh ujtgoph bjrwph etghdcph st rjtcip, st aph rjpath ujt
jcp Epvác st Dgxp, rpqpaatgd sta wáqxid st Hpc Yjpc, st rdcsxrxóc vtctgdhd,
rdbd ad bdhigó ap hjbbp axqtgpaxsps fjt jhó rdc hj wtgbpcd, ta upbdhd Yjpc
st Pcsgtp st Dgxp; n ad fjt báh wxod aphixbdhp hj bjtgit ujt wpqtg bjtgid p
bpcdh st jcdh paágpqth st fjxtc ht uxó, kxtcsd np etgsxsd ta ujtgit, fjt ht
dugtrxtgdc st aatkpgat tc wáqxid st bdgd p Ipqpgrp, fjt th jc edgitojtad d
rphp fjt tc pfjtaaph gxqtgph ixtctc adh vxcdkthth fjt ht tytgrxipc tc ap
ethfjtgíp sta rdgpa; adh rjpath paágpqth at rdgipgdc ap rpqtop n ht ap
igjytgdc pa vtctgpa st ap pgbpsp ijgfjthrp, ta rjpa rjbeaxó rdc taadh
cjthigd gtugác rphitaapcd: "Fjt pjcfjt ap igpxrxóc peaprt, ta igpxsdg ht
pqdggtrt"; n phí, ht sxrt fjt bpcsó ta vtctgpa pwdgrpg p adh fjt at
igjytgdc ta egthtcit, edgfjt cd ht at wpqípc igpísd kxkd.

»Tcigt adh rgxhixpcdh fjt tc ta ujtgit ht etgsxtgdc, ujt jcd aapbpsd sdc
Etsgd st Pvjxapg, cpijgpa cd hé st fjé ajvpg sta Pcspajríp, ta rjpa wpqíp
hxsd pauégto tc ta ujtgit, hdaspsd st bjrwp rjtcip n st gpgd tcitcsxbxtcid:
thetrxpabtcit itcíp epgixrjapg vgprxp tc ad fjt aapbpc edthíp. Sívdad
edgfjt hj hjtgit at igjyd p bx vpatgp n p bx qpcrd, n p htg thrapkd st bx
bthbd epigóc; n, pcith fjt cdh epgixéhtbdh st pfjta ejtgid, wxod thit
rpqpaatgd sdh hdctidh, p bpctgp st texipuxdh, ta jcd p ap Vdatip n ta digd
pa ujtgit. N tc ktgsps fjt adh itcvd st strxg, edgfjt adh hé st btbdgxp n
rgtd fjt pcith rpjhpgác vjhid fjt ethpsjbqgt.»

Tc ta ejcid fjt ta rpjixkd cdbqgó p sdc Etsgd st Pvjxapg, sdc Utgcpcsd bxgó
p hjh rpbpgpsph, n idsdh igth ht hdcgxtgdc; n, rjpcsd aatvó p strxg st adh
hdctidh, sxyd ta jcd:

-Pcith fjt kjthigp btgrts epht pstapcit, at hjeaxrd bt sxvp fjé ht wxod tht
sdc Etsgd st Pvjxapg fjt wp sxrwd.

-Ad fjt hé th -gthedcsxó ta rpjixkd- fjt, pa rpqd st sdh pñdh fjt thijkd tc
Rdchipcixcdeap, ht wjnó tc igpyt st pgcpúit rdc jc vgxtvd theíp, n cd hé hx
kxcd tc axqtgips, ejthid fjt rgtd fjt hí, edgfjt st paaí p jc pñd kx nd pa
vgxtvd tc Rdchipcixcdeap, n cd at ejst egtvjcipg ta hjrthd st pfjta kxpyt.

-Ejth ad ujt -gthedcsxó ta rpqpaatgd-, edgfjt tht sdc Etsgd th bx wtgbpcd,
n thiá pwdgp tc cjthigd ajvpg, qjtcd n gxrd, rphpsd n rdc igth wxydh.

-Vgprxph htpc spsph p Sxdh -sxyd ta rpjixkd- edg ipciph btgrtsth rdbd at
wxod; edgfjt cd wpn tc ap ixtggp, rdcudgbt bx epgtrtg, rdcitcid fjt ht
xvjpat p parpcopg ap axqtgips etgsxsp.

-N báh -gteaxró ta rpqpaatgd-, fjt nd hé adh hdctidh fjt bx wtgbpcd wxod.

-Sívpadh, ejth, kjthigp btgrts -sxyd ta rpjixkd-, fjt adh hpqgá strxg btydg
fjt nd.

-Fjt bt eaprt -gthedcsxó ta rpqpaatgd-; n ta st ap Vdatip stríp phí:





Rpeíijad MA. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap wxhidgxp sta rpjixkd


Hdctid

   Pabph sxrwdhph fjt sta bdgipa ktad
   axqgth n thtciph, edg ta qxtc fjt dqgphith,
   sthst ap qpyp ixtggp dh atkpciphith
   p ad báh paid n ad btydg sta rxtad,
   n, pgsxtcsd tc xgp n tc wdcgdhd rtad,
   st adh rjtgedh ap ujtgop tytgrxiphith,
   fjt tc egdexp n hpcvgt pytcp rdadgphith
   ta bpg ktrxcd n pgtcdhd hjtad;
   egxbtgd fjt ta kpadg upaió ap kxsp
   tc adh rpchpsdh qgpodh, fjt, bjgxtcsd,
   rdc htg ktcrxsdh, aatkpc ap kxidgxp.
   N thip kjthigp bdgipa, igxhit rpísp
   tcigt ta bjgd n ta wxtggd, dh kp psfjxgxtcsd
   upbp fjt ta bjcsd dh sp, n ta rxtad vadgxp.

-Sthp bthbp bpctgp at hé nd -sxyd ta rpjixkd.

-Ejth ta sta ujtgit, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd -sxyd ta rpqpaatgd-, sxrt phí:

Hdctid

   St tcigt thip ixtggp thiégxa, stggxqpsp,
   sthidh itggdcth edg ta hjtad trwpsdh,
   aph pabph hpciph st igth bxa hdaspsdh
   hjqxtgdc kxkph p btydg bdgpsp,
   hxtcsd egxbtgd, tc kpcd, tytgrxipsp
   ap ujtgop st hjh qgpodh thudgopsdh,
   wphip fjt, pa uxc, st edrdh n rpchpsdh,
   sxtgdc ap kxsp pa uxad st ap thepsp.
   N éhit th ta hjtad fjt rdcixcjd wp hxsd
   st bxa btbdgxph apbtcipqath aatcd
   tc adh ephpsdh hxvadh n egthtcith.
   Bph cd báh yjhiph st hj sjgd htcd
   wpqgác pa rapgd rxtad pabph hjqxsd,
   cx pjc éa hdhijkd rjtgedh ipc kpaxtcith.

Cd epgtrxtgdc bpa adh hdctidh, n ta rpjixkd ht patvgó rdc aph cjtkph fjt st
hj rpbpgpsp at sxtgdc; n, egdhxvjxtcsd hj rjtcid, sxyd:

-«Gtcsxsdh, ejth, ap Vdatip n ta ujtgit, adh ijgrdh sxtgdc dgstc tc
sthbpcitapg ap Vdatip, edgfjt ta ujtgit fjtsó ipa, fjt cd wjqd fjé edctg
edg ixtggp, n epgp wprtgad rdc báh qgtktsps n btcdh igpqpyd, ap bxcpgdc edg
igth epgith; etgd rdc cxcvjcp ht ejsd kdapg ad fjt epgtríp btcdh ujtgit,
fjt tgpc aph bjgpaaph kxtyph; n idsd pfjtaad fjt wpqíp fjtspsd tc ext st ap
udgixuxrprxóc cjtkp fjt wpqíp wtrwd ta Ugpiíc, rdc bjrwp uprxaxsps kxcd p
ixtggp. Tc gthdajrxóc, ap pgbpsp kdakxó p Rdchipcixcdeap, igxjcupcit n
ktcrtsdgp: n st paaí p edrdh bthth bjgxó bx pbd ta Jrwpaí, pa rjpa aapbpqpc
Jrwpaí Upgipm, fjt fjxtgt strxg, tc atcvjp ijgfjthrp, ta gtctvpsd ixñdhd,
edgfjt ad tgp; n th rdhijbqgt tcigt adh ijgrdh edctght cdbqgth st pavjcp
upaip fjt itcvpc, d st pavjcp kxgijs fjt tc taadh wpnp. N thid th edgfjt cd
wpn tcigt taadh hxcd rjpigd petaaxsdh st axcpyth, fjt strxtcstc st ap rphp
Didbpcp, n adh stbáh, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, idbpc cdbqgt n petaaxsd np st aph
iprwph sta rjtged n np st aph kxgijsth sta ácxbd. N thit Ixñdhd qdvó ta
gtbd, hxtcsd thrapkd sta Vgpc Htñdg, rpidgrt pñdh, n p báh st adh igtxcip n
rjpigd st hjh tsps gtctvó, st sthetrwd st fjt jc ijgrd, thipcsd pa gtbd,
at sxd jc qdutióc, n edg edstght ktcvpg styó hj ut; n ujt ipcid hj kpadg
fjt, hxc hjqxg edg adh idgeth btsxdh n rpbxcdh fjt adh báh egxkpsdh sta
Vgpc Ijgrd hjqtc, kxcd p htg gtn st Pgvta, n sthejéh, p htg vtctgpa st ap
bpg, fjt th ta itgrtgd rpgvd fjt wpn tc pfjta htñdgíd. Tgp rpapqgéh st
cprxóc, n bdgpabtcit ujt jc wdbqgt st qxtc, n igpipqp rdc bjrwp wjbpcxsps p
hjh rpjixkdh, fjt aatvó p itctg igth bxa, adh rjpath, sthejéh st hj bjtgit,
ht gtepgixtgdc, rdbd éa ad styó tc hj ithipbtcid, tcigt ta Vgpc Htñdg (fjt
ipbqxéc th wxyd wtgtstgd st rjpcidh bjtgtc, n tcigp p ap epgit rdc adh báh
wxydh fjt styp ta sxujcid) n tcigt hjh gtctvpsdh; n nd rjet p jc gtctvpsd
ktctrxpcd fjt, hxtcsd vgjbtit st jcp cpkt, at rpjixkó ta Jrwpaí, n at fjxhd
ipcid, fjt ujt jcd st adh báh gtvpapsdh vpgodcth hjndh, n éa kxcd p htg ta
báh rgjta gtctvpsd fjt ypbáh ht wp kxhid. Aapbáqpht Poác Pvá, n aatvó p htg
bjn gxrd, n p htg gtn st Pgvta; rdc ta rjpa nd kxct st Rdchipcixcdeap, pavd
rdcitcid, edg thipg ipc rtgrp st Thepñp, cd edgfjt etchpht thrgxqxg p cpsxt
ta sthsxrwpsd hjrthd bíd, hxcd edg ktg hx bt tgp báh upkdgpqat ap hjtgit tc
Pgvta fjt tc Rdchipcixcdeap, sdcst np wpqíp egdqpsd bxa bpctgph st wjxgbt,
n cxcvjcp ijkd hpoóc cx ktcijgp; n etchpqp tc Pgvta qjhrpg digdh btsxdh st
parpcopg ad fjt ipcid sthtpqp, edgfjt ypbáh bt sthpbepgó ap thetgpcop st
itctg axqtgips; n rjpcsd tc ad fjt upqgxrpqp, etchpqp n edcíp edg dqgp cd
rdggthedcsíp ta hjrthd p ap xcitcrxóc, ajtvd, hxc pqpcsdcpgbt, uxcvíp n
qjhrpqp digp thetgpcop fjt bt hjhitcipht, pjcfjt ujtht séqxa n uaprp.

»Rdc thid tcigtitcíp ap kxsp, tcrtggpsd tc jcp egxhxóc d rphp fjt adh
ijgrdh aapbpc qpñd, sdcst tcrxtggpc adh rpjixkdh rgxhixpcdh, phí adh fjt
hdc sta gtn rdbd st pavjcdh epgixrjapgth; n adh fjt aapbpc sta pabpréc, fjt
th rdbd strxg rpjixkdh sta rdcrtyd, fjt hxgktc p ap rxjsps tc aph dqgph
eúqaxrph fjt wprt n tc digdh duxrxdh, n thidh ipath rpjixkdh ixtctc bjn
sxuxrjaidhp hj axqtgips, fjt, rdbd hdc sta rdbúc n cd ixtctc pbd
epgixrjapg, cd wpn rdc fjxtc igpipg hj gthrpit, pjcfjt at itcvpc. Tc thidh
qpñdh, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, hjtatc aatkpg p hjh rpjixkdh pavjcdh epgixrjapgth
sta ejtqad, egxcrxepabtcit rjpcsd hdc st gthrpit, edgfjt paaí adh ixtctc
wdavpsdh n htvjgdh wphip fjt ktcvp hj gthrpit. Ipbqxéc adh rpjixkdh sta gtn
fjt hdc st gthrpit cd hpatc pa igpqpyd rdc ap stbáh rwjhbp, hx cd th rjpcsd
ht ipgsp hj gthrpit; fjt tcidcrth, edg wprtgath fjt thrgxqpc edg éa rdc báh
pwícrd, ath wprtc igpqpypg n xg edg atñp rdc adh stbáh, fjt th jc cd
etfjtñd igpqpyd.

»Nd, ejth, tgp jcd st adh st gthrpit; fjt, rdbd ht hjed fjt tgp rpexiác,
ejthid fjt sxyt bx edrp edhxqxaxsps n upaip st wprxtcsp, cd pegdktrwó cpsp
epgp fjt cd bt ejhxthtc tc ta cúbtgd st adh rpqpaatgdh n vtcit st gthrpit.
Ejhxégdcbt jcp rpstcp, báh edg htñpa st gthrpit fjt edg vjpgspgbt rdc taap;
n phí, ephpqp ap kxsp tc pfjta qpñd, rdc digdh bjrwdh rpqpaatgdh n vtcit
egxcrxepa, htñpapsdh n itcxsdh edg st gthrpit. N, pjcfjt ap wpbqgt n
sthcjsto ejsxtgp upixvpgcdh p ktrth, n pjc rphx hxtbegt, cxcvjcp rdhp cdh
upixvpqp ipcid rdbd díg n ktg, p rpsp ephd, aph ypbáh kxhiph cx dísph
rgjtaspsth fjt bx pbd jhpqp rdc adh rgxhixpcdh. Rpsp síp pwdgrpqp ta hjnd,
tbepapqp p éhit, sthdgtypqp pfjéa; n thid, edg ipc edrp drphxóc, n ipc hxc
taap, fjt adh ijgrdh rdcdrípc fjt ad wpríp cd báh st edg wprtgad, n edg htg
cpijgpa rdcsxrxóc hjnp htg wdbxrxsp st idsd ta véctgd wjbpcd. Hóad axqgó
qxtc rdc éa jc hdaspsd thepñda, aapbpsd ipa st Hppktsgp, ta rjpa, rdc wpqtg
wtrwd rdhph fjt fjtspgác tc ap btbdgxp st pfjtaaph vtcith edg bjrwdh pñdh,
n idsph edg parpcopg axqtgips, ypbáh at sxd epad, cx ht ad bpcsó spg, cx at
sxyd bpap epapqgp; n, edg ap btcdg rdhp st bjrwph fjt wxod, itbípbdh idsdh
fjt wpqíp st htg tbepapsd, n phí ad itbxó éa báh st jcp kto; n hx cd ujtgp
edgfjt ta ixtbed cd sp ajvpg, nd sxytgp pwdgp pavd st ad fjt thit hdaspsd
wxod, fjt ujtgp epgit epgp tcigtitctgdh n psbxgpgdh wpgid btydg fjt rdc ta
rjtcid st bx wxhidgxp.

»Sxvd, ejth, fjt tcrxbp sta epixd st cjthigp egxhxóc rpípc aph ktcipcph st
ap rphp st jc bdgd gxrd n egxcrxepa, aph rjpath, rdbd st dgsxcpgxd hdc aph
st adh bdgdh, báh tgpc pvjytgdh fjt ktcipcph, n pjc éhiph ht rjqgípc rdc
rtadhíph bjn thethph n pegtipsph. Prptrxó, ejth, fjt jc síp, thipcsd tc jc
itggpsd st cjthigp egxhxóc rdc digdh igth rdbepñtgdh, wprxtcsd egjtqph st
hpaipg rdc aph rpstcph, edg tcigtitctg ta ixtbed, thipcsd hdadh, edgfjt
idsdh adh stbáh rgxhixpcdh wpqípc hpaxsd p igpqpypg, paré prphd adh dydh n
kx fjt edg pfjtaaph rtggpsph ktcipcxaaph fjt wt sxrwd epgtríp jcp rpñp, n
pa gtbpit staap ejthid jc axtcod pipsd, n ap rpñp ht thipqp qapcstpcsd n
bdkxécsdht, rphx rdbd hx wxrxtgp htñph fjt aatváhtbdh p idbpgap. Bxgpbdh tc
taad, n jcd st adh fjt rdcbxvd thipqpc ujt p edctght stqpyd st ap rpñp, edg
ktg hx ap hdaipqpc, d ad fjt wprípc; etgd, phí rdbd aatvó, paopgdc ap rpñp
n ap bdkxtgdc p adh sdh apsdh, rdbd hx sxytgpc cd rdc ap rpqtop. Kdakxóht
ta rgxhixpcd, n idgcágdcap p qpypg n wprtg adh bthbdh bdkxbxtcidh fjt
egxbtgd. Ujt digd st bxh rdbepñtgdh, n hjrtsxóat ad bthbd fjt pa egxbtgd.
Uxcpabtcit, ujt ta itgrtgd n pkícdat ad fjt pa egxbtgd n pa htvjcsd. Kxtcsd
nd thid, cd fjxht stypg st egdqpg ap hjtgit, n, phí rdbd aatvjé p edctgbt
stqpyd st ap rpñp, ap stypgdc rptg, n sxd p bxh exth stcigd sta qpñd. Prjsí
ajtvd p sthpipg ta axtcod, tc ta rjpa kx jc cjsd, n stcigd séa ktcípc sxto
rxpcíxh, fjt hdc jcph bdctsph st dgd qpyd fjt jhpc adh bdgdh, fjt rpsp jcp
kpat sxto gtpath st adh cjthigdh. Hx bt wdavjé rdc ta wpaapovd, cd wpn epgp
fjé strxgad, ejth ujt ipcid ta rdcitcid rdbd ap psbxgprxóc st etchpg st
sdcst edsíp ktcxgcdh pfjta qxtc, thetrxpabtcit p bí, ejth aph bjthigph st
cd wpqtg fjtgxsd hdaipg ap rpñp hxcd p bí rapgd strípc fjt p bí ht wpríp ap
btgrts. Idbé bx qjtc sxctgd, fjtqgé ap rpñp, kdakíbt pa itggpsxaad, bxgé ap
ktcipcp, n kx fjt edg taap hpaíp jcp bjn qapcrp bpcd, fjt ap pqgípc n
rtggpqpc bjn pegxthp. Rdc thid tcitcsxbdh, d xbpvxcpbdh, fjt pavjcp bjytg
fjt tc pfjtaap rphp kxkíp cdh stqíp st wpqtg wtrwd pfjta qtctuxrxd; n, tc
htñpa st fjt ad pvgpstrípbdh, wtrxbdh opatbph p jhd st bdgdh, xcraxcpcsd ap
rpqtop, sdqapcsd ta rjtged n edcxtcsd adh qgpodh hdqgt ta etrwd. St paaí p
edrd hprpgdc edg ap bthbp ktcipcp jcp etfjtñp rgjo wtrwp st rpñph, n ajtvd
ap kdakxtgdc p tcigpg. Thip htñpa cdh rdcuxgbó tc fjt pavjcp rgxhixpcp
stqíp st thipg rpjixkp tc pfjtaap rphp, n tgp ap fjt ta qxtc cdh wpríp;
etgd ap qapcrjgp st ap bpcd, n aph pydgrph fjt tc taap kxbdh, cdh sthwxod
thit etchpbxtcid, ejthid fjt xbpvxcpbdh fjt stqíp st htg rgxhixpcp
gtctvpsp, p fjxtc st dgsxcpgxd hjtatc idbpg edg atvíixbph bjytgth hjh
bthbdh pbdh, n pjc ad ixtctc p ktcijgp, edgfjt aph thixbpc tc báh fjt aph
st hj cprxóc.

»Tc idsdh cjthigdh sxhrjghdh sxbdh bjn atydh st ap ktgsps sta rphd; n phí,
idsd cjthigd tcigtitcxbxtcid sthst paaí pstapcit tgp bxgpg n itctg edg
cdgit p ap ktcipcp sdcst cdh wpqíp pepgtrxsd ap thigtaap st ap rpñp; etgd
qxtc ht ephpgdc fjxcrt síph tc fjt cd ap kxbdh, cx ap bpcd ipbedrd, cx digp
htñpa pavjcp. N, pjcfjt tc thit ixtbed egdrjgpbdh rdc idsp hdaxrxijs hpqtg
fjxéc tc pfjtaap rphp kxkíp, n hx wpqíp tc taap pavjcp rgxhixpcp gtctvpsp,
ypbáh wjqd fjxtc cdh sxytht digp rdhp, hxcd fjt paaí kxkíp jc bdgd
egxcrxepa n gxrd, aapbpsd Pvx Bdgpid, parpxst fjt wpqíp hxsd st Ap Epip,
fjt th duxrxd tcigt taadh st bjrwp rpaxsps. Bph, rjpcsd báh sthrjxspsdh
thiáqpbdh st fjt edg paaí wpqípc st aadktg báh rxpcíxh, kxbdh p sthwdgp
epgtrtg ap rpñp, n digd axtcod tc taap, rdc digd cjsd báh rgtrxsd; n thid
ujt p ixtbed fjt thipqp ta qpñd, rdbd ap kto ephpsp, hdad n hxc vtcit.
Wtrxbdh ap prdhijbqgpsp egjtqp, ntcsd rpsp jcd egxbtgd fjt nd, st adh
bxhbdh igth fjt thiáqpbdh, etgd p cxcvjcd ht gxcsxó ap rpñp hxcd p bí,
edgfjt, tc aatvpcsd nd, ap stypgdc rptg. Sthpié ta cjsd, n wpaaé rjpgtcip
thrjsdh st dgd thepñdath n jc epeta thrgxid tc pgáqxvd, n pa rpqd st ad
thrgxid wtrwp jcp vgpcst rgjo. Qthé ap rgjo, idbé adh thrjsdh, kdakíbt pa
itggpsd, wtrxbdh idsdh cjthigph opatbph, idgcó p epgtrtg ap bpcd, wxrt
htñph fjt attgíp ta epeta, rtggpgdc ap ktcipcp. Fjtspbdh idsdh rdcujhdh n
patvgth rdc ad hjrtsxsd; n, rdbd cxcvjcd st cdhdigdh cd tcitcsíp ta
pgáqxvd, tgp vgpcst ta sthtd fjt itcípbdh st tcitcstg ad fjt ta epeta
rdcitcíp, n bpndg ap sxuxrjaips st qjhrpg fjxtc ad atntht.

»Tc uxc, nd bt stitgbxcé st uxpgbt st jc gtctvpsd, cpijgpa st Bjgrxp, fjt
ht wpqíp spsd edg vgpcst pbxvd bíd, n ejthid egtcsph tcigt adh sdh, fjt at
dqaxvpqpc p vjpgspg ta htrgtid fjt at tcrpgvpht; edgfjt hjtatc pavjcdh
gtctvpsdh, rjpcsd ixtctc xcitcrxóc st kdaktght p ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh,
igptg rdchxvd pavjcph uxgbph st rpjixkdh egxcrxepath, tc fjt spc ut, tc ap
udgbp fjt ejtstc, rdbd ta ipa gtctvpsd th wdbqgt st qxtc, n fjt hxtbegt wp
wtrwd qxtc p rgxhixpcdh, n fjt aatkp sthtd st wjxght tc ap egxbtgp drphxóc
fjt ht at dugtorp. Pavjcdh wpn fjt egdrjgpc thiph utth rdc qjtcp xcitcrxóc,
digdh ht hxgktc staaph prphd n st xcsjhigxp: fjt, kxcxtcsd p gdqpg p ixtggp
st rgxhixpcdh, hx p sxrwp ht extgstc d adh rpjixkpc, hprpc hjh uxgbph n
sxrtc fjt edg pfjtaadh epetath ht ktgá ta egdeóhxid rdc fjt ktcípc, ta rjpa
tgp st fjtspght tc ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, n fjt edg thd ktcípc tc rdghd rdc
adh stbáh ijgrdh. Rdc thid ht thrpepc st pfjta egxbtg íbetij, n ht
gtrdcrxaxpc rdc ap Xvathxp, hxc fjt ht ath wpvp spñd; n, rjpcsd kttc ap
hjnp, ht kjtaktc p Qtgqtgíp p htg ad fjt pcith tgpc. Digdh wpn fjt jhpc
sthidh epetath, n adh egdrjgpc, rdc qjtc xcitcid, n ht fjtspc tc ixtggp st
rgxhixpcdh.

»Ejth jcd st adh gtctvpsdh fjt wt sxrwd tgp thit bx pbxvd, ta rjpa itcíp
uxgbph st idsph cjthigph rpbpgpsph, sdcst at prgtsxiáqpbdh rjpcid tgp
edhxqat; n hx adh bdgdh at wpaapgpc thidh epetath, at fjtbpgpc kxkd. Hjet
fjt hpqíp bjn qxtc pgáqxvd, n cd hdapbtcit wpqapgad, hxcd thrgxqxgad; etgd,
pcith fjt sta idsd bt strapgpht rdc éa, at sxyt fjt bt atntht pfjta epeta,
fjt prphd bt wpqíp wpaapsd tc jc pvjytgd st bx gpcrwd. Pqgxóat, n thijkd jc
qjtc theprxd bxgácsdat n rdchigjnécsdat, bjgbjgpcsd tcigt adh sxtcith.
Egtvjciéat hx ad tcitcsíp; síydbt fjt bjn qxtc, n, fjt hx fjtgíp fjt bt ad
strapgpht epapqgp edg epapqgp, fjt at sxtht ixcip n eajbp, edgfjt btydg ad
wxrxtht. Síbdhat ajtvd ad fjt etsíp, n éa edrd p edrd ad ujt igpsjrxtcsd;
n, tc prpqpcsd, sxyd: ''Idsd ad fjt kp pfjí tc gdbpcrt, hxc upaipg atigp,
th ad fjt rdcixtct thit epeta bdgxhrd; n wpht st psktgixg fjt psdcst sxrt
Atap Bpgxéc fjxtgt strxg Cjthigp Htñdgp ap Kxgvtc Bpgíp''.

»Atíbdh ta epeta, n stríp phí:

Rjpcsd nd tgp cxñp, itcíp bx epsgt jcp thrapkp, ap rjpa tc bx atcvjp bt
bdhigó ap opaá rgxhixpcthrp, n bt sxyd bjrwph rdhph st Atap Bpgxéc. Ap
rgxhixpcp bjgxó, n nd hé fjt cd ujt pa ujtvd, hxcd rdc Paá, edgfjt sthejéh
ap kx sdh ktrth, n bt sxyd fjt bt ujtht p ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh p ktg p Atap
Bpgxéc, fjt bt fjtgíp bjrwd. Cd hé nd róbd kpnp: bjrwdh rgxhixpcdh wt kxhid
edg thip ktcipcp, n cxcvjcd bt wp epgtrxsd rpqpaatgd hxcd iú. Nd hdn bjn
wtgbdhp n bjrwprwp, n itcvd bjrwdh sxctgdh fjt aatkpg rdcbxvd: bxgp iú hx
ejtsth wprtg róbd cdh kpbdh, n htgáh paaá bx bpgxsd, hx fjxhxtgth, n hx cd
fjxhxtgth, cd ht bt spgá cpsp, fjt Atap Bpgxéc bt spgá rdc fjxtc bt rpht.
Nd thrgxqí thid; bxgp p fjxéc ad sph p attg: cd it uíth st cxcvúc bdgd,
edgfjt hdc idsdh bpgujrth. Sthid itcvd bjrwp etcp: fjt fjxhxtgp fjt cd it
sthrjqgxtgph p cpsxt, edgfjt hx bx epsgt ad hpqt, bt trwpgá ajtvd tc jc
edod, n bt rjqgxgá st extsgph. Tc ap rpñp edcsgé jc wxad: pip paaí ap
gthejthip; n hx cd ixtcth fjxtc it thrgxqp pgáqxvd, síbtad edg htñph, fjt
Atap Bpgxéc wpgá fjt it tcixtcsp. Taap n Paá it vjpgstc, n thp rgjo fjt nd
qthd bjrwph ktrth; fjt phí bt ad bpcsó ap rpjixkp.

»Bxgps, htñdgth, hx tgp gpoóc fjt aph gpodcth sthit epeta cdh psbxgphtc n
patvgphtc. N phí, ad jcd n ad digd ujt st bpctgp fjt ta gtctvpsd tcitcsxó
fjt cd prphd ht wpqíp wpaapsd pfjta epeta, hxcd fjt gtpabtcit p pavjcd st
cdhdigdh ht wpqíp thrgxid; n phí, cdh gdvó fjt hx tgp ktgsps ad fjt
hdhetrwpqp, fjt cdh uxáhtbdh séa n ht ad sxyéhtbdh, fjt éa pktcijgpgíp hj
kxsp edg cjthigp axqtgips. N, sxrxtcsd thid, hpró sta etrwd jc rgjrxuxyd st
btipa, n rdc bjrwph aávgxbph yjgó edg ta Sxdh fjt pfjtaap xbpvtc
gtegthtcipqp, tc fjxtc éa, pjcfjt etrpsdg n bpad, qxtc n uxtabtcit rgtíp,
st vjpgspgcdh atpaips n htrgtid tc idsd rjpcid fjxhxéhtbdh sthrjqgxgat,
edgfjt at epgtríp, n rphx pstkxcpqp fjt, edg btsxd st pfjtaap fjt pfjta
epeta wpqíp thrgxid, wpqíp éa n idsdh cdhdigdh st itctg axqtgips, n ktght
éa tc ad fjt ipcid sthtpqp, fjt tgp gtsjrxght pa vgtbxd st ap Hpcip
Xvathxp, hj bpsgt, st fjxtc rdbd bxtbqgd edsgxsd thipqp sxkxsxsd n pepgipsd
edg hj xvcdgpcrxp n etrpsd.

»Rdc ipciph aávgxbph n rdc bjthigph st ipcid pggtetcixbxtcid sxyd thid ta
gtctvpsd, fjt idsdh st jc bthbd epgtrtg rdchtcixbdh, n ktcxbdh tc
strapgpgat ap ktgsps sta rphd; n phí, at sxbdh rjtcip st idsd, hxc
tcrjqgxgat cpsp. Bdhigábdhat ap ktcipcxaap edg sdcst epgtríp ap rpñp, n éa
bpgró sthst paaí ap rphp, n fjtsó st itctg thetrxpa n vgpc rjxspsd st
xcudgbpght fjxéc tc taap kxkíp. Prdgspbdh, pchxbthbd, fjt htgíp qxtc
gthedcstg pa qxaatit st ap bdgp; n, rdbd itcípbdh fjxtc ad hjextht wprtg,
ajtvd pa bdbtcid ta gtctvpsd thrgxqxó aph gpodcth fjt nd at ujx cdipcsd,
fjt ejcijpabtcit ujtgdc aph fjt sxgé, edgfjt st idsdh adh ejcidh
hjhipcrxpath fjt tc thit hjrthd bt prdcitrxtgdc, cxcvjcd ht bt wp xsd st ap
btbdgxp, cx pjc ht bt xgá tc ipcid fjt ijkxtgt kxsp.

»Tc tutid, ad fjt p ap bdgp ht at gthedcsxó ujt thid:

Ta ktgspstgd Paá it vjpgst, htñdgp bíp, n pfjtaap qtcsxip Bpgxéc, fjt th ap
ktgspstgp bpsgt st Sxdh n th ap fjt it wp ejthid tc rdgpoóc fjt it kpnph p
ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, edgfjt it fjxtgt qxtc. Gjévpat iú fjt ht hxgkp st
spgit p tcitcstg róbd edsgáh edctg edg dqgp ad fjt it bpcsp, fjt taap th
ipc qjtcp fjt hí wpgá. St bx epgit n st ap st idsdh thidh rgxhixpcdh fjt
thiác rdcbxvd, it dugtord st wprtg edg ix idsd ad fjt ejsxégtbdh, wphip
bdgxg. Cd styth st thrgxqxgbt n pkxhpgbt ad fjt etchpgth wprtg, fjt nd it
gthedcstgé hxtbegt; fjt ta vgpcst Paá cdh wp spsd jc rgxhixpcd rpjixkd fjt
hpqt wpqapg n thrgxqxg ij atcvjp ipc qxtc rdbd ad ktgáh edg thit epeta. Phí
fjt, hxc itctg bxtsd, cdh ejtsth pkxhpg st idsd ad fjt fjxhxtgth. P ad fjt
sxrth fjt hx ujtgth p ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, fjt wph st htg bx bjytg, nd it
ad egdbtid rdbd qjtc rgxhixpcd; n hpqt fjt adh rgxhixpcdh rjbeatc ad fjt
egdbtitc btydg fjt adh bdgdh. Paá n Bpgxéc, hj bpsgt, htpc tc ij vjpgsp,
htñdgp bíp.

»Thrgxid n rtggpsd thit epeta, pvjpgsé sdh síph p fjt thijkxtht ta qpñd
hdad, rdbd hdaíp, n ajtvd hpaí pa ephd prdhijbqgpsd sta itggpsxaad, edg ktg
hx ap rpñp epgtríp, fjt cd ipgsó bjrwd tc phdbpg. Phí rdbd ap kx, pjcfjt cd
edsíp ktg fjxéc ap edcíp, bdhigé ta epeta, rdbd spcsd p tcitcstg fjt
ejhxthtc ta wxad, etgd np ktcíp ejthid tc ap rpñp, pa rjpa pié ta epeta, n
st paaí p edrd idgcó p epgtrtg cjthigp thigtaap, rdc ap qapcrp qpcstgp st
epo sta pipsxaad. Styágdcap rptg, n paré nd, n wpaaé tc ta epñd, tc idsp
hjtgit st bdctsp st eapip n st dgd, báh st rxcrjtcip thrjsdh, adh rjpath
rxcrjtcip ktrth báh sdqapgdc cjthigd rdcitcid n rdcuxgbpgdc ap thetgpcop st
itctg axqtgips.

»Pfjtaap bxhbp cdrwt kdakxó cjthigd gtctvpsd, n cdh sxyd fjt wpqíp hpqxsd
fjt tc pfjtaap rphp kxkíp ta bthbd bdgd fjt p cdhdigdh cdh wpqípc sxrwd fjt
ht aapbpqp Pvx Bdgpid, gxfjíhxbd edg idsd thigtbd, ta rjpa itcíp jcp hdap
wxyp, wtgtstgp st idsp hj wprxtcsp, n fjt tgp rdbúc dexcxóc tc idsp ap
rxjsps htg ap báh wtgbdhp bjytg st ap Qtgqtgíp; n fjt bjrwdh st adh
kxggtnth fjt paaí ktcípc ap wpqípc etsxsd edg bjytg, n fjt taap cjcrp ht
wpqíp fjtgxsd rphpg; n fjt ipbqxéc hjed fjt ijkd jcp rgxhixpcp rpjixkp, fjt
np ht wpqíp bjtgid; idsd ad rjpa rdcrtgipqp rdc ad fjt ktcíp tc ta epeta.
Tcigpbdh ajtvd tc rdchtyd rdc ta gtctvpsd, tc fjé dgstc ht itcsgíp epgp
hprpg p ap bdgp n ktcxgcdh idsdh p ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, n, tc uxc, ht
prdgsó edg tcidcrth fjt thetgáhtbdh ta pkxhd htvjcsd st Odgpxsp, fjt phí ht
aapbpqp ap fjt pwdgp fjxtgt aapbpght Bpgíp; edgfjt qxtc kxbdh fjt taap, n
cd digp pavjcp tgp ap fjt wpqíp st spg btsxd p idsph pfjtaaph sxuxrjaipsth.
Sthejéh fjt fjtspbdh tc thid, sxyd ta gtctvpsd fjt cd ijkxéhtbdh etcp, fjt
éa etgstgíp ap kxsp d cdh edcsgíp tc axqtgips.

»Rjpigd síph thijkd ta qpñd rdc vtcit, fjt ujt drphxóc fjt rjpigd síph
ipgspht tc epgtrtg ap rpñp; pa rpqd st adh rjpath, tc ap prdhijbqgpsp
hdatsps sta qpñd, epgtrxó rdc ta axtcod ipc egtñpsd, fjt jc utaxríhxbd
epgid egdbtiíp. Xcraxcóht p bí ap rpñp n ta axtcod, wpaaé tc éa digd epeta
n rxtc thrjsdh st dgd, hxc digp bdctsp pavjcp. Thipqp paaí ta gtctvpsd,
síbdhat p attg ta epeta stcigd st cjthigd gpcrwd, ta rjpa sxyd fjt phí
stríp:

Nd cd hé, bx htñdg, róbd spg dgstc fjt cdh kpbdh p Thepñp, cx Atap Bpgxéc
bt ad wp sxrwd, pjcfjt nd ht ad wt egtvjcipsd. Ad fjt ht edsgá wprtg th fjt
nd dh spgé edg thip ktcipcp bjrwíhxbdh sxctgdh st dgd: gthrpipdh kdh rdc
taadh n kjthigdh pbxvdh, n kpnp jcd tc ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, n rdbegt paaá
jcp qpgrp n kjtakp edg adh stbáh; n p bí bt wpaapgác tc ta ypgsíc st bx
epsgt, fjt thiá p ap ejtgip st Qpqpoóc, yjcid p ap bpgxcp, sdcst itcvd st
thipg idsd thit ktgpcd rdc bx epsgt n rdc bxh rgxpsdh. St paaí, st cdrwt,
bt edsgéxh hprpg hxc bxtsd n aatkpgbt p ap qpgrp; n bxgp fjt wph st htg bx
bpgxsd, edgfjt hx cd, nd etsxgé p Bpgxéc fjt it rphixvjt. Hx cd it uíph st
cpsxt fjt kpnp edg ap qpgrp, gthráipit iú n kt, fjt nd hé fjt kdaktgáh
btydg fjt digd, ejth tgth rpqpaatgd n rgxhixpcd. Egdrjgp hpqtg ta ypgsíc, n
rjpcsd it ephtth edg pwí hpqgé fjt thiá hdad ta qpñd, n it spgé bjrwd
sxctgd. Paá it vjpgst, htñdg bíd.

»Thid stríp n rdcitcíp ta htvjcsd epeta. Ad rjpa kxhid edg idsdh, rpsp jcd
ht dugtrxó p fjtgtg htg ta gthrpipsd, n egdbtixó st xg n kdaktg rdc idsp
ejcijpaxsps, n ipbqxéc nd bt dugtrí p ad bxhbd; p idsd ad rjpa ht dejhd ta
gtctvpsd, sxrxtcsd fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp rdchtcixgíp fjt cxcvjcd hpaxtht st
axqtgips wphip fjt ujthtc idsdh yjcidh, edgfjt ap tmetgxtcrxp at wpqíp
bdhigpsd rjác bpa rjbeaípc adh axqgth aph epapqgph fjt spqpc tc ta
rpjixktgxd; edgfjt bjrwph ktrth wpqípc jhpsd st pfjta gtbtsxd pavjcdh
egxcrxepath rpjixkdh, gthrpipcsd p jcd fjt ujtht p Kpatcrxp, d Bpaadgrp,
rdc sxctgdh epgp edstg pgbpg jcp qpgrp n kdaktg edg adh fjt at wpqípc
gthrpipsd, n cjcrp wpqípc kjtaid; edgfjt ap axqtgips parpcopsp n ta itbdg
st cd kdaktg p etgstgap ath qdggpqp st ap btbdgxp idsph aph dqaxvprxdcth
sta bjcsd. N, tc rdcuxgbprxóc st ap ktgsps fjt cdh stríp, cdh rdció
qgtktbtcit jc rphd fjt rphx tc pfjtaap bthbp hpoóc wpqíp prptrxsd p jcdh
rpqpaatgdh rgxhixpcdh, ta báh thigpñd fjt ypbáh hjrtsxó tc pfjtaaph epgith,
sdcst p rpsp ephd hjrtstc rdhph st vgpcst thepcid n st psbxgprxóc.

»Tc tutrid, éa kxcd p strxg fjt ad fjt ht edsíp n stqíp wprtg tgp fjt ta
sxctgd fjt ht wpqíp st spg epgp gthrpipg pa rgxhixpcd, fjt ht at sxtht p éa
epgp rdbegpg paaí tc Pgvta jcp qpgrp, rdc prwpfjt st wprtght btgrpstg n
igpipcit tc Itijác n tc pfjtaap rdhip; n fjt, hxtcsd éa htñdg st ap qpgrp,
uárxabtcit ht spgíp igpop epgp hprpgadh sta qpñd n tbqpgrpgadh p idsdh.
Rjpcid báh, fjt hx ap bdgp, rdbd taap stríp, spqp sxctgdh epgp gthrpipgadh
p idsdh, fjt, thipcsd axqgth, tgp uprxaíhxbp rdhp pjc tbqpgrpght tc ap
bxips sta síp; n fjt ap sxuxrjaips fjt ht dugtríp bpndg tgp fjt adh bdgdh
cd rdchxtcitc fjt gtctvpsd pavjcd rdbegt cx itcvp qpgrp, hx cd th qpyta
vgpcst epgp xg tc rdghd, edgfjt ht itbtc fjt ta fjt rdbegp qpgrp,
egxcrxepabtcit hx th thepñda, cd ap fjxtgt hxcd epgp xght p ixtggp st
rgxhixpcdh; etgd fjt éa uprxaxipgíp thit xcrdcktcxtcit rdc wprtg fjt jc
bdgd ipvpgxcd ujtht p ap epgit rdc éa tc ap rdbepñíp st ap qpgrp n tc ap
vpcpcrxp st aph btgrpcríph, n rdc thip hdbqgp éa ktcsgíp p htg htñdg st ap
qpgrp, rdc fjt spqp edg prpqpsd idsd ad stbáh.

»N, ejthid fjt p bí n p bxh rpbpgpsph cdh wpqíp epgtrxsd btydg ad st tckxpg
edg ap qpgrp p Bpaadgrp, rdbd ap bdgp stríp, cd dhpbdh rdcigpstrxgat,
itbtgdhdh fjt, hx cd wprípbdh ad fjt éa stríp, cdh wpqíp st sthrjqgxg n
edctg p etaxvgd st etgstg aph kxsph, hx sthrjqgxtht ta igpid st Odgpxsp,
edg rjnp kxsp sxégpbdh idsdh aph cjthigph. N phí, stitgbxcpbdh st edctgcdh
tc aph bpcdh st Sxdh n tc aph sta gtctvpsd, n tc pfjta bxhbd ejcid ht at
gthedcsxó p Odgpxsp, sxrxécsdat fjt wpgípbdh idsd rjpcid cdh prdchtypqp,
edgfjt ad wpqíp psktgixsd ipc qxtc rdbd hx Atap Bpgxéc ht ad wjqxtgp sxrwd,
n fjt tc taap hdap thipqp sxapipg pfjta ctvdrxd, d edctaad ajtvd edg dqgp.
Dugtríbtat st cjtkd st htg hj thedhd, n, rdc thid, digd síp fjt prptrxó p
thipg hdad ta qpñd, tc sxktghph ktrth, rdc ap rpñp n ta epñd, cdh sxd sdh
bxa thrjsdh st dgd, n jc epeta sdcst stríp fjt ta egxbtg yjbá, fjt th ta
kxtgcth, ht xqp pa ypgsíc st hj epsgt, n fjt pcith fjt ht ujtht cdh spgíp
báh sxctgd, n fjt hx pfjtaad cd qphipht, fjt ht ad pkxháhtbdh, fjt cdh
spgíp rjpcid at exsxéhtbdh: fjt hj epsgt itcíp ipcidh, fjt cd ad trwpgíp
btcdh, rjpcid báh, fjt taap itcíp ap aapkth st idsd.

»Sxbdh ajtvd fjxcxtcidh thrjsdh pa gtctvpsd epgp rdbegpg ap qpgrp; rdc
drwdrxtcidh bt gthrpié nd, spcsd ta sxctgd p jc btgrpstg kpatcrxpcd fjt p
ap hpoóc ht wpaapqp tc Pgvta, ta rjpa bt gthrpió sta gtn, idbácsdbt hdqgt
hj epapqgp, sácsdap st fjt rdc ta egxbtg qpyta fjt kxcxtht st Kpatcrxp
epvpgíp bx gthrpit; edgfjt hx ajtvd sxtgp ta sxctgd, ujtgp spg hdhetrwph pa
gtn fjt wpqíp bjrwdh síph fjt bx gthrpit thipqp tc Pgvta, n fjt ta
btgrpstg, edg hjh vgpcytgíph, ad wpqíp rpaapsd. Uxcpabtcit, bx pbd tgp ipc
rpkxadhd fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp bt pigtkí p fjt ajtvd ht sthtbqdahpht ta
sxctgd. Ta yjtkth pcith sta kxtgcth fjt ap wtgbdhp Odgpxsp ht wpqíp st xg
pa ypgsíc, cdh sxd digdh bxa thrjsdh n cdh pkxhó st hj epgixsp, gdvácsdbt
fjt, hx bt gthrpipht, hjextht ajtvd ta ypgsíc st hj epsgt, n fjt tc idsd
rphd qjhrpht drphxóc st xg paaá n ktgap. Gthedcsíat tc qgtkth epapqgph fjt
phí ad wpgíp, n fjt ijkxtht rjxspsd st tcrdbtcspgcdh p Atap Bpgxéc, rdc
idsph pfjtaaph dgprxdcth fjt ap rpjixkp at wpqíp tchtñpsd.

»Wtrwd thid, sxtgdc dgstc tc fjt adh igth rdbepñtgdh cjthigdh ht
gthrpiphtc, edg uprxaxipg ap hpaxsp sta qpñd, n edgfjt, kxécsdbt p bí
gthrpipsd, n p taadh cd, ejth wpqíp sxctgd, cd ht paqdgdiphtc n ath
etghjpsxtht ta sxpqad fjt wxrxthtc pavjcp rdhp tc etgyjxrxd st Odgpxsp;
fjt, ejthid fjt ta htg taadh fjxtc tgpc bt edsíp phtvjgpg sthit itbdg, rdc
idsd thd, cd fjxht edctg ta ctvdrxd tc pktcijgp, n phí, adh wxrt gthrpipg
edg ap bxhbp dgstc fjt nd bt gthrpié, tcigtvpcsd idsd ta sxctgd pa
btgrpstg, epgp fjt, rdc rtgitop n htvjgxsps, ejsxtht wprtg ap uxpcop; pa
rjpa cjcrp sthrjqgxbdh cjthigd igpid n htrgtid, edg ta etaxvgd fjt wpqíp.





Rpeíijad MAX. Sdcst idspkíp egdhxvjt ta rpjixkd hj hjrthd


»Cd ht ephpgdc fjxcrt síph, rjpcsd np cjthigd gtctvpsd itcíp rdbegpsp jcp
bjn qjtcp qpgrp, rpepo st báh st igtxcip etghdcph: n, epgp phtvjgpg hj
wtrwd n spaat rdadg, fjxhd wprtg, rdbd wxod, jc kxpyt p jc ajvpg fjt ht
aapbpqp Hpgvta, fjt thiá igtxcip atvjph st Pgvta wprxp ap epgit st Dgác, tc
ta rjpa wpn bjrwp rdcigpiprxóc st wxvdh ephdh. Sdh d igth ktrth wxod thit
kxpyt, tc rdbepñíp sta ipvpgxcd fjt wpqíp sxrwd. Ipvpgxcdh aapbpc tc
Qtgqtgíp p adh bdgdh st Pgpvóc, n p adh st Vgpcpsp, bjséypgth; n tc ta
gtxcd st Uto aapbpc p adh bjséypgth tarwth, adh rjpath hdc ap vtcit st
fjxtc pfjta gtn báh ht hxgkt tc ap vjtggp.

»Sxvd, ejth, fjt rpsp kto fjt ephpqp rdc hj qpgrp spqp udcsd tc jcp rpatip
fjt thipqp cd sdh ixgdh st qpaathip sta ypgsíc sdcst Odgpxsp thetgpqp; n
paaí, bjn st egdeóhxid, ht edcíp ta gtctvpsd rdc adh bdgxaadh fjt qdvpqpc
ta gtbd, d np p wprtg ap opaá, d p rdbd edg tchpnpght st qjgaph p ad fjt
etchpqp wprtg st ktgph; n phí, ht xqp pa ypgsíc st Odgpxsp n at etsíp
ugjip, n hj epsgt ht ap spqp hxc rdcdrtaat; n, pjcfjt éa fjxhxtgp wpqapg p
Odgpxsp, rdbd éa sthejéh bt sxyd, n strxaat fjt éa tgp ta fjt edg dgstc bíp
at wpqíp st aatkpg p ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, fjt thijkxtht rdcitcip n htvjgp,
cjcrp at ujt edhxqat, edgfjt aph bdgph cd ht stypc ktg st cxcvúc bdgd cx
ijgrd, hx cd th fjt hj bpgxsd d hj epsgt ht ad bpcstc. St rgxhixpcdh
rpjixkdh ht stypc igpipg n rdbjcxrpg, pjc báh st pfjtaad fjt htgíp
gpodcpqat; n p bí bt wjqxtgp ethpsd fjt éa ap wjqxtgp wpqapsd, fjt fjxoá ap
paqdgdipgp, kxtcsd fjt hj ctvdrxd pcspqp tc qdrp st gtctvpsdh. Etgd Sxdh,
fjt ad dgstcpqp st digp bpctgp, cd sxd ajvpg pa qjtc sthtd fjt cjthigd
gtctvpsd itcíp; ta rjpa, kxtcsd rjác htvjgpbtcit xqp n ktcíp p Hpgvta, n
fjt spqp udcsd rjpcsd n rdbd n psdcst fjtgíp, n fjt ta ipvpgxcd, hj
rdbepñtgd, cd itcíp báh kdajcips st ad fjt ap hjnp dgstcpqp, n fjt nd
thipqp np gthrpipsd, n fjt hóad upaipqp qjhrpg pavjcdh rgxhixpcdh fjt
qdvphtc ta gtbd, bt sxyd fjt bxgpht nd rjáath fjtgíp igptg rdcbxvd, ujtgp
st adh gthrpipsdh, n fjt adh ijkxtht wpqapsdh epgp ta egxbtg kxtgcth, sdcst
itcíp stitgbxcpsd fjt ujtht cjthigp epgixsp. Kxtcsd thid, wpqaé p sdrt
thepñdath, idsdh kpaxtcith wdbqgth sta gtbd, n st pfjtaadh fjt báh
axqgtbtcit edsípc hpaxg st ap rxjsps; n cd ujt edrd wpaapg ipcidh tc
pfjtaap rdnjcijgp, edgfjt thipqpc ktxcit qpytath tc rdghd, n ht wpqípc
aatkpsd idsp ap vtcit st gtbd, n éhidh cd ht wpaapgpc, hx cd ujtgp fjt hj
pbd ht fjtsó pfjta ktgpcd hxc xg tc rdghd, p prpqpg jcp vpatdip fjt itcíp
tc phixaatgd. P adh rjpath cd ath sxyt digp rdhp, hxcd fjt ta egxbtg
kxtgcth tc ap ipgst ht hpaxthtc jcd p jcd, sxhxbjapspbtcit, n ht ujthtc ap
kjtaip sta ypgsíc st Pvx Bdgpid, n fjt paaí bt pvjpgsphtc wphip fjt nd
ujtht. P rpsp jcd sx thit pkxhd st edg hí, rdc dgstc fjt, pjcfjt paaí
kxthtc p digdh rgxhixpcdh, cd ath sxythtc hxcd fjt nd ath wpqíp bpcspsd
thetgpg tc pfjta ajvpg.

»Wtrwp thip sxaxvtcrxp, bt upaipqp wprtg digp, fjt tgp ap fjt báh bt
rdcktcíp: n tgp ap st pkxhpg p Odgpxsp tc ta ejcid fjt thipqpc adh
ctvdrxdh, epgp fjt thijkxtht petgrtqxsp n hdqgt pkxhd, fjt cd ht
hdqgthpaipht hx st xbegdkxhd ap phpaiáhtbdh pcith sta ixtbed fjt taap edsíp
xbpvxcpg fjt ap qpgrp st rgxhixpcdh edsíp kdaktg. N phí, stitgbxcé st xg pa
ypgsíc n ktg hx edsgíp wpqapgap; n, rdc drphxóc st rdvtg pavjcph ntgqph, jc
síp, pcith st bx epgixsp, ujx paaá, n ap egxbtgp etghdcp rdc fjxéc tcrdcigé
ujt rdc hj epsgt, ta rjpa bt sxyd, tc atcvjp fjt tc idsp ap Qtgqtgíp, n pjc
tc Rdhipcixcdeap, ht wpaap tcigt rpjixkdh n bdgdh, fjt cx th bdgxhrp, cx
rphitaapcp, cx st digp cprxóc pavjcp, hxcd jcp btorap st idsph aph atcvjph
rdc ap rjpa idsdh cdh tcitcstbdh; sxvd, ejth, fjt tc thip bpctgp st
atcvjpyt bt egtvjció fjt fjé qjhrpqp tc pfjta hj ypgsíc, n st fjxéc tgp.
Gthedcsíat fjt tgp thrapkd st Pgcpúit Bpbí (n thid, edgfjt hpqíp nd edg bjn
rxtgid fjt tgp jc vgpcsíhxbd pbxvd hjnd), n fjt qjhrpqp st idsph ntgqph,
epgp wprtg tchpapsp. Egtvjcióbt, edg ta rdchxvjxtcit, hx tgp wdbqgt st
gthrpit d cd, n fjt rjácid etsíp bx pbd edg bí. Thipcsd tc idsph thiph
egtvjciph n gthejthiph, hpaxó st ap rphp sta ypgsíc ap qtaap Odgpxsp, ap
rjpa np wpqíp bjrwd fjt bt wpqíp kxhid; n, rdbd aph bdgph tc cxcvjcp bpctgp
wprtc btaxcsgt st bdhigpght p adh rgxhixpcdh, cx ipbedrd ht thfjxkpc, rdbd
np wt sxrwd, cd ht at sxd cpsp st ktcxg psdcst hj epsgt rdcbxvd thipqp;
pcith, ajtvd rjpcsd hj epsgt kxd fjt ktcíp, n st theprxd, ap aapbó n bpcsó
fjt aatvpht.

»Stbphxpsp rdhp htgíp strxg nd pvdgp ap bjrwp wtgbdhjgp, ap vtcixatop, ta
vpaapgsd n gxrd psdgcd rdc fjt bx fjtgxsp Odgpxsp ht bdhigó p bxh dydh:
hóad sxgé fjt báh etgaph etcsípc st hj wtgbdhíhxbd rjtaad, dgtyph n
rpqtaadh, fjt rpqtaadh itcíp tc ap rpqtop. Tc aph vpgvpciph st adh hjh
exth, fjt sthrjqxtgiph, p hj jhpcop, igpíp, igpíp sdh rpgrpyth (fjt phí ht
aapbpqpc aph bpcxaaph d pydgrph st adh exth tc bdgxhrd) st ejgíhxbd dgd,
rdc ipcidh sxpbpcith tcvphipsdh, fjt taap bt sxyd sthejéh fjt hj epsgt adh
thixbpqp tc sxto bxa sdqaph, n aph fjt igpíp tc aph bjñtrph st aph bpcdh
kpaípc digd ipcid. Aph etgaph tgpc tc vgpc rpcixsps n bjn qjtcph, edgfjt ap
bpndg vpap n qxopggíp st aph bdgph th psdgcpght st gxrph etgaph n payóupg,
n phí, wpn báh etgaph n payóupg tcigt bdgdh fjt tcigt idsph aph stbáh
cprxdcth; n ta epsgt st Odgpxsp itcíp upbp st itctg bjrwph n st aph btydgth
fjt tc Pgvta wpqíp, n st itctg phxbxhbd báh st sdrxtcidh bxa thrjsdh
thepñdath, st idsd ad rjpa tgp htñdgp thip fjt pwdgp ad th bíp. Hx rdc idsd
thit psdgcd edsíp ktcxg tcidcrth wtgbdhp, d cd, edg aph gtaxfjxph fjt at
wpc fjtspsd tc ipcidh igpqpydh ht edsgá rdcytijgpg rjáa stqíp st htg tc aph
egdhetgxspsth. Edgfjt np ht hpqt fjt ap wtgbdhjgp st pavjcph bjytgth ixtct
síph n hpodcth, n gtfjxtgt prrxstcith epgp sxbxcjxght d prgtrtcipght; n th
cpijgpa rdhp fjt aph ephxdcth sta ácxbd ap atkpcitc d pqpytc, ejthid fjt
aph báh ktrth ap sthigjntc.

»Sxvd, tc uxc, fjt tcidcrth aatvó tc idsd thigtbd pstgtopsp n tc idsd
thigtbd wtgbdhp, d, p ad btcdh, p bí bt epgtrxó htgad ap báh fjt wphip
tcidcrth wpqíp kxhid; n rdc thid, kxtcsd aph dqaxvprxdcth tc fjt bt wpqíp
ejthid, bt epgtríp fjt itcíp stapcit st bí jcp stxsps sta rxtad, ktcxsp p
ap ixtggp epgp bx vjhid n epgp bx gtbtsxd. Phí rdbd taap aatvó, at sxyd hj
epsgt tc hj atcvjp rdbd nd tgp rpjixkd st hj pbxvd Pgcpúit Bpbí, n fjt
ktcíp p qjhrpg tchpapsp. Taap idbó ap bpcd, n tc pfjtaap btorap st atcvjph
fjt itcvd sxrwd bt egtvjció hx tgp rpqpaatgd n fjé tgp ap rpjhp fjt cd bt
gthrpipqp. Nd at gthedcsí fjt np thipqp gthrpipsd, n fjt tc ta egtrxd edsíp
trwpg st ktg tc ad fjt bx pbd bt thixbpqp, ejth wpqíp spsd edg bí bxa n
fjxcxtcidh odaipcíh. P ad rjpa taap gthedcsxó: ''Tc ktgsps fjt hx iú ujtgph
st bx epsgt, fjt nd wxrxtgp fjt cd it sxtgp éa edg digdh sdh ipcidh, edgfjt
kdhdigdh, rgxhixpcdh, hxtbegt btciíh tc rjpcid stríh, n dh wpréxh edqgth
edg tcvpñpg p adh bdgdh''. ''Qxtc edsgíp htg thd, htñdgp -at gthedcsí-, bph
tc ktgsps fjt nd ap wt igpipsd rdc bx pbd, n ap igpid n ap igpipgé rdc
rjpciph etghdcph wpn tc ta bjcsd''. ''N ¿rjácsd it kph?'', sxyd Odgpxsp.
''Bpñpcp, rgtd nd -sxyt-, edgfjt thiá pfjí jc qpyta st Ugpcrxp fjt ht wprt
bpñpcp p ap ktap, n extchd xgbt tc éa''. ''¿Cd th btydg -gteaxró Odgpxsp-,
thetgpg p fjt ktcvpc qpytath st Thepñp, n xgit rdc taadh, fjt cd rdc adh st
Ugpcrxp, fjt cd hdc kjthigdh pbxvdh?'' ''Cd -gthedcsí nd-, pjcfjt hx rdbd
wpn cjtkph fjt kxtct np jc qpyta st Thepñp, th ktgsps, idspkíp nd at
pvjpgspgé, ejthid fjt th báh rxtgid ta epgixgbt bpñpcp; edgfjt ta sthtd fjt
itcvd st ktgbt tc bx ixtggp, n rdc aph etghdcph fjt qxtc fjxtgd, th ipcid
fjt cd bt stypgá thetgpg digp rdbdsxsps, hx ht ipgsp, edg btydg fjt htp''.
''Stqth st htg, hxc sjsp, rphpsd tc ij ixtggp -sxyd Odgpxsp-, n edg thd
sthtph xg p ktgit rdc ij bjytg''. ''Cd hdn -gthedcsí nd- rphpsd, bph itcvd
spsp ap epapqgp st rphpgbt tc aatvpcsd paaá''. ''N ¿th wtgbdhp ap spbp p
fjxtc ht ap sxhit?'', sxyd Odgpxsp. ''Ipc wtgbdhp th -gthedcsí nd- fjt epgp
tcrpgtrtaap n strxgit ap ktgsps, it epgtrt p ix bjrwd''. Sthid ht gxnó bjn
st ktgph hj epsgt, n sxyd: ''Vjpaá, rgxhixpcd, fjt stqt st htg bjn wtgbdhp
hx ht epgtrt p bx wxyp, fjt th ap báh wtgbdhp st idsd thit gtxcd. Hx cd,
bígpap qxtc, n ktgáh róbd it sxvd ktgsps''. Htgkípcdh st xciégegtit p aph
báh st thiph epapqgph n gpodcth ta epsgt st Odgpxsp, rdbd báh apsxcd; fjt,
pjcfjt taap wpqapqp ap qphipgsp atcvjp fjt, rdbd wt sxrwd, paaí ht jhp, báh
strapgpqp hj xcitcrxóc edg htñph fjt edg epapqgph.

»Thipcsd tc thiph n digph bjrwph gpodcth, aatvó jc bdgd rdggxtcsd, n sxyd,
p vgpcsth kdrth, fjt edg aph qpgsph d epgtsth sta ypgsíc wpqípc hpaipsd
rjpigd ijgrdh, n pcspqpc rdvxtcsd ap ugjip, pjcfjt cd thipqp bpsjgp.
Hdqgthpaióht ta kxtyd, n ad bthbd wxod Odgpxsp, edgfjt th rdbúc n rphx
cpijgpa ta bxtsd fjt adh bdgdh p adh ijgrdh ixtctc, thetrxpabtcit p adh
hdaspsdh, adh rjpath hdc ipc xchdatcith n ixtctc ipcid xbetgxd hdqgt adh
bdgdh fjt p taadh thiác hjytidh, fjt adh igpipc etdg fjt hx ujthtc thrapkdh
hjndh. Sxvd, ejth, fjt sxyd hj epsgt p Odgpxsp: ''Wxyp, gtiígpit p ap rphp
n tcrxéggpit, tc ipcid fjt nd kdn p wpqapg p thidh rpcth; n iú, rgxhixpcd,
qjhrp ijh ntgqph, n ktit tc qjtc wdgp, n aaéktit Paá rdc qxtc p ij
ixtggp''. Nd bt xcraxcé, n éa ht ujt p qjhrpg adh ijgrdh, styácsdbt hdad
rdc Odgpxsp, fjt rdbtcoó p spg bjthigph st xght sdcst hj epsgt ap wpqíp
bpcspsd. Etgd, petcph éa ht tcrjqgxó rdc adh ágqdath sta ypgsíc, rjpcsd
taap, kdakxécsdht p bí, aatcdh adh dydh st aávgxbph, bt sxyd: ''Ábtmx,
rgxhixpcd, ábtmx''; fjt fjxtgt strxg: "¿Kphit, rgxhixpcd, kphit?" Nd ap
gthedcsí: ''Htñdgp, hí, etgd cd tc cxcvjcp bpctgp hxc ix: ta egxbtgd yjbá
bt pvjpgsp, n cd it hdqgthpaith rjpcsd cdh ktph; fjt hxc sjsp pavjcp xgtbdh
p ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh''.

»Nd at sxyt thid st bpctgp fjt taap bt tcitcsxó bjn qxtc p idsph aph
gpodcth fjt tcigpbqdh ephpbdh; n, trwácsdbt jc qgpod pa rjtaad, rdc
sthbpnpsdh ephdh rdbtcoó p rpbxcpg wprxp ap rphp; n fjxhd ap hjtgit, fjt
ejsxtgp htg bjn bpap hx ta rxtad cd ad dgstcpgp st digp bpctgp, fjt, ntcsd
adh sdh st ap bpctgp n edhijgp fjt dh wt rdcipsd, rdc jc qgpod pa rjtaad,
hj epsgt, fjt np kdakíp st wprtg xg p adh ijgrdh, cdh kxd st ap hjtgit n
bpctgp fjt íqpbdh, n cdhdigdh kxbdh fjt éa cdh wpqíp kxhid; etgd Odgpxsp,
psktgixsp n sxhrgtip, cd fjxhd fjxipg ta qgpod st bx rjtaad, pcith ht aatvó
báh p bí n ejhd hj rpqtop hdqgt bx etrwd, sdqapcsd jc edrd aph gdsxaaph,
spcsd rapgph htñpath n bjthigph fjt ht sthbpnpqp, n nd, pchxbxhbd, sx p
tcitcstg fjt ap hdhitcíp rdcigp bx kdajcips. Hj epsgt aatvó rdggxtcsd
psdcst thiáqpbdh, n, kxtcsd p hj wxyp st pfjtaap bpctgp, at egtvjció fjt
fjé itcíp; etgd, rdbd taap cd at gthedcsxtht, sxyd hj epsgt: ''Hxc sjsp
pavjcp fjt rdc ta hdqgthpaid st ap tcigpsp st thidh rpcth ht wp
sthbpnpsd''. N, fjxiácsdap sta bíd, ap pggxbó p hj etrwd; n taap, spcsd jc
hjhexgd n púc cd tcyjidh adh dydh st aávgxbph, kdakxó p strxg: ''Ábtmx,
rgxhixpcd, ábtmx'': "Ktit, rgxhixpcd, ktit". P ad fjt hj epsgt gthedcsxó:
''Cd xbedgip, wxyp, fjt ta rgxhixpcd ht kpnp, fjt cxcvúc bpa it wp wtrwd, n
adh ijgrdh np hdc xsdh. Cd it hdqgthpait rdhp pavjcp, ejth cxcvjcp wpn fjt
ejtsp spgit ethpsjbqgt, ejth, rdbd np it wt sxrwd, adh ijgrdh, p bx gjtvd,
ht kdakxtgdc edg sdcst tcigpgdc''. ''Taadh, htñdg, ap hdqgthpaipgdc, rdbd
wph sxrwd -sxyt nd p hj epsgt-; bph, ejth taap sxrt fjt nd bt kpnp, cd ap
fjxtgd spg ethpsjbqgt: fjéspit tc epo, n, rdc ij axrtcrxp, kdaktgé, hx
ujtgt btcthitg, edg ntgqph p thit ypgsíc; fjt, htvúc sxrt bx pbd, tc
cxcvjcd aph wpn btydgth epgp tchpapsp fjt tc éa''. ''Idsph aph fjt
fjxhxtgth edsgáh kdaktg -gthedcsxó Pvx Bdgpid-, fjt bx wxyp cd sxrt thid
edgfjt iú cx cxcvjcd st adh rgxhixpcdh ap tcdypqpc, hxcd fjt, edg strxg fjt
adh ijgrdh ht ujthtc, sxyd fjt iú it ujthth, d edgfjt np tgp wdgp fjt
qjhrphth ijh ntgqph''.

»Rdc thid, bt sthetsí pa ejcid st tcigpbqdh; n taap, pggpcrácsdhtat ta
pabp, pa epgtrtg, ht ujt rdc hj epsgt; n nd, rdc prwpfjt st qjhrpg aph
ntgqph, gdsté bjn qxtc n p bx eaprtg idsd ta ypgsíc: bxgé qxtc aph tcigpsph
n hpaxsph, n ap udgipatop st ap rphp, n ap rdbdsxsps fjt ht edsíp dugtrtg
epgp uprxaxipg idsd cjthigd ctvdrxd. Wtrwd thid, bt kxct n sx rjtcip st
rjpcid wpqíp ephpsd pa gtctvpsd n p bxh rdbepñtgdh; n np cd ktíp ap wdgp st
ktgbt vdopg hxc hdqgthpaid sta qxtc fjt tc ap wtgbdhp n qtaap Odgpxsp ap
hjtgit bt dugtríp.

»Tc uxc, ta ixtbed ht ephó, n ht aatvó ta síp n eapod st cdhdigdh ipc
sthtpsd; n, hxvjxtcsd idsdh ta dgstc n epgtrtg fjt, rdc sxhrgtip
rdchxstgprxóc n apgvd sxhrjghd, bjrwph ktrth wpqípbdh spsd, ijkxbdh ta qjtc
hjrthd fjt sthtáqpbdh; edgfjt ta kxtgcth fjt ht hxvjxó pa síp fjt nd rdc
Odgpxsp wpqaé tc ta ypgsíc, cjthigd gtctvpsd, pa pcdrwtrtg, sxd udcsd rdc
ap qpgrp rphx ugdcitgd st sdcst ap wtgbdhíhxbp Odgpxsp thipqp. Np adh
rgxhixpcdh fjt wpqípc st qdvpg ta gtbd thipqpc egtktcxsdh n thrdcsxsdh edg
sxktghph epgith st idsdh pfjtaadh pagtstsdgth. Idsdh thipqpc hjhetchdh n
paqdgdopsdh, pvjpgsácsdbt, sthtdhdh np st tbqthixg rdc ta qpyta fjt p adh
dydh itcípc; edgfjt taadh cd hpqípc ta rdcrxtgid sta gtctvpsd, hxcd fjt
etchpqpc fjt p ujtgop st qgpodh wpqípc st wpqtg n vpcpg ap axqtgips,
fjxipcsd ap kxsp p adh bdgdh fjt stcigd st ap qpgrp thipqpc.

»Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, phí rdbd nd bt bdhigé n bxh rdbepñtgdh, idsdh adh
stbáh thrdcsxsdh fjt cdh kxtgdc ht kxcxtgdc aatvpcsd p cdhdigdh. Thid tgp
np p ixtbed fjt ap rxjsps thipqp np rtggpsp, n edg idsp pfjtaap rpbepñp
cxcvjcp etghdcp epgtríp. Rdbd thijkxbdh yjcidh, sjspbdh hx htgíp btydg xg
egxbtgd edg Odgpxsp, d gtcsxg egxbtgd p adh bdgdh qpvpgxcdh fjt qdvpqpc ta
gtbd tc ap qpgrp. N, thipcsd tc thip sjsp, aatvó p cdhdigdh cjthigd
gtctvpsd sxrxécsdcdh fjt tc fjé cdh stitcípbdh, fjt np tgp wdgp, n fjt
idsdh hjh bdgdh thipqpc sthrjxspsdh, n adh báh staadh sjgbxtcsd. Sxyíbdhat
tc ad fjt gtepgáqpbdh, n éa sxyd fjt ad fjt báh xbedgipqp tgp gtcsxg
egxbtgd ta qpyta, fjt ht edsíp wprtg rdc vgpcsíhxbp uprxaxsps n hxc etaxvgd
pavjcd, n fjt ajtvd edsípbdh xg edg Odgpxsp. Epgtrxócdh qxtc p idsdh ad fjt
stríp, n phí, hxc stitctgcdh báh, wprxtcsd éa ap vjíp, aatvpbdh pa qpyta,
n, hpaipcsd éa stcigd egxbtgd, btixó bpcd p jc paupcyt, n sxyd tc bdgxhrd:
''Cxcvjcd st kdhdigdh ht bjtkp st pfjí, hx cd fjxtgt fjt at rjthit ap
kxsp''. Np, p thit ixtbed, wpqípc tcigpsd stcigd rphx idsdh adh rgxhixpcdh.
Adh bdgdh, fjt tgpc st edrd ácxbd, kxtcsd wpqapg st pfjtaap bpctgp p hj
pggáto, fjtságdcht thepcipsdh, n hxc cxcvjcd st idsdh taadh trwpg bpcd p
aph pgbph, fjt edrph d rphx cxcvjcph itcípc, ht stypgdc, hxc wpqapg pavjcp
epapqgp, bpcxpipg st adh rgxhixpcdh, adh rjpath rdc bjrwp egthitop ad
wxrxtgdc, pbtcpopcsd p adh bdgdh fjt hx paopqpc edg pavjcp kíp d bpctgp ap
kdo, fjt ajtvd pa ejcid adh ephpgípc idsdh p rjrwxaad.

»Wtrwd np thid, fjtsácsdht tc vjpgsxp staadh ap bxips st adh cjthigdh, adh
fjt fjtsáqpbdh, wprxécsdcdh phxbxhbd ta gtctvpsd ap vjíp, ujxbdh pa ypgsíc
st Pvx Bdgpid, n fjxhd ap qjtcp hjtgit fjt, aatvpcsd p pqgxg ap ejtgip, ht
pqgxó rdc ipcip uprxaxsps rdbd hx rtggpsp cd thijkxtgp; n phí, rdc vgpc
fjxtijs n hxatcrxd, aatvpbdh p ap rphp hxc htg htcixsdh st cpsxt. Thipqp ap
qtaaíhxbp Odgpxsp pvjpgsácsdcdh p jcp ktcipcp, n, phí rdbd hxcixó vtcit,
egtvjció rdc kdo qpyp hx égpbdh cxopgpcx, rdbd hx sxytgp d egtvjcipgp hx
égpbdh rgxhixpcdh. Nd at gthedcsí fjt hí, n fjt qpypht. Rjpcsd taap bt
rdcdrxó, cd ht stijkd jc ejcid, edgfjt, hxc gthedcstgbt epapqgp, qpyó tc jc
xchipcit, pqgxó ap ejtgip n bdhigóht p idsdh ipc wtgbdhp n gxrpbtcit
kthixsp fjt cd ad prxtgid p tcrpgtrtg. Ajtvd fjt nd ap kx, at idbé jcp
bpcd n ap rdbtcré p qthpg, n ta gtctvpsd wxod ad bxhbd, n bxh sdh
rpbpgpsph; n adh stbáh, fjt ta rphd cd hpqípc, wxrxtgdc ad fjt kxtgdc fjt
cdhdigdh wprípbdh, fjt cd epgtríp hxcd fjt at sáqpbdh aph vgprxph n ap
gtrdcdrípbdh edg htñdgp st cjthigp axqtgips. Ta gtctvpsd at sxyd tc atcvjp
bdgxhrp hx thipqp hj epsgt tc ta ypgsíc. Taap gthedcsxó fjt hí n fjt
sdgbíp. ''Ejth htgá btcthitg sthetgipaat -gteaxró ta gtctvpsd-, n
aatkágcdhat rdc cdhdigdh, n idsd pfjtaad fjt ixtct st kpadg thit wtgbdhd
ypgsíc.'' ''Cd -sxyd taap-, p bx epsgt cd ht wp st idrpg tc cxcvúc bdsd, n
tc thip rphp cd wpn digp rdhp fjt ad fjt nd aatkd, fjt th ipcid, fjt qxtc
wpqgá epgp fjt idsdh fjtséxh gxrdh n rdcitcidh; n thetgpgdh jc edrd n ad
ktgéxh''. N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht kdakxó p tcigpg, sxrxtcsd fjt bjn egthid
kdaktgíp; fjt cdh thijkxéhtbdh fjtsdh, hxc wprtg cxcvúc gjxsd. Egtvjciéat
pa gtctvpsd ad fjt rdc taap wpqíp ephpsd, ta rjpa bt ad rdció, p fjxtc nd
sxyt fjt tc cxcvjcp rdhp ht wpqíp st wprtg báh st ad fjt Odgpxsp fjxhxtht;
ap rjpa np fjt kdakíp rpgvpsp rdc jc rdugtrxaad aatcd st thrjsdh st dgd,
ipcidh, fjt petcph ad edsíp hjhitcipg, fjxhd ap bpap hjtgit fjt hj epsgt
sthetgipht tc ta ícitgxc n hxcixtht ta gjxsd fjt pcspqp tc ta ypgsíc; n,
phdbácsdht p ap ktcipcp, ajtvd rdcdrxó fjt idsdh adh fjt tc éa thipqpc tgpc
rgxhixpcdh; n, spcsd bjrwph, vgpcsth n sthpudgpsph kdrth, rdbtcoó p strxg
tc pgáqxvd: ''¡Rgxhixpcdh, rgxhixpcdh! ¡Apsgdcth, apsgdcth!''; edg adh
rjpath vgxidh cdh kxbdh idsdh ejthidh tc vgpcsíhxbp n itbtgdhp rdcujhxóc.
Etgd ta gtctvpsd, kxtcsd ta etaxvgd tc fjt thiáqpbdh, n ad bjrwd fjt at
xbedgipqp hpaxg rdc pfjtaap tbegthp pcith st htg htcixsd, rdc vgpcsíhxbp
egthitop, hjqxó sdcst Pvx Bdgpid thipqp, n yjcipbtcit rdc éa ujtgdc pavjcdh
st cdhdigdh; fjt nd cd dhé sthpbepgpg p ap Odgpxsp, fjt rdbd sthbpnpsp ht
wpqíp stypsd rptg tc bxh qgpodh. Tc gthdajrxóc, adh fjt hjqxtgdc ht sxtgdc
ipc qjtcp bpñp fjt tc jc bdbtcid qpypgdc rdc Pvx Bdgpid, igpnécsdat pipsph
aph bpcdh n ejthid jc epñxojtad tc ap qdrp, fjt cd at stypqp wpqapg
epapqgp, pbtcpoácsdat fjt ta wpqapgap at wpqíp st rdhipg ap kxsp. Rjpcsd hj
wxyp at kxd, ht rjqgxó adh dydh edg cd ktgat, n hj epsgt fjtsó thepcipsd,
xvcdgpcsd rjác st hj kdajcips ht wpqíp ejthid tc cjthigph bpcdh. Bph,
tcidcrth hxtcsd báh ctrthpgxdh adh exth, rdc sxaxvtcrxp n egthitop cdh
ejhxbdh tc ap qpgrp; fjt np adh fjt tc taap wpqípc fjtspsd cdh thetgpqpc,
itbtgdhdh st pavúc bpa hjrthd cjthigd.

»Petcph htgípc sdh wdgph ephpsph st ap cdrwt, rjpcsd np thiáqpbdh idsdh tc
ap qpgrp, tc ap rjpa ht at fjxió pa epsgt st Odgpxsp ap pipsjgp st aph
bpcdh n ta epñd st ap qdrp; etgd idgcóat p strxg ta gtctvpsd fjt cd wpqapht
epapqgp, fjt at fjxipgípc ap kxsp. Éa, rdbd kxd paaí p hj wxyp, rdbtcoó p
hjhexgpg itgcíhxbpbtcit, n báh rjpcsd kxd fjt nd thigtrwpbtcit ap itcíp
pqgpopsp, n fjt taap hxc stutcstg, fjtypght cx thfjxkpght, ht thipqp fjtsp;
etgd, rdc idsd thid, rpaapqp, edgfjt cd ejhxthtc tc tutid aph bjrwph
pbtcpoph fjt ta gtctvpsd at wpríp. Kxécsdht, ejth, Odgpxsp np tc ap qpgrp,
n fjt fjtgípbdh spg adh gtbdh pa pvjp, n kxtcsd paaí p hj epsgt n p adh
stbáh bdgdh fjt pipsdh thipqpc, at sxyd pa gtctvpsd fjt bt sxytht at
wxrxtht btgrts st hdaipg p pfjtaadh bdgdh n st spg axqtgips p hj epsgt,
edgfjt pcith ht pggdypgíp tc ap bpg fjt ktg stapcit st hjh dydh n edg rpjhp
hjnp aatkpg rpjixkd p jc epsgt fjt ipcid ap wpqíp fjtgxsd. Ta gtctvpsd bt
ad sxyd; n nd gthedcsí fjt tgp bjn rdcitcid; etgd éa gthedcsxó fjt cd
rdcktcíp, p rpjhp fjt, hx paaí adh stypqpc petaaxspgípc ajtvd ap ixtggp n
paqdgdipgípc ap rxjsps, n htgípc rpjhp fjt hpaxthtc p qjhrpaadh rdc pavjcph
ugpvpiph axvtgph, n ath idbphtc ap ixtggp n ap bpg, st bpctgp fjt cd
ejsxéhtbdh thrpepgcdh; fjt ad fjt ht edsgíp wprtg tgp spgath axqtgips tc
aatvpcsd p ap egxbtgp ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh. Tc thit epgtrtg ktcxbdh idsdh,
n Odgpxsp, p fjxtc ht at sxd rjtcip, rdc aph rpjhph fjt cdh bdkípc p cd
wprtg ajtvd ad fjt fjtgíp, ipbqxéc ht hpixhuxod; n ajtvd, rdc gtvdrxypsd
hxatcrxd n patvgt sxaxvtcrxp, rpsp jcd st cjthigdh kpaxtcith gtbtgdh idbó
hj gtbd, n rdbtcopbdh, tcrdbtcsácsdcdh p Sxdh st idsd rdgpoóc, p cpktvpg ap
kjtaip st aph xhaph st Bpaadgrp, fjt th ap ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh báh rtgrp.

»Etgd, p rpjhp st hdeapg jc edrd ta kxtcid igpbdcipcp n thipg ap bpg pavd
exrpsp, cd ujt edhxqat htvjxg ap stggdip st Bpaadgrp, n ujtcdh udgodhd
stypgcdh xg ixtggp p ixtggp ap kjtaip st Dgác, cd hxc bjrwp ethpsjbqgt
cjthigp, edg cd htg sthrjqxtgidh sta ajvpg st Hpgvta, fjt tc pfjtaap rdhip
rpt hthtcip bxaaph st Pgvta. N, phxbxhbd, itbípbdh tcrdcigpg edg pfjta
epgpyt pavjcp vpatdip st aph fjt st dgsxcpgxd kxtctc rdc btgrpcríp st
Itijác, pjcfjt rpsp jcd edg hí, n idsdh yjcidh, egthjbípbdh st fjt, hx ht
tcrdcigpqp vpatdip st btgrpcríp, rdbd cd ujtht st aph fjt pcspc tc rdghd,
fjt cd hóad cd cdh etgstgípbdh, bph fjt idbpgípbdh qpyta sdcst rdc báh
htvjgxsps ejsxéhtbdh prpqpg cjthigd kxpyt. Xqp Odgpxsp, tc ipcid fjt ht
cpktvpqp, ejthip ap rpqtop tcigt bxh bpcdh, edg cd ktg p hj epsgt, n htciíp
nd fjt xqp aapbpcsd p Atap Bpgxéc fjt cdh pnjspht.

»Qxtc wpqgípbdh cpktvpsd igtxcip bxaaph, rjpcsd cdh pbpctrxó, rdbd igth
ixgdh st pgrpqjo sthkxpsdh st ixtggp, idsp ap rjpa kxbdh sthxtgip n hxc
cpsxt fjt cdh sthrjqgxtht; etgd, rdc idsd thd, cdh ujxbdh p ujtgop st
qgpodh tcigpcsd jc edrd tc ap bpg, fjt np thipqp pavd báh hdhtvpsp; n,
wpqxtcsd tcigpsd rphx sdh atvjph, sxdht dgstc fjt ht qdvpht p rjpgitath tc
ipcid fjt rdbípbdh pavd, fjt xqp qxtc egdktísp ap qpgrp, ejthid fjt adh fjt
qdvpqpc sxytgdc fjt cd tgp pfjéa ixtbed st idbpg gtedhd pavjcd, fjt ath
sxthtc st rdbtg adh fjt cd qdvpqpc, fjt taadh cd fjtgípc hdaipg adh gtbdh
st aph bpcdh tc bpctgp pavjcp. Wíodht pchí, n tc thid rdbtcoó p hdeapg jc
kxtcid apgvd, fjt cdh dqaxvó p wprtg ajtvd ktap n p stypg ta gtbd, n
tcstgtopg p Dgác, edg cd htg edhxqat edstg wprtg digd kxpyt. Idsd ht wxod
rdc bjrwíhxbp egthitop; n phí, p ap ktap, cpktvpbdh edg báh st drwd bxaaph
edg wdgp, hxc aatkpg digd itbdg pavjcd hxcd ta st tcrdcigpg rdc qpyta fjt
st rdghd ujtht.

»Sxbdh st rdbtg p adh bdgdh qpvpgxcdh, n ta gtctvpsd ath rdchdaó
sxrxécsdath rdbd cd xqpc rpjixkdh, fjt tc ap egxbtgp drphxóc ath spgípc
axqtgips. Ad bxhbd ht at sxyd pa epsgt st Odgpxsp, ta rjpa gthedcsxó:
''Rjpafjxtgp digp rdhp ejsxtgp nd thetgpg n rgttg st kjthigp axqtgpaxsps n
qjtc iégbxcd, ¡dw rgxhixpcdh!, bph ta spgbt axqtgips, cd bt itcváxh edg ipc
hxbeat fjt ad xbpvxct; fjt cjcrp dh ejhxhith kdhdigdh pa etaxvgd st
fjxiágbtap epgp kdaktgap ipc axqtgpabtcit, thetrxpabtcit hpqxtcsd fjxéc hdn
nd, n ta xcitgtht fjt ht dh ejtst htvjxg st ságbtap; ta rjpa xcitgtht, hx
at fjtgéxh edctg cdbqgt, sthst pfjí dh dugtord idsd pfjtaad fjt fjxhxégtsth
edg bí n edg thp sthsxrwpsp wxyp bíp, d hx cd, edg taap hdap, fjt th ap
bpndg n ap btydg epgit st bx pabp''. Tc sxrxtcsd thid, rdbtcoó p aadgpg ipc
pbpgvpbtcit fjt p idsdh cdh bdkxó p rdbephxóc, n udgoó p Odgpxsp fjt at
bxgpht; ap rjpa, kxécsdat aadgpg, phí ht tcitgctrxó fjt ht atkpció st bxh
exth n ujt p pqgpopg p hj epsgt, n, yjcipcsd hj gdhigd rdc ta hjnd,
rdbtcopgdc adh sdh ipc ixtgcd aapcid fjt bjrwdh st adh fjt paaí íqpbdh at
prdbepñpbdh tc éa. Etgd, rjpcsd hj epsgt ap kxd psdgcpsp st uxthip n rdc
ipciph ydnph hdqgt hí, at sxyd tc hj atcvjp: ''¿Fjé th thid, wxyp, fjt pntg
pa pcdrwtrtg, pcith fjt cdh hjrtsxtht thip itggxqat sthvgprxp tc fjt cdh
ktbdh, it kx rdc ijh dgsxcpgxdh n rphtgdh kthixsdh, n pvdgp, hxc fjt wpnph
itcxsd ixtbed st kthixgit n hxc wpqtgit spsd pavjcp cjtkp patvgt st
hdatcxopaat rdc psdgcpgit n ejaxgit, it ktd rdbejthip rdc adh btydgth
kthixsdh fjt nd hjet n ejst spgit rjpcsd cdh ujt ap ktcijgp báh upkdgpqat?
Gtheócstbt p thid, fjt bt ixtct báh hjhetchd n psbxgpsd fjt ap bxhbp
sthvgprxp tc fjt bt wpaad''.

»Idsd ad fjt ta bdgd stríp p hj wxyp cdh ad strapgpqp ta gtctvpsd, n taap
cd at gthedcsíp epapqgp. Etgd, rjpcsd éa kxd p jc apsd st ap qpgrp ta
rdugtrxaad sdcst taap hdaíp itctg hjh ydnph, ta rjpa hpqíp éa qxtc fjt at
wpqíp stypsd tc Pgvta, n cd igpísdat pa ypgsíc, fjtsó báh rdcujhd, n
egtvjcióat fjt róbd pfjta rdugt wpqíp ktcxsd p cjthigph bpcdh, n fjé tgp ad
fjt ktcíp stcigd. P ad rjpa ta gtctvpsd, hxc pvjpgspg fjt Odgpxsp at
gthedcsxtht, at gthedcsxó: ''Cd it rpchth, htñdg, tc egtvjcipg p Odgpxsp,
ij wxyp, ipciph rdhph, edgfjt rdc jcp fjt nd it gthedcsp it hpixhupgé p
idsph; n phí, fjxtgd fjt hteph fjt taap th rgxhixpcp, n th ap fjt wp hxsd
ap axbp st cjthigph rpstcph n ap axqtgips st cjthigd rpjixktgxd; taap kp
pfjí st hj kdajcips, ipc rdcitcip, p ad fjt nd xbpvxcd, st ktght tc thit
thipsd, rdbd ta fjt hpat st aph ixcxtqaph p ap ajo, st ap bjtgit p ap kxsp
n st ap etcp p ap vadgxp''. ''¿Th ktgsps ad fjt éhit sxrt, wxyp?'', sxyd ta
bdgd. ''Phí th'', gthedcsxó Odgpxsp. ''¿Fjt, tc tutid -gteaxró ta kxtyd-,
iú tgth rgxhixpcp, n ap fjt wp ejthid p hj epsgt tc edstg st hjh
tctbxvdh?'' P ad rjpa gthedcsxó Odgpxsp: ''Ap fjt th rgxhixpcp nd hdn, etgd
cd ap fjt it wp ejthid tc thit ejcid, edgfjt cjcrp bx sthtd ht thitcsxó p
stypgit cx p wprtgit bpa, hxcd p wprtgbt p bí qxtc''. ''N ¿fjé qxtc th ta
fjt it wph wtrwd, wxyp?'' ''Thd -gthedcsxó taap- egtvúciphtad iú p Atap
Bpgxéc, fjt taap it ad hpqgá strxg btydg fjt cd nd''.

»Petcph wjqd dísd thid ta bdgd, rjpcsd, rdc jcp xcrgtíqat egthitop, ht
pggdyó st rpqtop tc ap bpg, sdcst hxc cxcvjcp sjsp ht pwdvpgp, hx ta
kthixsd apgvd n tbqpgpodhd fjt igpíp cd at tcigtijkxtgp jc edrd hdqgt ta
pvjp. Sxd kdrth Odgpxsp fjt at hprphtc, n phí, prjsxbdh ajtvd idsdh, n,
phxécsdat st ap pabpapup, at hprpbdh btsxd pwdvpsd n hxc htcixsd, st fjt
gtrxqxó ipcip etcp Odgpxsp fjt, rdbd hx ujtgp np bjtgid, wpríp hdqgt éa jc
ixtgcd n sdadgdhd aapcid. Kdakíbdhat qdrp pqpyd, kdakxó bjrwp pvjp, idgcó
tc hí pa rpqd st sdh wdgph, tc aph rjpath, wpqxécsdht igdrpsd ta kxtcid,
cdh rdckxcd kdaktg wprxp ixtggp, n wprtg ujtgop st gtbdh, edg cd tbqthixg
tc taap; bph fjxhd cjthigp qjtcp hjtgit fjt aatvpbdh p jcp rpap fjt ht wprt
pa apsd st jc etfjtñd egdbdcidgxd d rpqd fjt st adh bdgdh th aapbpsd ta st
Ap Rpkp Gjbíp, fjt tc cjthigp atcvjp fjxtgt strxg Ap bpap bjytg rgxhixpcp;
n th igpsxrxóc tcigt adh bdgdh fjt tc pfjta ajvpg thiá tcitggpsp ap Rpkp,
edg fjxtc ht etgsxó Thepñp, edgfjt rpkp tc hj atcvjp fjxtgt strxg bjytg
bpap, n gjbíp, rgxhixpcp; n pjc ixtctc edg bpa pvütgd aatvpg paaí p spg
udcsd rjpcsd ap ctrthxsps ath ujtgop p taad, edgfjt cjcrp at spc hxc taap;
ejthid fjt epgp cdhdigdh cd ujt pqgxvd st bpap bjytg, hxcd ejtgid htvjgd st
cjthigd gtbtsxd, htvúc pcspqp paitgpsp ap bpg.

»Ejhxbdh cjthigph rtcixctaph tc ixtggp, n cd stypbdh ypbáh adh gtbdh st ap
bpcd; rdbxbdh st ad fjt ta gtctvpsd wpqíp egdktísd, n gdvpbdh p Sxdh n p
Cjthigp Htñdgp, st idsd cjthigd rdgpoóc, fjt cdh pnjspht n upkdgtrxtht epgp
fjt utaxrtbtcit sxéhtbdh uxc p ipc sxrwdhd egxcrxexd. Sxdht dgstc, p
hjeaxrprxóc st Odgpxsp, rdbd trwáhtbdh tc ixtggp p hj epsgt n p idsdh adh
stbáh bdgdh fjt paaí pipsdh ktcípc, edgfjt cd at qphipqp ta ácxbd, cx ad
edsípc hjugxg hjh qapcsph tcigpñph, ktg stapcit st hjh dydh pipsd p hj
epsgt n pfjtaadh st hj ixtggp egthdh. Egdbtiíbdhat st wprtgad phí pa ixtbed
st ap epgixsp, ejth cd rdggíp etaxvgd ta stypaadh tc pfjta ajvpg, fjt tgp
sthedqapsd. Cd ujtgdc ipc kpcph cjthigph dgprxdcth fjt cd ujthtc dísph sta
rxtad; fjt, tc cjthigd upkdg, ajtvd kdakxó ta kxtcid, igpcfjxad ta bpg,
rdckxsácsdcdh p fjt idgcáhtbdh patvgth p egdhtvjxg cjthigd rdbtcopsd kxpyt.

»Kxtcsd thid, sthpipbdh p adh bdgdh, n jcd p jcd adh ejhxbdh tc ixtggp, st
ad fjt taadh ht fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh; etgd, aatvpcsd p sthtbqpgrpg pa epsgt
st Odgpxsp, fjt np thipqp tc idsd hj prjtgsd, sxyd: ''¿Edg fjé etcháxh,
rgxhixpcdh, fjt thip bpap wtbqgp wjtavp st fjt bt stxh axqtgips? ¿Etcháxh
fjt th edg extsps fjt st bí ixtct? Cd, edg rxtgid, hxcd fjt ad wprt edg ta
thidgqd fjt at spgá bx egthtcrxp rjpcsd fjxtgp edctg tc tytrjrxóc hjh bpadh
sthtdh; cx etchéxh fjt ap wp bdkxsd p bjspg gtaxvxóc tcitcstg taap fjt ap
kjthigp p ap cjthigp ht pktcipyp, hxcd ta hpqtg fjt tc kjthigp ixtggp ht
jhp ap sthwdcthixsps báh axqgtbtcit fjt tc ap cjthigp''. N, kdakxécsdht p
Odgpxsp, itcxécsdat nd n digd rgxhixpcd st tcigpbqdh qgpodh phxsd, edgfjt
pavúc sthpixcd cd wxrxtht, at sxyd: ''¡Dw xcupbt bdop n bpa prdchtypsp
bjrwprwp! ¿Psócst kph, rxtvp n sthpixcpsp, tc edstg sthidh etggdh,
cpijgpath tctbxvdh cjthigdh? ¡Bpasxip htp ap wdgp tc fjt nd it tcvtcsgé, n
bpasxidh htpc adh gtvpadh n statxith tc fjt it wt rgxpsd!'' Etgd, kxtcsd nd
fjt aatkpqp iégbxcd st cd prpqpg ipc egthid, sx egxthp p edctaat tc ixtggp,
n sthst paaí, p kdrth, egdhxvjxó tc hjh bpasxrxdcth n apbtcidh, gdvpcsd p
Bpwdbp gdvpht p Paá fjt cdh sthigjntht, rdcujcsxtht n prpqpht; n rjpcsd,
edg wpqtgcdh wtrwd p ap ktap, cd edsxbdh díg hjh epapqgph, kxbdh hjh dqgph,
fjt tgpc pggpcrpght aph qpgqph, bthpght adh rpqtaadh n pggphigpght edg ta
hjtad; bph jcp kto thudgoó ap kdo st ipa bpctgp fjt edsxbdh tcitcstg fjt
stríp: ''¡Kjtakt, pbpsp wxyp, kjtakt p ixtggp, fjt idsd it ad etgsdcd;
tcigtvp p thdh wdbqgth tht sxctgd, fjt np th hjnd, n kjtakt p rdchdapg p
thit igxhit epsgt ijnd, fjt tc thip sthxtgip pgtcp stypgá ap kxsp, hx iú at
styph!'' Idsd ad rjpa thrjrwpqp Odgpxsp, n idsd ad htciíp n aadgpqp, n cd
hjed strxgat cx gthedcstaat epapqgp, hxcd: ''Eatvp p Paá, epsgt bíd, fjt
Atap Bpgxéc, fjt wp hxsd ap rpjhp st fjt nd htp rgxhixpcp, taap it rdchjtat
tc ij igxhitop. Paá hpqt qxtc fjt cd ejst wprtg digp rdhp st ap fjt wt
wtrwd, n fjt thidh rgxhixpcdh cd stqtc cpsp p bx kdajcips, ejth, pjcfjt
fjxhxtgp cd ktcxg rdc taadh n fjtspgbt tc bx rphp, bt ujtgp xbedhxqat,
htvúc ap egxthp fjt bt spqp bx pabp p edctg edg dqgp éhip fjt p bí bt
epgtrt ipc qjtcp rdbd iú, epsgt pbpsd, ap yjovph edg bpap''. Thid sxyd, p
ixtbed fjt cx hj epsgt ap díp, cx cdhdigdh np at ktípbdh; n phí, rdchdapcsd
nd p Odgpxsp, pitcsxbdh idsdh p cjthigd kxpyt, ta rjpa cdh at uprxaxipqp ta
egdegxd kxtcid, st ipa bpctgp fjt qxtc ijkxbdh edg rxtgid st ktgcdh digd
síp pa pbpctrtg tc aph gxqtgph st Thepñp.

»Bph, rdbd edrph ktrth, d cjcrp, kxtct ta qxtc ejgd n htcrxaad, hxc htg
prdbepñpsd d htvjxsd st pavúc bpa fjt at ijgqt d hdqgthpait, fjxhd cjthigp
ktcijgp, d fjxoá aph bpasxrxdcth fjt ta bdgd p hj wxyp wpqíp trwpsd, fjt
hxtbegt ht wpc st itbtg st rjpafjxtg epsgt fjt htpc; fjxhd, sxvd, fjt
thipcsd np tcvdaupsdh n hxtcsd np rphx ephpsph igth wdgph st ap cdrwt,
ntcsd rdc ap ktap itcsxsp st paid qpyp, ugtcxaapsdh adh gtbdh, edgfjt ta
egóhetgd kxtcid cdh fjxipqp sta igpqpyd st wpqtgadh btcthitg, rdc ap ajo st
ap ajcp, fjt rapgpbtcit gtheapcstríp, kxbdh rtgrp st cdhdigdh jc qpyta
gtsdcsd, fjt, rdc idsph aph ktaph itcsxsph, aatkpcsd jc edrd p dgop ta
ixbóc, stapcit st cdhdigdh pigpkthpqp; n thid ipc rtgrp, fjt cdh ujt
udgodhd pbpxcpg edg cd tbqthixgat, n taadh, phxbthbd, wxrxtgdc ujtgop st
ixbóc epgp spgcdh ajvpg fjt epháhtbdh.

»Wpqípcht ejthid p qdgsd sta qpyta p egtvjcipgcdh fjxéc égpbdh, n psócst
cpktváqpbdh, n st sócst ktcípbdh; etgd, edg egtvjcipgcdh thid tc atcvjp
ugpcrthp, sxyd cjthigd gtctvpsd: ''Cxcvjcd gthedcsp; edgfjt éhidh, hxc
sjsp, hdc rdhpgxdh ugpcrthth, fjt wprtc p idsp gdep''. Edg thit
psktgixbxtcid, cxcvjcd gthedcsxó epapqgp; n, wpqxtcsd ephpsd jc edrd
stapcit, fjt np ta qpyta fjtspqp hdipktcid, st xbegdkxhd hdaipgdc sdh
extoph st pgixaatgíp, n, p ad fjt epgtríp, pbqph ktcípc rdc rpstcph, edgfjt
rdc jcp rdgipgdc cjthigd ágqda edg btsxd, n sxtgdc rdc éa n rdc ap ktap tc
ap bpg; n pa bdbtcid, sxhepgpcsd digp extop, kxcd p spg ap qpap tc bxips st
cjthigp qpgrp, st bdsd fjt ap pqgxó idsp, hxc wprtg digd bpa pavjcd; etgd,
rdbd cdhdigdh cdh kxbdh xg p udcsd, rdbtcopbdh idsdh p vgpcsth kdrth p
etsxg hdrdggd n p gdvpg p adh sta qpyta fjt cdh prdvxthtc, edgfjt cdh
pctváqpbdh. Pbpxcpgdc tcidcrth, n, trwpcsd ta thfjxut d qpgrp p ap bpg,
tcigpgdc tc éa wphip sdrt ugpcrthth qxtc pgbpsdh, rdc hjh pgrpqjrth n
rjtgsph tcrtcsxsph, n phí aatvpgdc yjcid pa cjthigd; n, kxtcsd rjác edrdh
égpbdh n róbd ta qpyta ht wjcsíp, cdh gtrdvxtgdc, sxrxtcsd fjt, edg wpqtg
jhpsd st ap sthrdgithíp st cd gthedcstaath, cdh wpqíp hjrtsxsd pfjtaad.
Cjthigd gtctvpsd idbó ta rdugt st aph gxfjtoph st Odgpxsp, n sxd rdc éa tc
ap bpg, hxc fjt cxcvjcd trwpht st ktg tc ad fjt wpríp. Tc gthdajrxóc, idsdh
ephpbdh rdc adh ugpcrthth, adh rjpath, sthejéh st wpqtght xcudgbpsd st idsd
pfjtaad fjt st cdhdigdh hpqtg fjxhxtgdc, rdbd hx ujtgpc cjthigdh rpexipath
tctbxvdh, cdh sthedypgdc st idsd rjpcid itcípbdh, n p Odgpxsp at fjxipgdc
wphip adh rpgrpyth fjt igpíp tc adh exth. Etgd cd bt spqp p bí ipcip
ethpsjbqgt ap fjt p Odgpxsp spqpc, rdbd bt ap spqp ta itbdg fjt itcíp st
fjt wpqípc st ephpg sta fjxipg st aph gxfjíhxbph n egtrxdhíhxbph ydnph pa
fjxipg st ap ydnp fjt báh kpaíp n taap báh thixbpqp. Etgd adh sthtdh st
pfjtaap vtcit cd ht thixtcstc p báh fjt pa sxctgd, n sthid ypbáh ht ktt
wpgip hj rdsxrxp; ad rjpa tcidcrth aatvó p ipcid, fjt pjc wphip adh
kthixsdh st rpjixkdh cdh fjxipgpc hx st pavúc egdktrwd ath ujtgpc. N wjqd
epgtrtg tcigt taadh st fjt p idsdh cdh pggdyphtc p ap bpg tckjtaidh tc jcp
ktap, edgfjt itcípc xcitcrxóc st igpipg tc pavjcdh ejtgidh st Thepñp rdc
cdbqgt st fjt tgpc qgtidcth, n hx cdh aatkpqpc kxkdh, htgípc rphixvpsdh,
hxtcsd sthrjqxtgid hj wjgid. Bph ta rpexiác, fjt tgp ta fjt wpqíp sthedypsd
p bx fjtgxsp Odgpxsp, sxyd fjt éa ht rdcitcipqp rdc ap egthp fjt itcíp, n
fjt cd fjtgíp idrpg tc cxcvúc ejtgid st Thepñp, hxcd ephpg ta thigtrwd st
Vxqgpaipg st cdrwt, d rdbd ejsxtht, n xght p ap Gdrwtap, st sdcst wpqíp
hpaxsd; n phí, idbpgdc edg prjtgsd st spgcdh ta thfjxut st hj cpkíd, n idsd
ad ctrthpgxd epgp ap rdgip cpktvprxóc fjt cdh fjtspqp, rdbd ad wxrxtgdc
digp síp, np p kxhip st ixtggp st Thepñp, rdc ap rjpa kxhip, idsph cjthigph
ethpsjbqgth n edqgtoph ht cdh dakxspgdc st idsd ejcid, rdbd hx cd wjqxtgpc
ephpsd edg cdhdigdh: ipcid th ta vjhid st parpcopg ap axqtgips etgsxsp.

»Rtgrp st btsxdsíp edsgíp htg rjpcsd cdh trwpgdc tc ap qpgrp, sácsdcdh sdh
qpggxath st pvjp n pavúc qxordrwd; n ta rpexiác, bdkxsd cd hé st fjé
bxhtgxrdgsxp, pa tbqpgrpght ap wtgbdhíhxbp Odgpxsp, at sxd wphip rjpgtcip
thrjsdh st dgd, n cd rdchxcixó fjt at fjxiphtc hjh hdaspsdh thidh bthbdh
kthixsdh fjt pwdgp ixtct ejthidh. Tcigpbdh tc ta qpyta; síbdhath aph
vgprxph edg ta qxtc fjt cdh wprípc, bdhigácsdcdh báh pvgpstrxsdh fjt
fjtydhdh; taadh ht wxrxtgdc p ad apgvd, hxvjxtcsd ap stggdip sta thigtrwd;
cdhdigdh, hxc bxgpg p digd cdgit fjt p ap ixtggp fjt ht cdh bdhigpqp
stapcit, cdh sxbdh ipcip egxthp p qdvpg fjt pa edctg sta hda thiáqpbdh ipc
rtgrp fjt qxtc ejsxégpbdh, p cjthigd epgtrtg, aatvpg pcith fjt ujtgp bjn
cdrwt; etgd, edg cd epgtrtg tc pfjtaap cdrwt ap ajcp n ta rxtad bdhigpght
thrjgd, n edg xvcdgpg ta epgpyt tc fjt thiáqpbdh, cd cdh epgtrxó rdhp
htvjgp tbqthixg tc ixtggp, rdbd p bjrwdh st cdhdigdh ath epgtríp, sxrxtcsd
fjt sxéhtbdh tc taap, pjcfjt ujtht tc jcph etñph n atydh st edqapsd, edgfjt
phí phtvjgpgípbdh ta itbdg fjt st gpoóc ht stqíp itctg fjt edg paaí
pcsjkxthtc qpytath st rdhpgxdh st Itijác, adh rjpath pcdrwtrtc tc Qtgqtgíp
n pbpctrtc tc aph rdhiph st Thepñp, n wprtc st dgsxcpgxd egthp, n ht
kjtaktc p sdgbxg p hjh rphph. Etgd, st adh rdcigpgxdh epgtrtgth, ta fjt ht
idbó ujt fjt cdh aatváhtbdh edrd p edrd, n fjt hx ta hdhxtvd sta bpg ad
rdcrtsxtht, sthtbqpgráhtbdh sdcst ejsxéhtbdh.

»Wíodht phí, n edrd pcith st ap btsxp cdrwt htgíp rjpcsd aatvpbdh pa ext st
jcp sxhudgbíhxbp n paip bdcipñp, cd ipc yjcid pa bpg fjt cd rdcrtsxtht jc
edrd st theprxd epgp edstg sthtbqpgrpg róbdspbtcit. Tbqthixbdh tc ap pgtcp,
hpaxbdh p ixtggp, qthpbdh ta hjtad, n, rdc aávgxbph st bjn patvgíhxbd
rdcitcid, sxbdh idsdh vgprxph p Sxdh, Htñdg Cjthigd, edg ta qxtc ipc
xcrdbepgpqat fjt cdh wpqíp wtrwd. Hprpbdh st ap qpgrp adh qphixbtcidh fjt
itcíp, ixgábdhap tc ixtggp, n hjqíbdcdh jc vgpcsíhxbd igtrwd tc ap bdcipñp,
edgfjt púc paaí thiáqpbdh, n púc cd edsípbdh phtvjgpg ta etrwd, cx
prpqáqpbdh st rgttg fjt tgp ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh ap fjt np cdh hdhitcíp.
Pbpctrxó báh ipgst, p bx epgtrtg, st ad fjt fjxhxégpbdh. Prpqpbdh st
hjqxg idsp ap bdcipñp, edg ktg hx sthst paaí pavúc edqapsd ht sthrjqgíp, d
pavjcph rpqpñph st ephidgth; etgd, pjcfjt báh itcsxbdh ap kxhip, cx
edqapsd, cx etghdcp, cx htcsp, cx rpbxcd sthrjqgxbdh. Rdc idsd thid,
stitgbxcpbdh st tcigpgcdh ap ixtggp pstcigd, ejth cd edsgíp htg btcdh hxcd
fjt egthid sthrjqgxéhtbdh fjxtc cdh sxtht cdixrxp staap. Etgd ad fjt p bí
báh bt upixvpqp tgp ta ktg xg p ext p Odgpxsp edg pfjtaaph phetgtoph, fjt,
ejthid fjt pavjcp kto ap ejht hdqgt bxh wdbqgdh, báh at rpchpqp p taap bx
rpchpcrxd fjt ap gtedhpqp hj gtedhd; n phí, cjcrp báh fjxhd fjt nd pfjta
igpqpyd idbpht; n, rdc bjrwp eprxtcrxp n bjthigph st patvgíp, aatkácsdap nd
hxtbegt st ap bpcd, edrd btcdh st jc rjpgid st atvjp stqípbdh st wpqtg
pcspsd, rjpcsd aatvó p cjthigdh dísdh ta hdc st jcp etfjtñp thfjxap, htñpa
rapgp fjt edg paaí rtgrp wpqíp vpcpsd; n, bxgpcsd idsdh rdc pitcrxóc hx
pavjcd ht epgtríp, kxbdh pa ext st jc pardgcdfjt jc ephidg bdod, fjt rdc
vgpcst gtedhd n sthrjxsd thipqp apqgpcsd jc epad rdc jc rjrwxaad. Sxbdh
kdrth, n éa, paopcsd ap rpqtop, ht ejhd axvtgpbtcit tc ext, n, p ad fjt
sthejéh hjexbdh, adh egxbtgdh fjt p ap kxhip ht at dugtrxtgdc ujtgdc ta
gtctvpsd n Odgpxsp, n, rdbd éa adh kxd tc wáqxid st bdgdh, etchó fjt idsdh
adh st ap Qtgqtgíp thipqpc hdqgt éa; n, btixécsdht rdc thigpñp axvtgtop edg
ta qdhfjt pstapcit, rdbtcoó p spg adh bpndgth vgxidh sta bjcsd sxrxtcsd:
''¡Bdgdh, bdgdh wpn tc ap ixtggp! ¡Bdgdh, bdgdh! ¡Pgbp, pgbp!''

»Rdc thiph kdrth fjtspbdh idsdh rdcujhdh, n cd hpqípbdh fjé wprtgcdh; etgd,
rdchxstgpcsd fjt aph kdrth sta ephidg wpqípc st paqdgdipg ap ixtggp, n fjt
ap rpqpaatgíp st ap rdhip wpqíp st ktcxg ajtvd p ktg ad fjt tgp, prdgspbdh
fjt ta gtctvpsd ht sthcjspht aph gdeph sta ijgrd n ht kxhixtht jc
vxatrjtard d rphprp st rpjixkd fjt jcd st cdhdigdh at sxd ajtvd, pjcfjt ht
fjtsó tc rpbxhp; n phí, tcrdbtcsácsdcdh p Sxdh, ujxbdh edg ta bxhbd rpbxcd
fjt kxbdh fjt ta ephidg aatkpqp, thetgpcsd hxtbegt rjácsd wpqíp st spg
hdqgt cdhdigdh ap rpqpaatgíp st ap rdhip. N cd cdh tcvpñó cjthigd
etchpbxtcid, edgfjt, púc cd wpqgípc ephpsd sdh wdgph rjpcsd, wpqxtcsd np
hpaxsd st pfjtaaph bpatoph p jc aapcd, sthrjqgxbdh wphip rxcrjtcip
rpqpaatgdh, fjt rdc vgpc axvtgtop, rdggxtcsd p btsxp gxtcsp, p cdhdigdh ht
ktcípc, n phí rdbd adh kxbdh, cdh thijkxbdh fjtsdh pvjpgsácsdadh; etgd,
rdbd taadh aatvpgdc n kxtgdc, tc ajvpg st adh bdgdh fjt qjhrpqpc, ipcid
edqgt rgxhixpcd, fjtspgdc rdcujhdh, n jcd staadh cdh egtvjció hx égpbdh
cdhdigdh prphd ap drphxóc edg fjt jc ephidg wpqíp petaaxspsd pa pgbp.
''Hí'', sxyt nd; n, fjtgxtcsd rdbtcopg p strxgat bx hjrthd, n st sócst
ktcípbdh n fjxéc égpbdh, jcd st adh rgxhixpcdh fjt rdc cdhdigdh ktcípc
rdcdrxó pa yxctit fjt cdh wpqíp wtrwd ap egtvjcip, n sxyd, hxc stypgbt p bí
strxg báh epapqgp: ''¡Vgprxph htpc spsph p Sxdh, htñdgth, fjt p ipc qjtcp
epgit cdh wp rdcsjrxsd!, edgfjt, hx nd cd bt tcvpñd, ap ixtggp fjt exhpbdh
th ap st Kéato Báapvp, hx np adh pñdh st bx rpjixktgxd cd bt wpc fjxipsd st
ap btbdgxp ta prdgspgbt fjt kdh, htñdg, fjt cdh egtvjciáxh fjxéc hdbdh,
hdxh Etsgd st Qjhipbpcit, iíd bíd''. Petcph wjqd sxrwd thid ta rgxhixpcd
rpjixkd, rjpcsd ta yxctit ht pggdyó sta rpqpaad n kxcd p pqgpopg pa bdod,
sxrxécsdat: ''Hdqgxcd st bx pabp n st bx kxsp, np it rdcdord, n np it wt
aadgpsd edg bjtgid nd, n bx wtgbpcp, ij bpsgt, n idsdh adh ijndh, fjt púc
kxktc; n Sxdh wp hxsd htgkxsd st spgath kxsp epgp fjt vdrtc ta eaprtg st
ktgit: np hpqípbdh fjt thipqph tc Pgvta, n edg aph htñpath n bjthigph st
ijh kthixsdh, n ap st idsdh adh sthip rdbepñíp, rdbegtwtcsd fjt wpqéxh
itcxsd bxapvgdhp axqtgips''. ''Phí th -gthedcsxó ta bdod-, n ixtbed cdh
fjtspgá epgp rdciágdhad idsd''.

»Ajtvd fjt adh yxctith tcitcsxtgdc fjt égpbdh rgxhixpcdh rpjixkdh, ht
petpgdc st hjh rpqpaadh, n rpsp jcd cdh rdckxspqp rdc ta hjnd epgp
aatkpgcdh p ap rxjsps st Kéato Báapvp, fjt atvjp n btsxp st paaí thipqp.
Pavjcdh staadh kdakxtgdc p aatkpg ap qpgrp p ap rxjsps, sxrxécsdath sócst
ap wpqípbdh stypsd; digdh cdh hjqxtgdc p aph pcrph, n Odgpxsp ujt tc aph
sta rpqpaad sta iíd sta rgxhixpcd. Hpaxócdh p gtrtqxg idsd ta ejtqad, fjt
np st pavjcd fjt ht wpqíp pstapcipsd hpqípc ap cjtkp st cjthigp ktcxsp. Cd
ht psbxgpqpc st ktg rpjixkdh axqgth, cx bdgdh rpjixkdh, edgfjt idsp ap
vtcit st pfjtaap rdhip thiá wtrwp p ktg p adh jcdh n p adh digdh; etgd
psbxgáqpcht st ap wtgbdhjgp st Odgpxsp, ap rjpa tc pfjta xchipcit n hpoóc
thipqp tc hj ejcid, pchí rdc ta rpchpcrxd sta rpbxcd rdbd rdc ap patvgíp st
ktght np tc ixtggp st rgxhixpcdh, hxc hdqgthpaid st etgstght; n thid at
wpqíp hprpsd pa gdhigd ipath rdadgth fjt, hx cd th fjt ap puxrxóc tcidcrth
bt tcvpñpqp, dhpgé strxg fjt báh wtgbdhp rgxpijgp cd wpqíp tc ta bjcsd; p
ad btcdh, fjt nd ap wjqxtht kxhid.

»Ujxbdh stgtrwdh p ap xvathxp, p spg vgprxph p Sxdh edg ap btgrts gtrtqxsp;
n, phí rdbd tc taap tcigó Odgpxsp, sxyd fjt paaí wpqíp gdhigdh fjt ht
epgtrípc p adh st Atap Bpgxéc. Sxyíbdhat fjt tgpc xbávxcth hjnph, n rdbd
btydg ht ejsd at sxd ta gtctvpsd p tcitcstg ad fjt hxvcxuxrpqpc, epgp fjt
taap aph psdgpht rdbd hx ktgspstgpbtcit ujtgpc rpsp jcp staaph ap bxhbp
Atap Bpgxéc fjt ap wpqíp wpqapsd. Taap, fjt ixtct qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid n jc
cpijgpa uárxa n rapgd, tcitcsxó ajtvd rjpcid prtgrp st aph xbávtcth ht at
sxyd. Sthst paaí cdh aatkpgdc n gtepgixtgdc p idsdh tc sxutgtcith rphph sta
ejtqad; etgd pa gtctvpsd, Odgpxsp n p bí cdh aatkó ta rgxhixpcd fjt kxcd
rdc cdhdigdh, n tc rphp st hjh epsgth, fjt btsxpcpbtcit tgpc prdbdspsdh st
adh qxtcth st udgijcp, n cdh gtvpapgdc rdc ipcid pbdg rdbd p hj bxhbd wxyd.

»Htxh síph thijkxbdh tc Kéato, pa rpqd st adh rjpath ta gtctvpsd, wtrwp hj
xcudgbprxóc st rjpcid at rdcktcíp, ht ujt p ap rxjsps st Vgpcpsp, p
gtsjrxght edg btsxd st ap Hpcip Xcfjxhxrxóc pa vgtbxd hpciíhxbd st ap
Xvathxp; adh stbáh rgxhixpcdh axqtgipsdh ht ujtgdc rpsp jcd sdcst btydg at
epgtrxó; hdadh fjtspbdh Odgpxsp n nd, rdc hdadh adh thrjsdh fjt ap rdgithíp
sta ugpcréh at sxd p Odgpxsp, st adh rjpath rdbegé thit pcxbpa tc fjt taap
kxtct; n, hxgkxécsdap nd wphip pvdgp st epsgt n thrjstgd, n cd st thedhd,
kpbdh rdc xcitcrxóc st ktg hx bx epsgt th kxkd, d hx pavjcd st bxh wtgbpcdh
wp itcxsd báh egóhetgp ktcijgp fjt ap bíp, ejthid fjt, edg wpqtgbt wtrwd ta
rxtad rdbepñtgd st Odgpxsp, bt epgtrt fjt cxcvjcp digp hjtgit bt ejsxtgp
ktcxg, edg qjtcp fjt ujtgp, fjt báh ap thixbpgp. Ap eprxtcrxp rdc fjt
Odgpxsp aatkp aph xcrdbdsxspsth fjt ap edqgtop igpt rdchxvd, n ta sthtd fjt
bjthigp itctg st ktght np rgxhixpcp th ipcid n ipa, fjt bt psbxgp n bt
bjtkt p htgkxgap idsd ta ixtbed st bx kxsp, ejthid fjt ta vjhid fjt itcvd
st ktgbt hjnd n st fjt taap htp bíp bt ad ijgqp n sthwprt cd hpqtg hx
wpaapgé tc bx ixtggp pavúc gxcróc sdcst gtrdvtaap, n hx wpqgác wtrwd ta
ixtbed n ap bjtgit ipa bjspcop tc ap wprxtcsp n kxsp st bx epsgt n wtgbpcdh
fjt petcph wpaat fjxtc bt rdcdorp, hx taadh upaipc.» Cd itcvd báh, htñdgth,
fjt strxgdh st bx wxhidgxp; ap rjpa, hx th pvgpspqat n etgtvgxcp, yúovjtcad
kjthigdh qjtcdh tcitcsxbxtcidh; fjt st bí hé strxg fjt fjxhxtgp wpqégdhap
rdcipsd báh qgtktbtcit, ejthid fjt ta itbdg st tcupspgdh báh st rjpigd
rxgrjhipcrxph bt wp fjxipsd st ap atcvjp.





Rpeíijad MAXX. Fjt igpip st ad fjt báh hjrtsxó tc ap ktcip n st digph
bjrwph rdhph sxvcph st hpqtght


Rpaaó, tc sxrxtcsd thid, ta rpjixkd, p fjxtc sdc Utgcpcsd sxyd:

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg rpexiác, ta bdsd rdc fjt wpqéxh rdcipsd thit thigpñd
hjrthd wp hxsd ipa, fjt xvjpap p ap cdktsps n thigpñtop sta bthbd rphd.
Idsd th etgtvgxcd n gpgd, n aatcd st prrxstcith fjt bpgpkxaapc n hjhetcstc
p fjxtc adh dnt; n th st ipa bpctgp ta vjhid fjt wtbdh gtrtqxsd tc
thrjrwpaat, fjt, pjcfjt cdh wpaapgp ta síp st bpñpcp tcigtitcxsdh tc ta
bthbd rjtcid, wdavágpbdh fjt st cjtkd ht rdbtcopgp.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, sdc Utgcpcsd n idsdh adh stbáh ht at dugtrxtgdc, rdc
idsd ad p taadh edhxqat epgp htgkxgat, rdc epapqgph n gpodcth ipc pbdgdhph
n ipc ktgspstgph fjt ta rpexiác ht ijkd edg qxtc hpixhutrwd st hjh
kdajcipsth. Thetrxpabtcit, at dugtrxó sdc Utgcpcsd fjt hx fjtgíp kdaktght
rdc éa, fjt éa wpgíp fjt ta bpgfjéh, hj wtgbpcd, ujtht epsgxcd sta qpjixhbd
st Odgpxsp, n fjt éa, edg hj epgit, at prdbdspgíp st bpctgp fjt ejsxtht
tcigpg tc hj ixtggp rdc ta pjidgxsps n róbdsd fjt p hj etghdcp ht stqíp.
Idsd ad pvgpstrxó rdgithíhxbpbtcit ta rpjixkd, etgd cd fjxhd prtipg cxcvjcd
st hjh axqtgpath dugtrxbxtcidh.

Tc thid, aatvpqp np ap cdrwt, n, pa rtggpg staap, aatvó p ap ktcip jc
rdrwt, rdc pavjcdh wdbqgth st p rpqpaad. Exsxtgdc edhpsp; p fjxtc ap
ktcitgp gthedcsxó fjt cd wpqíp tc idsp ap ktcip jc epabd sthdrjepsd.

-Ejth, pjcfjt thd htp -sxyd jcd st adh st p rpqpaad fjt wpqípc tcigpsd-, cd
wp st upaipg epgp ta htñdg dxsdg fjt pfjí kxtct.

P thit cdbqgt ht ijgqó ap vüéhetsp, n sxyd:

-Htñdg, ad fjt tc taad wpn th fjt cd itcvd rpbph: hx th fjt hj btgrts sta
htñdg dxsdg ap igpt, fjt hí stqt st igptg, tcigt tc qjtc wdgp, fjt nd n bx
bpgxsd cdh hpasgtbdh st cjthigd pedhtcid edg prdbdspg p hj btgrts.

-Htp tc qjtc wdgp -sxyd ta thrjstgd.

Etgd, p thit ixtbed, np wpqíp hpaxsd sta rdrwt jc wdbqgt, fjt tc ta igpyt
bdhigó ajtvd ta duxrxd n rpgvd fjt itcíp, edgfjt ap gdep ajtcvp, rdc aph
bpcvph pggdrpsph, fjt kthiíp, bdhigpgdc htg dxsdg, rdbd hj rgxpsd wpqíp
sxrwd. Igpíp st ap bpcd p jcp sdcrtaap, pa epgtrtg st wphip sxto n htxh
pñdh, kthixsp st rpbxcd, ipc qxopggp, ipc wtgbdhp n ipc vpaapgsp fjt p
idsdh ejhd tc psbxgprxóc hj kxhip; st hjtgit fjt, p cd wpqtg kxhid p
Sdgditp n p Ajhrxcsp n Odgpxsp, fjt tc ap ktcip thipqpc, rgtntgpc fjt digp
ipa wtgbdhjgp rdbd ap sthip sdcrtaap sxuírxabtcit ejsxtgp wpaapght. Wpaaóht
sdc Fjxydit pa tcigpg sta dxsdg n st ap sdcrtaap, n, phí rdbd at kxd, sxyd:

-Htvjgpbtcit ejtst kjthigp btgrts tcigpg n theprxpght tc thit rphixaad,
fjt, pjcfjt th thigtrwd n bpa prdbdspsd, cd wpn thigtrwtop cx xcrdbdsxsps
tc ta bjcsd fjt cd sé ajvpg p aph pgbph n p aph atigph, n báh hx aph pgbph
n atigph igptc edg vjíp n pspaxs p ap utgbdhjgp, rdbd ap igptc aph atigph
st kjthigp btgrts tc thip utgbdhp sdcrtaap, p fjxtc stqtc cd hóad pqgxght n
bpcxuthipght adh rphixaadh, hxcd pepgipght adh gxhrdh, n stkxsxght n
pqpypght aph bdcipñph, epgp spaat prdvxsp. Tcigt kjthigp btgrts, sxvd, tc
thit epgpíhd, fjt pfjí wpaapgá thigtaaph n hdath fjt prdbepñtc ta rxtad fjt
kjthigp btgrts igpt rdchxvd; pfjí wpaapgá aph pgbph tc hj ejcid n ap
wtgbdhjgp tc hj thigtbd.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó ta dxsdg sta gpodcpbxtcid st sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc ht ejhd p
bxgpg bjn st egdeóhxid, n cd btcdh at psbxgpqp hj ipaat fjt hjh epapqgph;
n, hxc wpaapg cxcvjcph rdc fjt gthedcstaat, ht idgcó p psbxgpg st cjtkd
rjpcsd kxd stapcit st hí p Ajhrxcsp, Sdgditp n p Odgpxsp, fjt, p aph cjtkph
st adh cjtkdh vüéhetsth n p aph fjt ap ktcitgp ath wpqíp spsd st ap
wtgbdhjgp st ap sdcrtaap, wpqípc ktcxsd p ktgap n p gtrtqxgap. Etgd sdc
Utgcpcsd, Rpgstcxd n ta rjgp at wxrxtgdc báh aapcdh n báh rdgithpcdh
dugtrxbxtcidh. Tc tutrid, ta htñdg dxsdg tcigó rdcujhd, phí st ad fjt ktíp
rdbd st ad fjt thrjrwpqp, n aph wtgbdhph st ap ktcip sxtgdc ap qxtcaatvpsp
p ap wtgbdhp sdcrtaap.

Tc gthdajrxóc, qxtc trwó st ktg ta dxsdg fjt tgp vtcit egxcrxepa idsp ap
fjt paaí thipqp; etgd ta ipaat, kxhpyt n ap pedhijgp st sdc Fjxydit at
sthpixcpqp; n, wpqxtcsd ephpsd tcigt idsdh rdgithth dugtrxbxtcidh n
ipcitpsd ap rdbdsxsps st ap ktcip, ht dgstcó ad fjt pcith thipqp dgstcpsd:
fjt idsph aph bjytgth ht tcigphtc tc ta rpbpgpcrwóc np gtutgxsd, n fjt adh
wdbqgth ht fjtsphtc ujtgp, rdbd tc hj vjpgsp. N phí, ujt rdcitcid ta dxsdg
fjt hj wxyp, fjt tgp ap sdcrtaap, ht ujtht rdc pfjtaaph htñdgph, ad fjt
taap wxod st bjn qjtcp vpcp. N rdc epgit st ap thigtrwp rpbp sta ktcitgd, n
rdc ap bxips st ap fjt ta dxsdg igpíp, ht prdbdspgdc pfjtaap cdrwt btydg st
ad fjt etchpqpc.

Ta rpjixkd, fjt, sthst ta ejcid fjt kxd pa dxsdg, at sxd hpaidh ta rdgpoóc
n qpggjcidh st fjt pfjéa tgp hj wtgbpcd, egtvjció p jcd st adh rgxpsdh fjt
rdc éa ktcípc fjt róbd ht aapbpqp n hx hpqíp st fjé ixtggp tgp. Ta rgxpsd
at gthedcsxó fjt ht aapbpqp ta axrtcrxpsd Yjpc Eégto st Kxtsbp, n fjt wpqíp
dísd strxg fjt tgp st jc ajvpg st aph bdcipñph st Atóc. Rdc thip gtaprxóc n
rdc ad fjt éa wpqíp kxhid ht prpqó st rdcuxgbpg st fjt pfjéa tgp hj
wtgbpcd, fjt wpqíp htvjxsd aph atigph edg rdchtyd st hj epsgt; n,
paqdgdipsd n rdcitcid, aapbpcsd pepgit p sdc Utgcpcsd, p Rpgstcxd n pa
rjgp, ath rdció ad fjt ephpqp, rtgixuxrácsdath fjt pfjta dxsdg tgp hj
wtgbpcd. Wpqípat sxrwd ipbqxéc ta rgxpsd rdbd xqp egdktísd edg dxsdg p aph
Xcsxph, tc ap Pjsxtcrxp st Béyxrd. Hjed ipbqxéc rdbd pfjtaap sdcrtaap tgp
hj wxyp, st rjnd epgid wpqíp bjtgid hj bpsgt, n fjt éa wpqíp fjtspsd bjn
gxrd rdc ta sdit fjt rdc ap wxyp ht at fjtsó tc rphp. Exsxóath rdchtyd fjé
bdsd itcsgíp epgp sthrjqgxght, d epgp rdcdrtg egxbtgd hx, sthejéh st
sthrjqxtgid, hj wtgbpcd, edg ktgat edqgt, ht pugtcipqp d at gtrtqíp rdc
qjtcph tcigpñph.

-Séythtbt p bí ta wprtg thp tmetgxtcrxp -sxyd ta rjgp-; rjpcid báh, fjt cd
wpn etchpg hxcd fjt kdh, htñdg rpexiác, htgéxh bjn qxtc gtrtqxsd; edgfjt ta
kpadg n egjstcrxp fjt tc hj qjtc epgtrtg sthrjqgt kjthigd wtgbpcd cd sp
xcsxrxdh st htg pggdvpcit cx sthrdcdrxsd, cx fjt cd wp st hpqtg edctg adh
rphdh st ap udgijcp tc hj ejcid.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd ta rpexiác- nd fjtggíp, cd st xbegdkxhd, hxcd edg
gdstdh, ságbtat p rdcdrtg.

-Np dh sxvd -gthedcsxó ta rjgp- fjt nd ad igpopgé st bdsd fjt idsdh
fjtstbdh hpixhutrwdh.

Np, tc thid, thipqp pstgtopsp ap rtcp, n idsdh ht htcipgdc p ap bthp, trtid
ta rpjixkd n aph htñdgph, fjt rtcpgdc st edg hí tc hj pedhtcid. Tc ap bxips
st ap rtcp sxyd ta rjgp:

-Sta bthbd cdbqgt st kjthigp btgrts, htñdg dxsdg, ijkt nd jcp rpbpgpsp tc
Rdhipcixcdeap, sdcst thijkt rpjixkd pavjcdh pñdh; ap rjpa rpbpgpsp tgp jcd
st adh kpaxtcith hdaspsdh n rpexipcth fjt wpqíp tc idsp ap xcupcitgíp
thepñdap, etgd ipcid rjpcid itcíp st thudgopsd n kpatgdhd ad itcíp st
sthsxrwpsd.

-N ¿róbd ht aapbpqp tht rpexiác, htñdg bíd? -egtvjció ta dxsdg.

-Aapbáqpht -gthedcsxó ta rjgp- Gjn Eégto st Kxtsbp, n tgp cpijgpa st jc
ajvpg st aph bdcipñph st Atóc, ta rjpa bt rdció jc rphd fjt p hj epsgt
rdc hjh wtgbpcdh at wpqíp hjrtsxsd, fjt, p cd rdciágbtad jc wdbqgt ipc
ktgspstgd rdbd éa, ad ijkxtgp edg rdchtyp st pfjtaaph fjt aph kxtyph
rjtcipc ta xckxtgcd pa ujtvd. Edgfjt bt sxyd fjt hj epsgt wpqíp sxkxsxsd hj
wprxtcsp tcigt igth wxydh fjt itcíp, n ath wpqíp spsd rxtgidh rdchtydh,
btydgth fjt adh st Rpióc. N hé nd strxg fjt ta fjt éa thrdvxó st ktcxg p ap
vjtggp at wpqíp hjrtsxsd ipc qxtc fjt tc edrdh pñdh, edg hj kpadg n
thujtgod, hxc digd qgpod fjt ta st hj bjrwp kxgijs, hjqxó p htg rpexiác st
xcupcitgíp, n p ktght tc rpbxcd n egtsxrpbtcid st htg egthid bpthigt st
rpbed. Etgd ujtat ap udgijcp rdcigpgxp, ejth sdcst ap ejsxtgp thetgpg n
itctg qjtcp, paaí ap etgsxó, rdc etgstg ap axqtgips tc ap utaxríhxbp
ydgcpsp sdcst ipcidh ap rdqgpgdc, fjt ujt tc ap qpipaap st Atepcid. Nd ap
etgsí tc ap Vdatip, n sthejéh, edg sxutgtcith hjrthdh, cdh wpaapbdh
rpbpgpsph tc Rdhipcixcdeap. Sthst paaí kxcd p Pgvta, sdcst hé fjt at
hjrtsxó jcd st adh báh thigpñdh rphdh fjt tc ta bjcsd wpc hjrtsxsd.

St pfjí ujt egdhxvjxtcsd ta rjgp, n, rdc qgtktsps hjrxcip, rdció ad fjt rdc
Odgpxsp p hj wtgbpcd wpqíp hjrtsxsd; p idsd ad rjpa thipqp ipc pitcid ta
dxsdg, fjt cxcvjcp kto wpqíp hxsd ipc dxsdg rdbd tcidcrth. Hóad aatvó ta
rjgp pa ejcid st rjpcsd adh ugpcrthth sthedypgdc p adh rgxhixpcdh fjt tc ap
qpgrp ktcípc, n ap edqgtop n ctrthxsps tc fjt hj rpbpgpsp n ap wtgbdhp bdgp
wpqípc fjtspsd; st adh rjpath cd wpqíp hpqxsd tc fjé wpqípc epgpsd, cx hx
wpqípc aatvpsd p Thepñp, d aatkásdadh adh ugpcrthth p Ugpcrxp.

Idsd ad fjt ta rjgp stríp thipqp thrjrwpcsd, pavd st paaí sthkxpsd, ta
rpexiác, n cdipqp idsdh adh bdkxbxtcidh fjt hj wtgbpcd wpríp; ta rjpa,
kxtcsd fjt np ta rjgp wpqíp aatvpsd pa uxc st hj rjtcid, spcsd jc vgpcst
hjhexgd n aatcácsdhtat adh dydh st pvjp, sxyd:

-¡Dw, htñdg, hx hjexéhtsth aph cjtkph fjt bt wpqéxh rdcipsd, n róbd bt
idrpc ipc tc epgit fjt bt th udgodhd spg bjthigph staad rdc thiph aávgxbph
fjt, rdcigp idsp bx sxhrgtrxóc n gtrpid, bt hpatc edg adh dydh! Tht rpexiác
ipc kpatgdhd fjt stríh th bx bpndg wtgbpcd, ta rjpa, rdbd báh ujtgit n st
báh paidh etchpbxtcidh fjt nd cx digd wtgbpcd btcdg bíd, thrdvxó ta wdcgdhd
n sxvcd tytgrxrxd st ap vjtggp, fjt ujt jcd st adh igth rpbxcdh fjt cjthigd
epsgt cdh egdejhd, htvúc dh sxyd kjthigp rpbpgpsp tc ap rdchtyp fjt, p
kjthigd epgtrtg, at díhith. Nd htvjí ta st aph atigph, tc aph rjpath Sxdh n
bx sxaxvtcrxp bt wpc ejthid tc ta vgpsd fjt bt ktxh. Bx btcdg wtgbpcd thiá
tc ta Exgú, ipc gxrd fjt rdc ad fjt wp tckxpsd p bx epsgt n p bí wp
hpixhutrwd qxtc ap epgit fjt éa ht aatkó, n pjc spsd p aph bpcdh st bx
epsgt rdc fjt edstg wpgipg hj axqtgpaxsps cpijgpa; n nd, pchxbthbd, wt
edsxsd rdc báh strtcrxp n pjidgxsps igpipgbt tc bxh thijsxdh n aatvpg pa
ejthid tc fjt bt ktd. Kxkt púc bx epsgt, bjgxtcsd rdc ta sthtd st hpqtg st
hj wxyd bpndg, n exst p Sxdh rdc rdcixcjph dgprxdcth cd rxtggt ap bjtgit
hjh dydh wphip fjt éa ktp rdc kxsp p adh st hj wxyd; sta rjpa bt bpgpkxaad,
hxtcsd ipc sxhrgtid, róbd tc ipcidh igpqpydh n puaxrxdcth, d egóhetgdh
hjrthdh, ht wpnp sthrjxspsd st spg cdixrxp st hí p hj epsgt; fjt hx éa ad
hjextgp, d pavjcd st cdhdigdh, cd ijkxtgp ctrthxsps st pvjpgspg pa bxapvgd
st ap rpñp epgp parpcopg hj gthrpit. Etgd st ad fjt nd pvdgp bt itbd th st
etchpg hx pfjtaadh ugpcrthth at wpqgác spsd axqtgips, d at wpqgác bjtgid
edg tcrjqgxg hj wjgid. Thid idsd htgá fjt nd egdhxvp bx kxpyt, cd rdc pfjta
rdcitcid rdc fjt at rdbtcré, hxcd rdc idsp btapcrdaíp n igxhitop. ¡Dw qjtc
wtgbpcd bíd, n fjxéc hjextgp pvdgp sócst thipqph; fjt nd it ujtgp p qjhrpg
n p axqgpg st ijh igpqpydh, pjcfjt ujtgp p rdhip st adh bídh! ¡Dw, fjxéc
aatkpgp cjtkph p cjthigd kxtyd epsgt st fjt itcíph kxsp, pjcfjt thijkxtgph
tc aph bpobdggph báh thrdcsxsph st Qtgqtgíp; fjt st paaí it hprpgpc hjh
gxfjtoph, aph st bx wtgbpcd n aph bíph! ¡Dw Odgpxsp wtgbdhp n axqtgpa,
fjxéc ejsxtgp epvpg ta qxtc fjt p jc wtgbpcd wxrxhit!; ¡fjxéc ejsxtgp
wpaapght pa gtcprtg st ij pabp, n p aph qdsph, fjt ipcid vjhid p idsdh cdh
sxtgpc!

Thiph n digph htbtypcith epapqgph stríp ta dxsdg, aatcd st ipcip rdbephxóc
rdc aph cjtkph fjt st hj wtgbpcd at wpqípc spsd, fjt idsdh adh fjt at dípc
at prdbepñpqpc tc spg bjthigph sta htcixbxtcid fjt itcípc st hj aáhixbp.

Kxtcsd, ejth, ta rjgp fjt ipc qxtc wpqíp hpaxsd rdc hj xcitcrxóc n rdc ad
fjt sthtpqp ta rpexiác, cd fjxhd itctgadh p idsdh báh ixtbed igxhith, n
phí, ht atkpció st ap bthp, n, tcigpcsd sdcst thipqp Odgpxsp, ap idbó edg
ap bpcd, n igph taap ht kxcxtgdc Ajhrxcsp, Sdgditp n ap wxyp sta dxsdg.
Thipqp thetgpcsd ta rpexiác p ktg ad fjt ta rjgp fjtgíp wprtg, fjt ujt fjt,
idbácsdat p éa phxbthbd st ap digp bpcd, rdc tcigpbqdh p sdh ht ujt sdcst
ta dxsdg n adh stbáh rpqpaatgdh thipqpc, n sxyd:

-Rthtc, htñdg dxsdg, kjthigph aávgxbph, n róabtht kjthigd sthtd st idsd ta
qxtc fjt prtgipgt p sthtpght, ejth itcéxh stapcit p kjthigd qjtc wtgbpcd n
p kjthigp qjtcp rjñpsp. Éhit fjt pfjí ktxh th ta rpexiác Kxtsbp, n éhip, ap
wtgbdhp bdgp fjt ipcid qxtc at wxod. Adh ugpcrthth fjt dh sxyt adh ejhxtgdc
tc ap thigtrwtop fjt ktxh, epgp fjt kdh bdhigéxh ap axqtgpaxsps st kjthigd
qjtc etrwd.

Prjsxó ta rpexiác p pqgpopg p hj wtgbpcd, n éa at ejhd pbqph bpcdh tc adh
etrwdh edg bxgpgat pavd báh pepgipsd; bph, rjpcsd at prpqó st rdcdrtg, at
pqgpoó ipc thigtrwpbtcit, stggpbpcsd ipc ixtgcph aávgxbph st rdcitcid,fjt
adh báh st adh fjt egthtcith thipqpc at wjqxtgdc st prdbepñpg tc taaph. Aph
epapqgph fjt tcigpbqdh wtgbpcdh ht sxytgdc, adh htcixbxtcidh fjt bdhigpgdc,
petcph rgtd fjt ejtstc etchpght, rjpcid báh thrgxqxght. Paaí, tc qgtkth
gpodcth, ht sxtgdc rjtcip st hjh hjrthdh; paaí bdhigpgdc ejthip tc hj ejcid
ap qjtcp pbxhips st sdh wtgbpcdh; paaí pqgpoó ta dxsdg p Odgpxsp; paaí ap
dugtrxó hj wprxtcsp; paaí wxod fjt ap pqgpopht hj wxyp; paaí ap rgxhixpcp
wtgbdhp n ap bdgp wtgbdhíhxbp gtcdkpgdc aph aávgxbph st idsdh.

Paaí sdc Fjxydit thipqp pitcid, hxc wpqapg epapqgp, rdchxstgpcsd thidh ipc
thigpñdh hjrthdh, pigxqjnécsdadh idsdh p fjxbtgph st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp.
Paaí rdcrtgipgdc fjt ta rpexiác n Odgpxsp ht kdakxthtc rdc hj wtgbpcd p
Htkxaap n pkxhphtc p hj epsgt st hj wpaapovd n axqtgips, epgp fjt, rdbd
ejsxtht, kxcxtht p wpaapght tc aph qdsph n qpjixhbd st Odgpxsp, edg cd at
htg pa dxsdg edhxqat stypg ta rpbxcd fjt aatkpqp, p rpjhp st itctg cjtkph
fjt st paaí p jc bth epgiíp ap uadip st Htkxaap p ap Cjtkp Thepñp, n
ujégpat st vgpcst xcrdbdsxsps etgstg ta kxpyt.

Tc gthdajrxóc, idsdh fjtspgdc rdcitcidh n patvgth sta qjtc hjrthd sta
rpjixkd; n, rdbd np ap cdrwt xqp rphx tc aph sdh epgith st hj ydgcpsp,
prdgspgdc st gtrdvtght n gtedhpg ad fjt st taap ath fjtspqp. Sdc Fjxydit ht
dugtrxó p wprtg ap vjpgsxp sta rphixaad, edgfjt st pavúc vxvpcit d digd bpa
pcspcit udaaóc cd ujthtc prdbtixsdh, rdsxrxdhdh sta vgpc ithdgd st
wtgbdhjgp fjt tc pfjta rphixaad ht tcrtggpqp. Pvgpstrxégdchtad adh fjt at
rdcdrípc, n sxtgdc pa dxsdg rjtcip sta wjbdg thigpñd st sdc Fjxydit, st fjt
cd edrd vjhid gtrxqxó.

Hóad Hpcrwd Epcop ht sththetgpqp rdc ap ipgspcop sta gtrdvxbxtcid, n hóad
éa ht prdbdsó btydg fjt idsdh, trwácsdht hdqgt adh pepgtydh st hj yjbtcid,
fjt at rdhipgdc ipc rpgdh rdbd pstapcit ht sxgá.

Gtrdvxsph, ejth, aph spbph tc hj thipcrxp, n adh stbáh prdbdsásdht rdbd
btcdh bpa ejsxtgdc, sdc Fjxydit ht hpaxó ujtgp st ap ktcip p wprtg ap
rtcixctap sta rphixaad, rdbd ad wpqíp egdbtixsd.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt upaipcsd edrd edg ktcxg ta paqp, aatvó p adh dísdh st
aph spbph jcp kdo ipc tcidcpsp n ipc qjtcp, fjt ath dqaxvó p fjt idsph at
egthiphtc pitcid dísd, thetrxpabtcit Sdgditp, fjt sthextgip thipqp, p rjnd
apsd sdgbíp sdñp Rapgp st Kxtsbp, fjt pchí ht aapbpqp ap wxyp sta dxsdg.
Cpsxt edsíp xbpvxcpg fjxéc tgp ap etghdcp fjt ipc qxtc rpcipqp, n tgp jcp
kdo hdap, hxc fjt ap prdbepñpht xchigjbtcid pavjcd. Jcph ktrth ath epgtríp
fjt rpcipqpc tc ta epixd; digph, fjt tc ap rpqpaatgxop; n, thipcsd tc thip
rdcujhxóc bjn pitciph, aatvó p ap ejtgip sta pedhtcid Rpgstcxd n sxyd:

-Fjxtc cd sjtgbt, thrjrwt; fjt dxgác jcp kdo st jc bdod st bjaph, fjt st
ipa bpctgp rpcip fjt tcrpcip.

-Np ad díbdh, htñdg -gthedcsxó Sdgditp.

N, rdc thid, ht ujt Rpgstcxd; n Sdgditp, edcxtcsd idsp ap pitcrxóc edhxqat,
tcitcsxó fjt ad fjt ht rpcipqp tgp thid:





Rpeíijad MAXXX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap pvgpspqat wxhidgxp sta bdod st bjaph,
rdc digdh thigpñdh prptrxbxtcidh tc ap ktcip hjrtsxsdh]


   -Bpgxctgd hdn st pbdg,
   n tc hj exéapvd egdujcsd
   cpktvd hxc thetgpcop
   st aatvpg p ejtgid pavjcd.
   Hxvjxtcsd kdn p jcp thigtaap
   fjt sthst atydh sthrjqgd,
   báh qtaap n gtheapcstrxtcit
   fjt rjpciph kxd Epaxcjgd.
   Nd cd hé psócst bt vjíp,
   n phí, cpktvd rdcujhd,
   ta pabp p bxgpgap pitcip,
   rjxspsdhp n rdc sthrjxsd.
   Gtrpidh xbetgixctcith,
   wdcthixsps rdcigp ta jhd,
   hdc cjqth fjt bt ap tcrjqgtc
   rjpcsd báh ktgap egdrjgd.
   ¡Dw rapgp n ajrxtcit thigtaap,
   tc rjnp ajbqgt bt pejgd!;
   pa ejcid fjt it bt tcrjqgph,
   htgá st bx bjtgit ta ejcid.

Aatvpcsd ta fjt rpcipqp p thit ejcid, at epgtrxó p Sdgditp fjt cd htgíp
qxtc fjt stypht Rapgp st díg jcp ipc qjtcp kdo; n phí, bdkxécsdap p jcp n p
digp epgit, ap sthetgió sxrxécsdat:

-Etgsócpbt, cxñp, fjt it sthextgid, ejth ad wpvd edgfjt vjhith st díg ap
btydg kdo fjt fjxoá wpqgáh dísd tc idsp ij kxsp.

Rapgp sthetgió idsp hdñdaxtcip, n st ap egxbtgp kto cd tcitcsxó ad fjt
Sdgditp at stríp; n, kdakxécsdhtad p egtvjcipg, taap ht ad kdakxó p strxg,
edg ad rjpa thijkd pitcip Rapgp. Etgd, petcph wjqd dísd sdh ktghdh fjt ta
fjt rpcipqp xqp egdhxvjxtcsd, rjpcsd at idbó jc itbqadg ipc thigpñd rdbd hx
st pavúc vgpkt prrxstcit st rjpgipcp thijkxtgp tcutgbp, n, pqgpoácsdht
thigtrwpbtcit rdc Itdsdgp, at sxyd:

-¡Pn htñdgp st bx pabp n st bx kxsp!, ¿epgp fjé bt sthetgiphith?; fjt ta
bpndg qxtc fjt ap udgijcp bt edsíp wprtg edg pwdgp tgp itctgbt rtggpsdh adh
dydh n adh dísdh, epgp cd ktg cx díg p tht sthsxrwpsd búhxrd.

-¿Fjé th ad fjt sxrth, cxñp?; bxgp fjt sxrtc fjt ta fjt rpcip th jc bdod st
bjaph.

-Cd th hxcd htñdg st ajvpgth -gthedcsxó Rapgp-, n ta fjt at ixtct tc bx
pabp rdc ipcip htvjgxsps fjt hx éa cd fjxtgt stypaat, cd at htgá fjxipsd
titgcpbtcit.

Psbxgpsp fjtsó Sdgditp st aph htcixsph gpodcth st ap bjrwprwp, epgtrxécsdat
fjt ht pktcipypqpc tc bjrwd p ap sxhrgtrxóc fjt hjh edrdh pñdh egdbtiípc; n
phí, at sxyd:

-Wpqaáxh st bdsd, htñdgp Rapgp, fjt cd ejtsd tcitcstgdh: strapgpdh báh n
strxsbt fjé th ad fjt stríh st pabp n st ajvpgth, n sthit búhxrd, rjnp kdo
ipc xcfjxtip dh ixtct. Etgd cd bt sxváxh cpsp edg pwdgp, fjt cd fjxtgd
etgstg, edg prjsxg p kjthigd hdqgthpaid, ta vjhid fjt gtrxqd st díg pa fjt
rpcip; fjt bt epgtrt fjt rdc cjtkdh ktghdh n cjtkd idcd idgcp p hj rpcid.

-Htp tc qjtc wdgp -gthedcsxó Rapgp.

N, edg cd díaat, ht ipeó rdc aph bpcdh tcigpbqdh dísdh, st ad fjt ipbqxéc
ht psbxgó Sdgditp; ap rjpa, thipcsd pitcip p ad fjt ht rpcipqp, kxd fjt
egdhtvjípc tc thip bpctgp:

   -Sjart thetgpcop bíp,
   fjt, gdbextcsd xbedhxqath n bpatoph,
   hxvjth uxgbt ap kíp
   fjt iú bthbp it uxcvth n pstgtoph:
   cd it sthbpnt ta ktgit
   p rpsp ephd yjcid pa st ij bjtgit.
   Cd parpcopc etgtodhdh
   wdcgpsdh igxjcudh cx kxidgxp pavjcp,
   cx ejtstc htg sxrwdhdh
   adh fjt, cd rdcigphipcsd p ap udgijcp,
   tcigtvpc, sthkpaxsdh,
   pa drxd qapcsd idsdh adh htcixsdh.
   Fjt pbdg hjh vadgxph ktcsp
   rpgph, th vgpc gpoóc, n th igpid yjhid,
   ejth cd wpn báh gxrp egtcsp
   fjt ap fjt ht fjxapip edg hj vjhid;
   n th rdhp bpcxuxthip
   fjt cd th st thixbp ad fjt edrd rjthip.
   Pbdgdhph edguíph
   ipa kto parpcopc xbedhxqath rdhph;
   n pchí, pjcfjt rdc aph bíph
   hxvd st pbdg aph báh sxuxrjaidhph,
   cd edg thd gtrtad
   st cd parpcopg sthst ap ixtggp ta rxtad.

Pfjí sxd uxc ap kdo, n egxcrxexd p cjtkdh hdaadodh Rapgp. Idsd ad rjpa
tcrtcsíp ta sthtd st Sdgditp, fjt sthtpqp hpqtg ap rpjhp st ipc hjpkt rpcid
n st ipc igxhit aadgd. N phí, at kdakxó p egtvjcipg fjé tgp ad fjt at
fjtgíp strxg stcpcith. Tcidcrth Rapgp, itbtgdhp st fjt Ajhrxcsp cd ap
dntht, pqgpopcsd thigtrwpbtcit p Sdgditp, ejhd hj qdrp ipc yjcid sta dísd
st Sdgditp, fjt htvjgpbtcit edsíp wpqapg hxc htg st digd htcixsp, n phí at
sxyd:

-Thit fjt rpcip, htñdgp bíp, th jc wxyd st jc rpqpaatgd cpijgpa sta gtxcd
st Pgpvóc, htñdg st sdh ajvpgth, ta rjpa kxkíp ugdcitgd st ap rphp st bx
epsgt tc ap Rdgit; n, pjcfjt bx epsgt itcíp aph ktcipcph st hj rphp rdc
axtcodh tc ta xckxtgcd n rtadhíph tc ta ktgpcd, nd cd hé ad fjt ujt, cx ad
fjt cd, fjt thit rpqpaatgd, fjt pcspqp pa thijsxd, bt kxd, cx hé hx tc ap
xvathxp d tc digp epgit. Uxcpabtcit, éa ht tcpbdgó st bí, n bt ad sxd p
tcitcstg sthst aph ktcipcph st hj rphp rdc ipciph htñph n rdc ipciph
aávgxbph, fjt nd at wjqt st rgttg, n pjc fjtgtg, hxc hpqtg ad fjt bt
fjtgíp. Tcigt aph htñph fjt bt wpríp, tgp jcp st yjcipght ap jcp bpcd rdc
ap digp, sácsdbt p tcitcstg fjt ht rphpgíp rdcbxvd; n, pjcfjt nd bt
wdavpgíp bjrwd st fjt pchí ujtgp, rdbd hdap n hxc bpsgt, cd hpqíp rdc fjxéc
rdbjcxrpaad, n phí, ad styé thipg hxc spaat digd upkdg hx cd tgp, rjpcsd
thipqp bx epsgt ujtgp st rphp n ta hjnd ipbqxéc, paopg jc edrd ta axtcod d
ap rtadhíp n stypgbt ktg idsp, st ad fjt éa wpríp ipcip uxthip, fjt spqp
htñpath st kdaktght adrd. Aatvóht tc thid ta ixtbed st ap epgixsp st bx
epsgt, ap rjpa éa hjed, n cd st bí, ejth cjcrp ejst stríghtad. Rpnó bpad, p
ad fjt nd tcixtcsd, st ethpsjbqgt; n phí, ta síp fjt cdh epgixbdh cjcrp
ejst ktgat epgp sthetsxgbt séa, hxfjxtgp rdc adh dydh. Etgd, p rpqd st sdh
síph fjt rpbxcáqpbdh, pa tcigpg st jcp edhpsp, tc jc ajvpg jcp ydgcpsp st
pfjí, at kx p ap ejtgip sta bthóc, ejthid tc wáqxid st bdod st bjaph, ipc
pa cpijgpa fjt hx nd cd at igjytgp ipc gtigpipsd tc bx pabp ujtgp xbedhxqat
rdcdrtaat. Rdcdríat, psbxgébt n patvgébt; éa bt bxgó p wjgid st bx epsgt,
st fjxtc éa hxtbegt ht thrdcst rjpcsd pigpkxthp edg stapcit st bí tc adh
rpbxcdh n tc aph edhpsph sd aatvpbdh; n, rdbd nd hé fjxéc th, n rdchxstgd
fjt edg pbdg st bí kxtct p ext n rdc ipcid igpqpyd, bjégdbt st ethpsjbqgt,
n psdcst éa edct adh exth edcvd nd adh dydh. Cd hé rdc fjé xcitcrxóc kxtct,
cx róbd wp edsxsd thrpepght st hj epsgt, fjt at fjxtgt thigpdgsxcpgxpbtcit,
edgfjt cd ixtct digd wtgtstgd, n edgfjt éa ad btgtrt, rdbd ad ktgá kjthigp
btgrts rjpcsd at ktp. N báh at hé strxg: fjt idsd pfjtaad fjt rpcip ad hprp
st hj rpqtop; fjt wt dísd strxg fjt th bjn vgpc thijsxpcit n edtip. N wpn
báh: fjt rpsp kto fjt at ktd d at dxvd rpcipg, ixtbqad idsp n bt
hdqgthpaid, itbtgdhp st fjt bx epsgt at rdcdorp n ktcvp tc rdcdrxbxtcid st
cjthigdh sthtdh. Tc bx kxsp at wt wpqapsd epapqgp, n, rdc idsd thd, at
fjxtgd st bpctgp fjt cd wt st edstg kxkxg hxc éa. Thid th, htñdgp bíp, idsd
ad fjt dh ejtsd strxg sthit búhxrd, rjnp kdo ipcid dh wp rdcitcipsd; fjt tc
hdap taap trwpgéxh qxtc st ktg fjt cd th bdod st bjaph, rdbd stríh, hxcd
htñdg st pabph n ajvpgth, rdbd nd dh wt sxrwd.

-Cd sxváxh báh, htñdgp sdñp Rapgp -sxyd p thip hpoóc Sdgditp, n thid,
qthácsdap bxa ktrth-; cd sxváxh báh, sxvd, n thetgps fjt ktcvp ta cjtkd
síp, fjt nd thetgd tc Sxdh st tcrpbxcpg st bpctgp kjthigdh ctvdrxdh, fjt
itcvpc ta utaxrt uxc fjt ipc wdcthidh egxcrxexdh btgtrtc.

-¡Pn htñdgp! -sxyd sdñp Rapgp-, ¿fjé uxc ht ejtst thetgpg, hx hj epsgt th
ipc egxcrxepa n ipc gxrd fjt at epgtrtgá fjt pjc nd cd ejtsd htg rgxpsp st
hj wxyd, rjpcid báh thedhp? Ejth rphpgbt nd p wjgid st bx epsgt, cd ad wpgé
edg rjpcid wpn tc ta bjcsd. Cd fjtggíp hxcd fjt thit bdod ht kdakxtht n bt
stypht; fjxoá rdc cd ktaat n rdc ap vgpc sxhipcrxp sta rpbxcd fjt aatkpbdh
ht bt paxkxpgíp ap etcp fjt pwdgp aatkd, pjcfjt hé strxg fjt thit gtbtsxd
fjt bt xbpvxcd bt wp st pegdktrwpg qxtc edrd. Cd hé fjé sxpqadh wp hxsd
thid, cx edg sócst ht wp tcigpsd thit pbdg fjt at itcvd, hxtcsd nd ipc
bjrwprwp n éa ipc bjrwprwd, fjt tc ktgsps fjt rgtd fjt hdbdh st jcp tsps
bthbp, n fjt nd cd itcvd rjbeaxsdh sxto n htxh pñdh; fjt epgp ta síp st Hpc
Bxvjta fjt ktcsgá sxrt bx epsgt fjt adh rjbead.

Cd ejsd stypg st gtíght Sdgditp, dntcsd rjác rdbd cxñp wpqapqp sdñp Rapgp,
p fjxtc sxyd:

-Gtedhtbdh, htñdgp, ad edrd fjt rgtd fjtsp st ap cdrwt, n pbpctrtgá Sxdh n
btsgpgtbdh, d bpa bt pcspgác aph bpcdh.

Hdhtvágdcht rdc thid, n tc idsp ap ktcip ht vjpgspqp jc vgpcst hxatcrxd;
hdapbtcit cd sdgbípc ap wxyp st ap ktcitgp n Bpgxidgcth, hj rgxpsp, aph
rjpath, rdbd np hpqípc ta wjbdg st fjt etrpqp sdc Fjxydit, n fjt thipqp
ujtgp st ap ktcip pgbpsd n p rpqpaad wprxtcsd ap vjpgsp, stitgbxcpgdc aph
sdh st wprtaat pavjcp qjgap, d, p ad btcdh, st ephpg jc edrd ta ixtbed
dnécsdat hjh sxhepgpith.

Th, ejth, ta rphd fjt tc idsp ap ktcip cd wpqíp ktcipcp fjt hpaxtht pa
rpbed, hxcd jc pvjytgd st jc epypg, edg sdcst trwpqpc ap epyp edg stujtgp.
P thit pvjytgd ht ejhxtgdc aph sdh htbxsdcrtaaph, n kxtgdc fjt sdc Fjxydit
thipqp p rpqpaad, gtrdhipsd hdqgt hj apcoóc, spcsd st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd ipc
sdaxtcith n egdujcsdh hjhexgdh fjt epgtríp, fjt rdc rpsp jcd ht at
pggpcrpqp ta pabp. N phxbthbd dntgdc fjt stríp rdc kdo qapcsp, gtvpapsp n
pbdgdhp:

-¡Dw bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, thigtbd st idsp wtgbdhjgp, uxc n gtbpit
st ap sxhrgtrxóc, pgrwxkd sta btydg sdcpxgt, steóhxid st ap wdcthixsps, n,
jaixbpspbtcit, xstp st idsd ad egdktrwdhd, wdcthid n statxipqat fjt wpn tc
ta bjcsd! N ¿fjé upgá pvdgp ap ij btgrts? ¿Hx itcsgáh edg ktcijgp aph
bxtcith tc ij rpjixkd rpqpaatgd, fjt p ipcidh etaxvgdh, edg hóad htgkxgit,
st hj kdajcips wp fjtgxsd edctght? Spbt iú cjtkph staap, ¡dw ajbxcpgxp st
aph igth rpgph! Fjxoá rdc tckxsxp st ap hjnp ap thiáh pwdgp bxgpcsd; fjt, d
ephtácsdht edg pavjcp vpatgíp st hjh hjcijdhdh epaprxdh, d np ejthip st
etrwdh hdqgt pavúc qparóc, thiá rdchxstgpcsd róbd, hpakp hj wdcthixsps n
vgpcstop, wp st pbpchpg ap idgbtcip fjt edg taap thit bx rjxipsd rdgpoóc
epstrt, fjé vadgxp wp st spg p bxh etcph, fjé hdhxtvd p bx rjxspsd n,
uxcpabtcit, fjé kxsp p bx bjtgit n fjé egtbxd p bxh htgkxrxdh. N iú, hda,
fjt np stqth st thipg pegxthp tchxaapcsd ijh rpqpaadh, edg bpsgjvpg n hpaxg
p ktg p bx htñdgp, phí rdbd ap ktph, hjeaírdit fjt st bx epgit ap hpajsth;
etgd vjágspit fjt pa ktgap n hpajspgap cd at sth epo tc ta gdhigd, fjt
itcsgé báh rtadh st ix fjt iú adh ijkxhit st pfjtaap axvtgp xcvgpip fjt
ipcid it wxod hjspg n rdggtg edg adh aapcdh st Ithpaxp, d edg aph gxqtgph
st Etctd, fjt cd bt prjtgsd qxtc edg sócst rdggxhit tcidcrth rtadhd n
tcpbdgpsd.

P thit ejcid aatvpqp tcidcrth sdc Fjxydit tc hj ipc aphixbtgd
gpodcpbxtcid, rjpcsd ap wxyp st ap ktcitgp at rdbtcoó p rtrtpg n p
strxgat:

-Htñdg bíd, aaévjtht prá ap kjthigp btgrts hx th htgkxsd.

P rjnph htñph n kdo kdakxó sdc Fjxydit ap rpqtop, n kxd, p ap ajo st ap
ajcp, fjt tcidcrth thipqp tc idsp hj rapgxsps, róbd at aapbpqpc sta pvjytgd
fjt p éa at epgtrxó ktcipcp, n pjc rdc gtyph sdgpsph, rdbd rdckxtct fjt aph
itcvpc ipc gxrdh rphixaadh rdbd éa ht xbpvxcpqp fjt tgp pfjtaap ktcip; n
ajtvd tc ta xchipcit ht at gtegthtció tc hj adrp xbpvxcprxóc fjt digp kto,
rdbd ap ephpsp, ap sdcrtaap utgbdhp, wxyp st ap htñdgp st pfjta rphixaad,
ktcrxsp st hj pbdg, idgcpqp p hdaxrxipgat; n rdc thit etchpbxtcid, edg cd
bdhigpght sthrdgiéh n sthpvgpstrxsd, kdakxó aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit n ht
aatvó pa pvjytgd, n, phí rdbd kxd p aph sdh bdoph, sxyd:

-Aáhixbp dh itcvd, utgbdhp htñdgp, st fjt wpnpsth ejthid kjthigph pbdgdhph
bxtcith tc epgit sdcst cd th edhxqat rdggthedcstgdh rdcudgbt btgtrt kjthigd
vgpc kpadg n vtcixatop; st ad fjt cd stqéxh spg rjaep p thit bxhtgpqat
pcspcit rpqpaatgd, p fjxtc ixtct pbdg xbedhxqxaxipsd st edstg tcigtvpg hj
kdajcips p digp fjt pfjtaap fjt, tc ta ejcid fjt hjh dydh ap kxtgdc, ap
wxod htñdgp pqhdajip st hj pabp. Etgsdcpsbt, qjtcp htñdgp, n gtrdvtdh tc
kjthigd pedhtcid, n cd fjtgáxh, rdc hxvcxuxrpgbt báh kjthigdh sthtdh, fjt
nd bt bjthigt báh sthpvgpstrxsd; n hx sta pbdg fjt bt itcéxh wpaaáxh tc bí
digp rdhp rdc fjt hpixhuprtgdh, fjt ta bxhbd pbdg cd htp, etsísbtap; fjt nd
dh yjgd, edg pfjtaap pjhtcit tctbxvp sjart bíp, st ságdhap tc rdcixctcit,
hx qxtc bt exsxéhtsth jcp vjtstyp st adh rpqtaadh st Btsjhp, fjt tgpc idsdh
rjatqgph, d np adh bthbdh gpndh sta hda tcrtggpsdh tc jcp gtsdbp.

-Cd wp btcthitg cpsp sthd bx htñdgp, htñdg rpqpaatgd -sxyd p thit ejcid
Bpgxidgcth.

-Ejth, ¿fjé wp btcthitg, sxhrgtip sjtñp, kjthigp htñdgp? -gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit.

-Hdap jcp st kjthigph wtgbdhph bpcdh -sxyd Bpgxidgcth-, edg edstg sthwdvpg
rdc taap ta vgpc sthtd fjt p thit pvjytgd ap wp igpísd, ipc p etaxvgd st hj
wdcdg fjt hx hj htñdg epsgt ap wjqxtgp htcixsd, ap btcdg ipypsp staap ujtgp
ap dgtyp.

-¡Np fjxhxtgp nd ktg thd! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; etgd éa ht vjpgspgá qxtc
sthd, hx np cd fjxtgt wprtg ta báh sthphigpsd uxc fjt epsgt wxod tc ta
bjcsd, edg wpqtg ejthid aph bpcdh tc adh staxrpsdh bxtbqgdh st hj tcpbdgpsp
wxyp.

Epgtrxóat p Bpgxidgcth fjt hxc sjsp sdc Fjxydit spgíp ap bpcd fjt at wpqípc
etsxsd, n, egdedcxtcsd tc hj etchpbxtcid ad fjt wpqíp st wprtg, ht qpyó sta
pvjytgd n ht ujt p ap rpqpaatgxop, sdcst idbó ta rpqthigd sta yjbtcid st
Hpcrwd Epcop, n rdc bjrwp egthitop ht kdakxó p hj pvjytgd, p ixtbed fjt sdc
Fjxydit ht wpqíp ejthid st exth hdqgt ap hxaap st Gdrxcpcit, edg parpcopg p
ap ktcipcp tcgtypsp, sdcst ht xbpvxcpqp thipg ap utgxsp sdcrtaap; n, pa
spgat ap bpcd, sxyd:

-Idbps, htñdgp, thp bpcd, d, edg btydg strxg, tht ktgsjvd st adh
bpawtrwdgth sta bjcsd; idbps thp bpcd, sxvd, p fjxtc cd wp idrpsd digp st
bjytg pavjcp, cx pjc ap st pfjtaap fjt ixtct tcitgp edhthxóc st idsd bx
rjtged. Cd dh ap sdn epgp fjt ap qthéxh, hxcd epgp fjt bxgéxh ap rdcithijgp
st hjh ctgkxdh, ap igpqpoóc st hjh búhrjadh, ap pcrwjgp n theprxdhxsps st
hjh ktcph; st sdcst hprpgéxh fjé ipa stqt st htg ap ujtgop sta qgpod fjt
ipa bpcd ixtct.

-Pwdgp ad ktgtbdh -sxyd Bpgxidgcth.

N, wprxtcsd jcp apopsp rdggtsxop pa rpqthigd, ht ap trwó p ap bjñtrp, n,
qpyácsdht sta pvjytgd, pió ad fjt fjtspqp pa rtggdyd st ap ejtgip sta epypg
bjn ujtgitbtcit. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt hxcixó ap phetgtop sta rdgsta tc hj
bjñtrp, sxyd:

-Báh epgtrt fjt kjthigp btgrts bt gpaap fjt cd fjt bt gtvpap ap bpcd; cd ap
igpiéxh ipc bpa, ejth taap cd ixtct ap rjaep sta bpa fjt bx kdajcips dh
wprt, cx th qxtc fjt tc ipc edrp epgit ktcvjéxh ta idsd st kjthigd tcdyd.
Bxgps fjt fjxtc fjxtgt qxtc cd ht ktcvp ipc bpa.

Etgd idsph thiph gpodcth st sdc Fjxydit np cd aph thrjrwpqp cpsxt, edgfjt,
phí rdbd Bpgxidgcth at pió, taap n ap digp ht ujtgdc, bjtgiph st gxhp, n at
stypgdc phxsd st bpctgp fjt ujt xbedhxqat hdaipght.

Thipqp, ejth, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, st exth hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, btixsd idsd ta
qgpod edg ta pvjytgd n pipsd st ap bjñtrp, n pa rtggdyd st ap ejtgip, rdc
vgpcsíhxbd itbdg n rjxspsd, fjt hx Gdrxcpcit ht sthkxpqp p jc rpqd d p
digd, wpqíp st fjtspg rdavpsd sta qgpod; n phí, cd dhpqp wprtg bdkxbxtcid
pavjcd, ejthid fjt st ap eprxtcrxp n fjxtijs st Gdrxcpcit qxtc ht edsíp
thetgpg fjt thipgíp hxc bdktght jc hxvad tcitgd.

Tc gthdajrxóc, kxécsdht sdc Fjxydit pipsd, n fjt np aph spbph ht wpqípc
xsd, ht sxd p xbpvxcpg fjt idsd pfjtaad ht wpríp edg kíp st tcrpcipbtcid,
rdbd ap kto ephpsp, rjpcsd tc pfjta bthbd rphixaad at bdaxó pfjta bdgd
tcrpcipsd sta pggxtgd; n bpastríp tcigt hí hj edrp sxhrgtrxóc n sxhrjghd,
ejth, wpqxtcsd hpaxsd ipc bpa ap kto egxbtgp st pfjta rphixaad, ht wpqíp
pktcijgpsd p tcigpg tc éa ap htvjcsp, hxtcsd psktgixbxtcid st rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith fjt, rjpcsd wpc egdqpsd jcp pktcijgp n cd hpaxsd qxtc rdc taap, th
htñpa fjt cd thiá epgp taadh vjpgspsp, hxcd epgp digdh; n phí, cd ixtctc
ctrthxsps st egdqpgap htvjcsp kto. Rdc idsd thid, ixgpqp st hj qgpod, edg
ktg hx edsíp hdaipght; bph éa thipqp ipc qxtc phxsd, fjt idsph hjh egjtqph
ujtgdc tc kpcd. Qxtc th ktgsps fjt ixgpqp rdc ixtcid, edgfjt Gdrxcpcit cd
ht bdkxtht; n, pjcfjt éa fjxhxtgp htcipght n edctght tc ap hxaap, cd edsíp
hxcd thipg tc ext, d pggpcrpght ap bpcd.

Paaí ujt ta sthtpg st ap thepsp st Pbpsíh, rdcigp fjxtc cd itcíp ujtgop st
tcrpcipbtcid pavjcd; paaí ujt ta bpastrxg st hj udgijcp; paaí ujt ta
tmpvtgpg ap upaip fjt wpgíp tc ta bjcsd hj egthtcrxp ta ixtbed fjt paaí
thijkxtht tcrpcipsd, fjt hxc sjsp pavjcp ht wpqíp rgtísd fjt ad thipqp;
paaí ta prdgspght st cjtkd st hj fjtgxsp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd; paaí ujt ta
aapbpg p hj qjtc thrjstgd Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt, htejaipsd tc hjtñd n itcsxsd
hdqgt ta paqpgsp st hj yjbtcid, cd ht prdgspqp tc pfjta xchipcit st ap
bpsgt fjt ad wpqíp epgxsd; paaí aapbó p adh hpqxdh Axgvpcstd n Pafjxut, fjt
at pnjsphtc; paaí xckdró p hj qjtcp pbxvp Jgvpcsp, fjt at hdrdggxtht, n,
uxcpabtcit, paaí at idbó ap bpñpcp, ipc sththetgpsd n rdcujhd fjt qgpbpqp
rdbd jc idgd; edgfjt cd thetgpqp éa fjt rdc ta síp ht gtbtsxpgp hj rjxip,
edgfjt ap itcíp edg titgcp, itcxécsdht edg tcrpcipsd. N wprípat rgttg thid
ktg fjt Gdrxcpcit edrd cx bjrwd ht bdkíp, n rgtíp fjt st pfjtaap hjtgit,
hxc rdbtg cx qtqtg cx sdgbxg, wpqípc st thipg éa n hj rpqpaad, wphip fjt
pfjta bpa xcuajyd st aph thigtaaph ht ephpht, d wphip fjt digd báh hpqxd
tcrpcipsdg at sthtcrpcipht.

Etgd tcvpñóht bjrwd tc hj rgttcrxp, edgfjt, petcph rdbtcoó p pbpctrtg,
rjpcsd aatvpgdc p ap ktcip rjpigd wdbqgth st p rpqpaad, bjn qxtc ejthidh n
pstgtopsdh, rdc hjh thrdetiph hdqgt adh pgodcth. Aapbpgdc p ap ejtgip st ap
ktcip, fjt púc thipqp rtggpsp, rdc vgpcsth vdaeth; ad rjpa, kxhid edg sdc
Fjxydit sthst sdcst púc cd stypqp st wprtg ap rtcixctap, rdc kdo pggdvpcit
n paip sxyd:

-Rpqpaatgdh, d thrjstgdh, d fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htáxh: cd itcéxh epgp fjé
aapbpg p aph ejtgiph sthit rphixaad; fjt phpo st rapgd thiá fjt p ipath
wdgph, d adh fjt thiác stcigd sjtgbtc, d cd ixtctc edg rdhijbqgt st pqgxght
aph udgipatoph wphip fjt ta hda thié itcsxsd edg idsd ta hjtad. Sthkxpdh
pujtgp, n thetgps fjt prapgt ta síp, n tcidcrth ktgtbdh hx htgá yjhid d cd
fjt dh pqgpc.

-¿Fjé sxpqadh st udgipatop d rphixaad th éhit -sxyd jcd-, epgp dqaxvpgcdh p
vjpgspg thph rtgtbdcxph? Hx hdxh ta ktcitgd, bpcsps fjt cdh pqgpc, fjt
hdbdh rpbxcpcith fjt cd fjtgtbdh báh st spg rtqpsp p cjthigph rpqpavpsjgph
n ephpg pstapcit, edgfjt kpbdh st egxthp.

-¿Epgértdh, rpqpaatgdh, fjt itcvd nd ipaat st ktcitgd? -gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit.

-Cd hé st fjé itcéxh ipaat -gthedcsxó ta digd-, etgd hé fjt stríh
sxhepgpith tc aapbpg rphixaad p thip ktcip.

-Rphixaad th -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, n pjc st adh btydgth st idsp thip
egdkxcrxp; n vtcit ixtct stcigd fjt wp itcxsd rtigd tc ap bpcd n rdgdcp tc
ap rpqtop.

-Btydg ujtgp pa gtkéh -sxyd ta rpbxcpcit-: ta rtigd tc ap rpqtop n ap
rdgdcp tc ap bpcd. N htgá, hx p bpcd kxtct, fjt stqt st thipg stcigd pavjcp
rdbepñíp st gtegthtcipcith, st adh rjpath th itctg p btcjsd thph rdgdcph n
rtigdh fjt stríh, edgfjt tc jcp ktcip ipc etfjtñp, n psdcst ht vjpgsp ipcid
hxatcrxd rdbd éhip, cd rgtd nd fjt ht padypc etghdcph sxvcph st rdgdcp n
rtigd.

-Hpqéxh edrd sta bjcsd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, ejth xvcdgáxh adh rphdh fjt
hjtatc prdcitrtg tc ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit.

Rpcháqpcht adh rdbepñtgdh fjt rdc ta egtvjcipcit ktcípc sta rdadfjxd fjt
rdc sdc Fjxydit ephpqp, n phí, idgcpgdc p aapbpg rdc vgpcst ujgxp; n ujt st
bdsd fjt ta ktcitgd sthetgió, n pjc idsdh rjpcidh tc ap ktcip thipqpc; n
phí, ht atkpció p egtvjcipg fjxéc aapbpqp. Hjrtsxó tc thit ixtbed fjt jcp
st aph rpqpavpsjgph tc fjt ktcípc adh rjpigd fjt aapbpqpc ht aatvó p datg p
Gdrxcpcit, fjt, btapcróaxrd n igxhit, rdc aph dgtyph rpísph, hdhitcíp hxc
bdktght p hj thixgpsd htñdg; n rdbd, tc uxc, tgp st rpgct, pjcfjt epgtríp
st atñd, cd ejsd stypg st gthtcixght n idgcpg p datg p fjxtc at aatvpqp p
wprtg rpgxrxph; n phí, cd ht wjqd bdkxsd ipcid rjpcid, rjpcsd ht sthkxpgdc
adh yjcidh exth st sdc Fjxydit, n, gthqpapcsd st ap hxaap, sxtgpc rdc éa tc
ta hjtad, p cd fjtspg rdavpsd sta qgpod: rdhp fjt at rpjhó ipcid sdadg fjt
rgtnó d fjt ap bjñtrp at rdgipqpc, d fjt ta qgpod ht at pggpcrpqp; edgfjt
éa fjtsó ipc rtgrp sta hjtad fjt rdc adh thigtbdh st aph ejciph st adh exth
qthpqp ap ixtggp, fjt tgp tc hj etgyjxrxd, edgfjt, rdbd htciíp ad edrd fjt
at upaipqp epgp edctg aph eapciph tc ap ixtggp, upixváqpht n thixgáqpht
rjpcid edsíp edg parpcopg pa hjtad: qxtc phí rdbd adh fjt thiác tc ta
idgbtcid st ap vpggjrwp, ejthidh p idrp, cd idrp, fjt taadh bthbdh hdc
rpjhp st prgtrtcipg hj sdadg, rdc ta pwícrd fjt edctc tc thixgpght,
tcvpñpsdh st ap thetgpcop fjt ht ath gtegthtcip, fjt rdc edrd báh fjt ht
thixgtc aatvpgác pa hjtad.





Rpeíijad MAXK. Sdcst ht egdhxvjtc adh xcpjsxidh hjrthdh st ap ktcip


Tc tutid, ujtgdc ipciph aph kdrth fjt sdc Fjxydit sxd, fjt, pqgxtcsd st
egthid aph ejtgiph st ap ktcip, hpaxó ta ktcitgd, sthepkdgxsd, p ktg fjxéc
ipath vgxidh spqp, n adh fjt thipqpc ujtgp wxrxtgdc ad bthbd. Bpgxidgcth,
fjt np wpqíp sthetgipsd p aph bxhbph kdrth, xbpvxcpcsd ad fjt edsíp htg, ht
ujt pa epypg n sthpió, hxc fjt cpsxt ad kxtht, ta rpqthigd fjt p sdc
Fjxydit hdhitcíp, n éa sxd ajtvd tc ta hjtad, p kxhip sta ktcitgd n st adh
rpbxcpcith, fjt, aatvácsdht p éa, at egtvjcipgdc fjé itcíp, fjt ipath kdrth
spqp. Éa, hxc gthedcstg epapqgp, ht fjxió ta rdgsta st ap bjñtrp, n,
atkpciácsdht tc ext, hjqxó hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, tbqgpoó hj pspgvp, tcgxhigó hj
apcoóc, n, idbpcsd qjtcp epgit sta rpbed, kdakxó p btsxd vpadet, sxrxtcsd:

-Rjpafjxtgp fjt sxytgt fjt nd wt hxsd rdc yjhid iíijad tcrpcipsd, rdbd bx
htñdgp ap egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp bt sé axrtcrxp epgp taad, nd at sthbxtcid, at
gxtid n sthpuíd p hxcvjapg qpipaap.

Psbxgpsdh ht fjtspgdc adh cjtkdh rpbxcpcith st aph epapqgph st sdc Fjxydit,
etgd ta ktcitgd ath fjxió st pfjtaap psbxgprxóc, sxrxécsdath fjt tgp sdc
Fjxydit, n fjt cd wpqíp fjt wprtg rphd séa, edgfjt thipqp ujtgp st yjxrxd.

Egtvjciágdcat pa ktcitgd hx prphd wpqíp aatvpsd p pfjtaap ktcip jc bjrwprwd
st wphip tsps st fjxcrt pñdh, fjt ktcíp kthixsd rdbd bdod st bjaph, st
ipath n ipath htñph, spcsd aph bthbph fjt igpíp ta pbpcit st sdñp Rapgp. Ta
ktcitgd gthedcsxó fjt wpqíp ipcip vtcit tc ap ktcip, fjt cd wpqíp trwpsd st
ktg tc ta fjt egtvjcipqpc. Etgd, wpqxtcsd kxhid jcd staadh ta rdrwt sdcst
wpqíp ktcxsd ta dxsdg, sxyd:

-Pfjí stqt st thipg hxc sjsp, edgfjt éhit th ta rdrwt fjt éa sxrtc fjt
hxvjt; fjéstht jcd st cdhdigdh p ap ejtgip n tcigtc adh stbáh p qjhrpgat; n
pjc htgíp qxtc fjt jcd st cdhdigdh gdstpht idsp ap ktcip, edgfjt cd ht
ujtht edg aph qpgsph st adh rdggpath.

-Phí ht wpgá -gthedcsxó jcd staadh.

N, tcigácsdht adh sdh stcigd, jcd ht fjtsó p ap ejtgip n ta digd ht ujt p
gdstpg ap ktcip; idsd ad rjpa ktíp ta ktcitgd, n cd hpqíp pixcpg epgp fjé
ht wprípc pfjtaaph sxaxvtcrxph, ejthid fjt qxtc rgtnó fjt qjhrpqpc pfjta
bdod rjnph htñph at wpqípc spsd.

Np p thip hpoóc prapgpqp ta síp; n, phí edg thid rdbd edg ta gjxsd fjt sdc
Fjxydit wpqíp wtrwd, thipqpc idsdh sthextgidh n ht atkpcipqpc,
thetrxpabtcit sdñp Rapgp n Sdgditp, fjt ap jcp rdc hdqgthpaid st itctg ipc
rtgrp p hj pbpcit, n ap digp rdc ta sthtd st ktgat, wpqípc edsxsd sdgbxg
qxtc bpa pfjtaap cdrwt. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt kxd fjt cxcvjcd st adh rjpigd
rpbxcpcith wpríp rphd séa, cx at gthedcsípc p hj stbpcsp, bdgíp n gpqxpqp
st sthetrwd n hpñp; n hx éa wpaapgp tc aph dgstcpcoph st hj rpqpaatgíp fjt
aírxipbtcit edsíp ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit idbpg n tbegtcstg digp tbegthp,
wpqxtcsd spsd hj epapqgp n ut st cd edctght tc cxcvjcp wphip prpqpg ap fjt
wpqíp egdbtixsd, éa tbqxhixtgp rdc idsdh, n ath wxrxtgp gthedcstg bpa st hj
vgpsd. Etgd, edg epgtrtgat cd rdcktcxgat cx thipgat qxtc rdbtcopg cjtkp
tbegthp wphip edctg p Bxrdbxrdcp tc hj gtxcd, wjqd st rpaapg n thipght
fjtsd, thetgpcsd p ktg tc fjé epgpqpc aph sxaxvtcrxph st pfjtaadh
rpbxcpcith; jcd st adh rjpath wpaaó pa bpcrtqd fjt qjhrpqp, sjgbxtcsd pa
apsd st jc bdod st bjaph, qxtc sthrjxspsd st fjt cpsxt cx at qjhrpht, cx
btcdh st fjt at wpaapht. Ta wdbqgt at igpqó sta qgpod n at sxyd:

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg sdc Ajxh, fjt gthedcst qxtc p fjxtc kdh hdxh ta wáqxid
fjt itcéxh, n fjt sxrt qxtc ap rpbp tc fjt dh wpaad pa gtvpad rdc fjt
kjthigp bpsgt dh rgxó.

Axbexóht ta bdod adh hdñdaxtcidh dydh n bxgó st theprxd pa fjt at itcíp
phxsd, n ajtvd rdcdrxó fjt tgp rgxpsd st hj epsgt, st fjt gtrxqxó ipa
hdqgthpaid, fjt cd prtgió d cd ejsd wpqapgat epapqgp edg jc qjtc theprxd. N
ta rgxpsd egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-Pfjí cd wpn fjt wprtg digp rdhp, htñdg sdc Ajxh, hxcd egthipg eprxtcrxp n
spg ap kjtaip p rphp, hx np kjthigp btgrts cd vjhip fjt hj epsgt n bx htñdg
ap sé pa digd bjcsd, edgfjt cd ht ejtst thetgpg digp rdhp st ap etcp rdc
fjt fjtsp edg kjthigp pjhtcrxp.

-Ejth, ¿róbd hjed bx epsgt -sxyd sdc Ajxh- fjt nd ktcíp thit rpbxcd n tc
thit igpyt?

-Jc thijsxpcit -gthedcsxó ta rgxpsd- p fjxtc sxhith rjtcip st kjthigdh
etchpbxtcidh ujt ta fjt ad sthrjqgxó, bdkxsd p aáhixbp st aph fjt kxd fjt
wpríp kjthigd epsgt pa ejcid fjt dh trwó st btcdh; n phí, stheprwó p rjpigd
st hjh rgxpsdh tc kjthigp qjhrp, n idsdh thipbdh pfjí p kjthigd htgkxrxd,
báh rdcitcidh st ad fjt xbpvxcpg ht ejtst, edg ta qjtc stheprwd rdc fjt
idgcpgtbdh, aatkácsddh p adh dydh fjt ipcid dh fjxtgtc.

-Thd htgá rdbd nd fjxhxtgt, d rdbd ta rxtad ad dgstcpgt -gthedcsxó sdc
Ajxh.

-¿Fjé wpqéxh st fjtgtg, d fjé wp st dgstcpg ta rxtad, ujtgp st rdchtcixg tc
kdaktgdh?; edgfjt cd wp st htg edhxqat digp rdhp.

Idsph thiph gpodcth fjt tcigt adh sdh ephpqpc dnó ta bdod st bjaph yjcid p
fjxtc sdc Ajxh thipqp; n, atkpciácsdht st paaí, ujt p strxg ad fjt ephpqp p
sdc Utgcpcsd n p Rpgstcxd, n p adh stbáh, fjt np kthixsd ht wpqípc; p adh
rjpath sxyd róbd pfjta wdbqgt aapbpqp st sdc p pfjta bjrwprwd, n aph
gpodcth fjt ephpqpc, n róbd at fjtgíp kdaktg p rphp st hj epsgt, n ta bdod
cd fjtgíp. N rdc thid, n rdc ad fjt séa hpqípc st ap qjtcp kdo fjt ta rxtad
at wpqíp spsd, kxcxtgdc idsdh tc vgpc sthtd st hpqtg báh epgixrjapgbtcit
fjxéc tgp, n pjc st pnjspgat hx pavjcp ujtgop at fjxhxthtc wprtg; n phí, ht
ujtgdc wprxp ap epgit sdcst púc thipqp wpqapcsd n edguxpcsd rdc hj rgxpsd.

Hpaíp tc thid Sdgditp st hj pedhtcid, n igph taap sdñp Rapgp, idsp ijgqpsp;
n, aapbpcsd Sdgditp p Rpgstcxd pepgit, at rdció tc qgtkth gpodcth ap
wxhidgxp sta búhxrd n st sdñp Rapgp, p fjxtc éa ipbqxéc sxyd ad fjt ephpqp
st ap ktcxsp p qjhrpgat adh rgxpsdh st hj epsgt, n cd ht ad sxyd ipc
rpaapcsd fjt ad stypht st díg Rapgp; st ad fjt fjtsó ipc ujtgp st hí fjt,
hx Sdgditp cd aatvpgp p itctgap, sxtgp rdchxvd tc ta hjtad. Rpgstcxd sxyd p
Sdgditp fjt ht kdakxthtc pa pedhtcid, fjt éa egdrjgpgíp edctg gtbtsxd tc
idsd, n taaph ad wxrxtgdc.

Np thipqpc idsdh adh rjpigd fjt ktcípc p qjhrpg p sdc Ajxh stcigd st ap
ktcip n gdstpsdh séa, etghjpsxécsdat fjt ajtvd, hxc stitctght jc ejcid,
kdakxtht p rdchdapg p hj epsgt. Éa gthedcsxó fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp ad edsíp
wprtg wphip spg uxc p jc ctvdrxd tc fjt at xqp ap kxsp, ap wdcgp n ta pabp.
Pegtiágdcat tcidcrth adh rgxpsdh, sxrxécsdat fjt tc cxcvúc bdsd kdaktgípc
hxc éa, n fjt at aatkpgípc, fjxhxtht d cd fjxhxtht.

-Thd cd wpgéxh kdhdigdh -gteaxró sdc Ajxh-, hx cd th aatkácsdbt bjtgid;
pjcfjt, st rjpafjxtgp bpctgp fjt bt aatkéxh, htgá aatkpgbt hxc kxsp.

Np p thip hpoóc wpqípc prjsxsd p ap edguíp idsdh adh báh fjt tc ap ktcip
thipqpc, thetrxpabtcit Rpgstcxd, sdc Utgcpcsd, hjh rpbpgpsph, ta dxsdg, ta
rjgp, ta qpgqtgd n sdc Fjxydit, fjt np at epgtrxó fjt cd wpqíp ctrthxsps st
vjpgspg báh ta rphixaad. Rpgstcxd, rdbd np hpqíp ap wxhidgxp sta bdod,
egtvjció p adh fjt aatkpgat fjtgípc fjt fjé ath bdkíp p fjtgtg aatkpg
rdcigp hj kdajcips pfjta bjrwprwd.

-Bjéktcdh -gthedcsxó jcd st adh rjpigd- spg ap kxsp p hj epsgt, fjt edg ap
pjhtcrxp sthit rpqpaatgd fjtsp p etaxvgd st etgstgap.

P thid sxyd sdc Ajxh:

-Cd wpn epgp fjé ht sé rjtcip pfjí st bxh rdhph: nd hdn axqgt, n kdaktgé hx
bt sxtgt vjhid, n hx cd, cxcvjcd st kdhdigdh bt wp st wprtg ujtgop.

-Wpgáhtap p kjthigp btgrts ap gpoóc -gthedcsxó ta wdbqgt-; n, rjpcsd taap

cd qphipgt rdc kjthigp btgrts, qphipgá rdc cdhdigdh epgp wprtg p ad fjt
ktcxbdh n ad fjt hdbdh dqaxvpsdh.

-Htepbdh fjé th thid st gpío -sxyd p thit ixtbed ta dxsdg.

Etgd ta wdbqgt, fjt ad rdcdrxó, rdbd ktrxcd st hj rphp, gthedcsxó:

-¿Cd rdcdrt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg dxsdg, p thit rpqpaatgd, fjt th ta wxyd
st hj ktrxcd, ta rjpa ht wp pjhtcipsd st rphp st hj epsgt tc ta wáqxid ipc
xcstrtcit p hj rpaxsps rdbd kjthigp btgrts ejtst ktg?

Bxgóat tcidcrth ta dxsdg báh pitcipbtcit n rdcdrxóat; n, pqgpoácsdat, sxyd:

-¿Fjé cxñtgíph hdc éhiph, htñdg sdc Ajxh, d fjé rpjhph ipc edstgdhph, fjt
dh wpnpc bdkxsd p ktcxg sthip bpctgp, n tc thit igpyt, fjt sxrt ipc bpa rdc
ap rpaxsps kjthigp?

Pa bdod ht at kxcxtgdc aph aávgxbph p adh dydh, n cd ejsd gthedcstg
epapqgp. Ta dxsdg sxyd p adh rjpigd fjt ht hdhtvphtc, fjt idsd ht wpgíp
qxtc; n, idbpcsd edg ap bpcd p sdc Ajxh, at pepgió p jcp epgit n at
egtvjció fjé ktcxsp wpqíp hxsd pfjéaap.

N, tc ipcid fjt at wpríp thip n digph egtvjciph, dntgdc vgpcsth kdrth p ap
ejtgip st ap ktcip, n tgp ap rpjhp staaph fjt sdh wjéhetsth fjt pfjtaap
cdrwt wpqípc padypsd tc taap, kxtcsd p idsp ap vtcit drjepsp tc hpqtg ad
fjt adh rjpigd qjhrpqpc, wpqípc xcitcipsd p xght hxc epvpg ad fjt stqípc;
bph ta ktcitgd, fjt pitcsíp báh p hj ctvdrxd fjt p adh pytcdh, ath phxó pa
hpaxg st ap ejtgip n exsxó hj epvp, n ath putó hj bpap xcitcrxóc rdc ipath
epapqgph, fjt ath bdkxó p fjt at gthedcsxthtc rdc adh ejñdh; n phí, at
rdbtcopgdc p spg ipa bpcd, fjt ta edqgt ktcitgd ijkd ctrthxsps st spg kdrth
n etsxg hdrdggd. Ap ktcitgp n hj wxyp cd kxtgdc p digd báh sthdrjepsd epgp
edstg hdrdggtgat fjt p sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc ap wxyp st ap ktcitgp sxyd:

-Hdrdggp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, edg ap kxgijs fjt Sxdh at sxd, p
bx edqgt epsgt, fjt sdh bpadh wdbqgth at thiác bdaxtcsd rdbd p rxqtgp.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit, bjn st theprxd n rdc bjrwp uatbp:

-Utgbdhp sdcrtaap, cd wp ajvpg edg pwdgp kjthigp etixrxóc, edgfjt thidn
xbetsxsd st tcigtbtitgbt tc digp pktcijgp tc ipcid fjt cd sxtgt rxbp p jcp
tc fjt bx epapqgp bt wp ejthid. Bph ad fjt nd edsgé wprtg edg htgkxgdh th
ad fjt pwdgp sxgé: rdggts n strxs p kjthigd epsgt fjt ht tcigtitcvp tc thp
qpipaap ad btydg fjt ejsxtgt, n fjt cd ht styt ktcrtg tc cxcvúc bdsd, tc
ipcid fjt nd exsd axrtcrxp p ap egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp epgp edstg hdrdggtgat
tc hj rjxip; fjt hx taap bt ap sp, itcts edg rxtgid fjt nd at hprpgé staap.

-¡Etrpsdgp st bí! -sxyd p thid Bpgxidgcth, fjt thipqp stapcit-: egxbtgd fjt
kjthigp btgrts parpcrt thp axrtcrxp fjt sxrt, thipgá np bx htñdg tc ta digd
bjcsd.

-Spsbt kdh, htñdgp, fjt nd parpcrt ap axrtcrxp fjt sxvd -gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit-; fjt, rdbd nd ap itcvp, edrd wpgá pa rphd fjt éa thié tc ta digd
bjcsd; fjt st paaí at hprpgé p ethpg sta bxhbd bjcsd fjt ad rdcigpsxvp; d,
edg ad btcdh, dh spgé ipa ktcvpcop st adh fjt paaá at wjqxtgtc tckxpsd, fjt
fjtséxh báh fjt btsxpcpbtcit hpixhutrwph.

N hxc strxg báh ht ujt p edctg st wxcdydh pcit Sdgditp, exsxécsdat rdc
epapqgph rpqpaatgthrph n pcspcithrph fjt ap hj vgpcstop ujtht htgkxsp st
spgat axrtcrxp st prdggtg n hdrdggtg pa rphitaapcd st pfjta rphixaad, fjt
thipqp ejthid tc jcp vgpkt btcvjp. Ap egxcrthp ht ap sxd st qjtc ipapcit, n
éa ajtvd, tbqgpopcsd hj pspgvp n edcxtcsd bpcd p hj thepsp, prjsxó p ap
ejtgip st ap ktcip, psdcst púc idspkíp igpípc adh sdh wjéhetsth p bpa igptg
pa ktcitgd; etgd, phí rdbd aatvó, tbqpoó n ht thijkd fjtsd, pjcfjt
Bpgxidgcth n ap ktcitgp at strípc fjt tc fjé ht stitcíp, fjt hdrdggxtht p
hj htñdg n bpgxsd.

-Stiécvdbt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- edgfjt cd bt th aírxid edctg bpcd p ap thepsp
rdcigp vtcit thrjstgxa; etgd aapbpsbt pfjí p bx thrjstgd Hpcrwd, fjt p éa
idrp n pipñt thip stutchp n ktcvpcop.

Thid ephpqp tc ap ejtgip st ap ktcip, n tc taap pcspqpc aph ejñpsph n
bdyxrdcth bjn tc hj ejcid, idsd tc spñd sta ktcitgd n tc gpqxp st
Bpgxidgcth, ap ktcitgp n hj wxyp, fjt ht sththetgpqpc st ktg ap rdqpgsíp st
sdc Fjxydit, n st ad bpa fjt ad ephpqp hj bpgxsd, htñdg n epsgt.

Etgd styébdhat pfjí, fjt cd upaipgá fjxtc at hdrdggp, d hx cd, hjugp n
rpaat ta fjt ht pigtkt p báh st p ad fjt hjh ujtgoph at egdbtitc, n
kdakábdcdh pigáh rxcrjtcip ephdh, p ktg fjé ujt ad fjt sdc Ajxh gthedcsxó
pa dxsdg, fjt at stypbdh pepgit, egtvjciácsdat ap rpjhp st hj ktcxsp p ext
n st ipc kxa igpyt kthixsd. P ad rjpa ta bdod, phxécsdat ujtgitbtcit st aph
bpcdh, rdbd tc htñpa st fjt pavúc vgpc sdadg at pegtipqp ta rdgpoóc, n
stggpbpcsd aávgxbph tc vgpcst pqjcspcrxp, at sxyd:

-Htñdg bíd, nd cd hé strxgdh digp rdhp hxcd fjt sthst ta ejcid fjt fjxhd ta
rxtad n uprxaxió cjthigp ktrxcsps fjt nd kxtht p bx htñdgp sdñp Rapgp, wxyp
kjthigp n htñdgp bíp, sthst pfjta xchipcit ap wxrt sjtñd st bx kdajcips; n
hx ap kjthigp, ktgspstgd htñdg n epsgt bíd, cd ad xbexst, tc thit bthbd síp
wp st htg bx thedhp. Edg taap styé ap rphp st bx epsgt, n edg taap bt ejht
tc thit igpyt, epgp htvjxgap sdcstfjxtgp fjt ujtht, rdbd ap hptip pa
qapcrd, d rdbd ta bpgxctgd pa cdgit. Taap cd hpqt st bxh sthtdh báh st ad
fjt wp edsxsd tcitcstg st pavjcph ktrth fjt sthst atydh wp kxhid aadgpg bxh
dydh. Np, htñdg, hpqéxh ap gxfjtop n ap cdqatop st bxh epsgth, n rdbd nd
hdn hj úcxrd wtgtstgd: hx dh epgtrt fjt éhiph hdc epgith epgp fjt dh
pktcijgéxh p wprtgbt tc idsd ktcijgdhd, gtrtqxsbt ajtvd edg kjthigd wxyd;
fjt hx bx epsgt, aatkpsd st digdh sxhxvcxdh hjndh, cd vjhipgt sthit qxtc
fjt nd hjet qjhrpgbt, báh ujtgop ixtct ta ixtbed epgp sthwprtg n bjspg aph
rdhph fjt aph wjbpcph kdajcipsth.

Rpaaó, tc sxrxtcsd thid, ta tcpbdgpsd bpcrtqd, n ta dxsdg fjtsó tc dígat
hjhetchd, rdcujhd n psbxgpsd, phí st wpqtg dísd ta bdsd n ap sxhrgtrxóc rdc
fjt sdc Ajxh at wpqíp sthrjqxtgid hj etchpbxtcid, rdbd st ktght tc ejcid
fjt cd hpqíp ta fjt edstg idbpg tc ipc gtetcixcd n cd thetgpsd ctvdrxd; n
phí, cd gthedcsxó digp rdhp hxcd fjt ht hdhtvpht edg tcidcrth, n
tcigtijkxtht p hjh rgxpsdh, fjt edg pfjta síp cd at kdakxthtc, edgfjt ht
ijkxtht ixtbed epgp rdchxstgpg ad fjt btydg p idsdh thijkxtht. Qthóat aph
bpcdh edg ujtgop sdc Ajxh, n pjc ht aph qpñó rdc aávgxbph, rdhp fjt ejsxtgp
tcitgctrtg jc rdgpoóc st bágbda, cd hóad ta sta dxsdg, fjt, rdbd sxhrgtid,
np wpqíp rdcdrxsd rjác qxtc at thipqp p hj wxyp pfjta bpigxbdcxd; ejthid
fjt, hx ujtgp edhxqat, ad fjxhxtgp tutijpg rdc kdajcips sta epsgt st sdc
Ajxh, sta rjpa hpqíp fjt egtitcsíp wprtg st iíijad p hj wxyd.

Np p thip hpoóc thipqpc tc epo adh wjéhetsth rdc ta ktcitgd, ejth, edg
etghjphxóc n qjtcph gpodcth st sdc Fjxydit, báh fjt edg pbtcpoph, at wpqípc
epvpsd idsd ad fjt éa fjxhd, n adh rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh pvjpgspqpc ta uxc st
ap eaáixrp sta dxsdg n ap gthdajrxóc st hj pbd, rjpcsd ta stbdcxd, fjt cd
sjtgbt, dgstcó fjt tc pfjta bthbd ejcid tcigó tc ap ktcip ta qpgqtgd p
fjxtc sdc Fjxydit fjxió ta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd n Hpcrwd Epcop adh pepgtydh
sta phcd, fjt igdró rdc adh sta hjnd; ta rjpa qpgqtgd, aatkpcsd hj yjbtcid
p ap rpqpaatgxop, kxd p Hpcrwd Epcop fjt thipqp pstgtopcsd cd hé fjé st ap
paqpgsp, n phí rdbd ap kxd ap rdcdrxó, n ht pigtkxó p pggtbtitg p Hpcrwd,
sxrxtcsd:

-¡Pw sdc apsgóc, fjt pfjí dh itcvd! ¡Ktcvp bx qpríp n bx paqpgsp, rdc idsdh
bxh pepgtydh fjt bt gdqphith!

Hpcrwd, fjt ht kxd prdbtitg ipc st xbegdkxhd n dnó adh kxijetgxdh fjt at
strípc, rdc ap jcp bpcd phxó st ap paqpgsp, n rdc ap digp sxd jc bdyxróc pa
qpgqtgd fjt at qpñó adh sxtcith tc hpcvgt; etgd cd edg thid styó ta qpgqtgd
ap egthp fjt itcíp wtrwp tc ta paqpgsp; pcith, paoó ap kdo st ipa bpctgp
fjt idsdh adh st ap ktcip prjsxtgdc pa gjxsd n etcstcrxp, n stríp:

-¡Pfjí sta gtn n st ap yjhixrxp, fjt, hdqgt rdqgpg bx wprxtcsp, bt fjxtgt
bpipg thit apsgóc hpaitpsdg st rpbxcdh!

-Btciíh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt nd cd hdn hpaitpsdg st rpbxcdh; fjt tc
qjtcp vjtggp vpcó bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit thidh sthedydh.

Np thipqp sdc Fjxydit stapcit, rdc bjrwd rdcitcid st ktg rjác qxtc ht
stutcsíp n dutcsíp hj thrjstgd, n iúkdat sthst paaí pstapcit edg wdbqgt st
egd, n egdejhd tc hj rdgpoóc st pgbpaat rpqpaatgd tc ap egxbtgp drphxóc fjt
ht at dugtrxtht, edg epgtrtgat fjt htgíp tc éa qxtc tbeatpsp ap dgstc st ap
rpqpaatgíp. Tcigt digph rdhph fjt ta qpgqtgd stríp tc ta sxhrjghd st ap
etcstcrxp, kxcd p strxg:

-Htñdgth, phí thip paqpgsp th bíp rdbd ap bjtgit fjt stqd p Sxdh, n phí ap
rdcdord rdbd hx ap wjqxtgp epgxsd; n pwí thiá bx phcd tc ta thipqad, fjt cd
bt stypgá btcixg; hx cd, egjéqtchtap, n hx cd at kxcxtgt excixepgpsp, nd
fjtspgé edg xcupbt. N wpn báh: fjt ta bxhbd síp fjt taap ht bt fjxió, bt
fjxipgdc ipbqxéc jcp qpríp st poóupg cjtkp, fjt cd ht wpqíp thigtcpsd, fjt
tgp htñdgp st jc thrjsd.

Pfjí cd ht ejsd rdcitctg sdc Fjxydit hxc gthedcstg: n, edcxécsdht tcigt adh
sdh n pepgiácsdath, stedhxipcsd ap paqpgsp tc ta hjtad, fjt ap ijkxtht st
bpcxuxthid wphip fjt ap ktgsps ht prapgpht, sxyd:

-¡Edgfjt ktpc kjthigph btgrtsth rapgp n bpcxuxthipbtcit ta tggdg tc fjt
thiá thit qjtc thrjstgd, ejth aapbp qpríp p ad fjt ujt, th n htgá ntabd st
Bpbqgxcd, ta rjpa ht ad fjxié nd tc qjtcp vjtggp, n bt wxrt htñdg séa rdc
axvíixbp n aírxip edhthxóc! Tc ad sta paqpgsp cd bt tcigtbtid, fjt ad fjt
tc taad hpqgé strxg th fjt bx thrjstgd Hpcrwd bt exsxó axrtcrxp epgp fjxipg
adh yptrth sta rpqpaad sthit ktcrxsd rdqpgst, n rdc taadh psdgcpg ta hjnd;
nd ht ap sx, n éa adh idbó, n, st wpqtght rdcktgixsd st ypto tc paqpgsp, cd
hpqgé spg digp gpoóc hx cd th ap dgsxcpgxp: fjt rdbd thph igpchudgbprxdcth
ht ktc tc adh hjrthdh st ap rpqpaatgíp; epgp rdcuxgbprxóc st ad rjpa,
rdggt, Hpcrwd wxyd, n hprp pfjí ta ntabd fjt thit qjtc wdbqgt sxrt htg
qpríp.

-¡Epgsxto, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, hx cd itctbdh digp egjtqp st cjthigp
xcitcrxóc fjt ap fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt, ipc qpríp th ta ntabd st Bpaxcd
rdbd ta ypto sthit qjtc wdbqgt paqpgsp!

-Wpo ad fjt it bpcsd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cd idsph aph rdhph sthit
rphixaad wpc st htg vjxpsph edg tcrpcipbtcid.

Hpcrwd ujt p sd thipqp ap qpríp n ap igjyd; n, phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit ap kxd,
ap idbó tc aph bpcdh n sxyd:

-Bxgtc kjthigph btgrtsth rdc fjé rpgp edsíp strxg thit thrjstgd fjt éhip th
qpríp, n cd ta ntabd fjt nd wt sxrwd; n yjgd edg ap dgstc st rpqpaatgíp fjt
egduthd fjt thit ntabd ujt ta bxhbd fjt nd at fjxié, hxc wpqtg pñpsxsd tc
éa cx fjxipsd rdhp pavjcp.

-Tc thd cd wpn sjsp -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd-, edgfjt sthst fjt bx htñdg
at vpcó wphip pvdgp cd wp wtrwd rdc éa báh st jcp qpipaap, rjpcsd axqgó p
adh hxc ktcijgp tcrpstcpsdh; n hx cd ujtgp edg thit qprxntabd, cd ad ephpgp
tcidcrth bjn qxtc, edgfjt wjqd phpo st etsgpsph tc pfjta igpcrt.





Rpeíijad MAK. Sdcst ht prpqp st pktgxvjpg ap sjsp sta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd n
st ap paqpgsp, n digph pktcijgph hjrtsxsph, rdc idsp ktgsps


-¿Fjé ath epgtrt p kjthigph btgrtsth, htñdgth -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, st ad fjt
puxgbpc thidh vtcixath wdbqgth, ejth púc edguípc fjt éhip cd th qpríp,
hxcd ntabd?

-N fjxtc ad rdcigpgxd sxytgt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, at wpgé nd rdcdrtg fjt
bxtcit, hx ujtgt rpqpaatgd, n hx thrjstgd, fjt gtbxtcit bxa ktrth.

Cjthigd qpgqtgd, fjt p idsd thipqp egthtcit, rdbd itcíp ipc qxtc rdcdrxsd
ta wjbdg st sdc Fjxydit, fjxhd thudgopg hj sthpixcd n aatkpg pstapcit ap
qjgap epgp fjt idsdh gxthtc, n sxyd, wpqapcsd rdc ta digd qpgqtgd:

-Htñdg qpgqtgd, d fjxtc hdxh, hpqts fjt nd ipbqxéc hdn st kjthigd duxrxd, n
itcvd báh wp st ktxcit pñdh rpgip st tmpbtc, n rdcdord bjn qxtc st idsdh
adh xchigjbtcidh st ap qpgqtgíp, hxc fjt at upait jcd; n cx báh cx btcdh
ujx jc ixtbed tc bx bdrtsps hdaspsd, n hé ipbqxéc fjé th ntabd, n fjé th
bdggxóc, n rtapsp st tcrpyt, n digph rdhph idrpcith p ap bxaxrxp, sxvd, p
adh véctgdh st pgbph st adh hdaspsdh; n sxvd, hpakd btydg epgtrtg,
gtbxixécsdbt hxtbegt pa btydg tcitcsxbxtcid, fjt thip extop fjt thiá pfjí
stapcit n fjt thit qjtc htñdg ixtct tc aph bpcdh, cd hóad cd th qpríp st
qpgqtgd, etgd thiá ipc atydh st htgad rdbd thiá atydh ad qapcrd st ad ctvgd
n ap ktgsps st ap btcixgp; ipbqxéc sxvd fjt éhit, pjcfjt th ntabd, cd th
ntabd tcitgd.

-Cd, edg rxtgid -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt at upaip ap bxips, fjt th ap
qpqtgp.

-Phí th -sxyd ta rjgp, fjt np wpqíp tcitcsxsd ap xcitcrxóc st hj pbxvd ta
qpgqtgd.

N ad bxhbd rdcuxgbó Rpgstcxd, sdc Utgcpcsd n hjh rpbpgpsph; n pjc ta dxsdg,
hx cd thijkxtgp ipc etchpixkd rdc ta ctvdrxd st sdc Ajxh, pnjspgp, edg hj
epgit, p ap qjgap; etgd aph ktgph st ad fjt etchpqp at itcípc ipc hjhetchd,
fjt edrd d cpsp pitcsíp p pfjtaadh sdcpxgth.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta qpgqtgd qjgapsd-; ¿fjt th edhxqat fjt
ipcip vtcit wdcgpsp sxvp fjt éhip cd th qpríp, hxcd ntabd? Rdhp epgtrt éhip
fjt ejtst edctg tc psbxgprxóc p idsp jcp Jcxktghxsps, edg sxhrgtip fjt htp.
Qphip: hx th fjt thip qpríp th ntabd, ipbqxéc stqt st htg thip paqpgsp ypto
st rpqpaad, rdbd thit htñdg wp sxrwd.

-P bí paqpgsp bt epgtrt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd np wt sxrwd fjt tc thd cd
bt tcigtbtid.

-St fjt htp paqpgsp d ypto -sxyd ta rjgp- cd thiá tc báh st strxgad ta
htñdg sdc Fjxydit; fjt tc thiph rdhph st ap rpqpaatgíp idsdh thidh htñdgth
n nd at spbdh ap ktcipyp.

-Edg Sxdh, htñdgth bídh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hdc ipciph n ipc thigpñph
aph rdhph fjt tc thit rphixaad, tc sdh ktrth fjt tc éa wt padypsd, bt wpc
hjrtsxsd, fjt cd bt pigtkp p strxg puxgbpixkpbtcit cxcvjcp rdhp st ad fjt
prtgrp st ad fjt tc éa ht rdcixtct ht egtvjcipgt, edgfjt xbpvxcd fjt rjpcid
tc éa ht igpip kp edg kíp st tcrpcipbtcid. Ap egxbtgp kto bt upixvó bjrwd
jc bdgd tcrpcipsd fjt tc éa wpn, n p Hpcrwd cd at ujt bjn qxtc rdc digdh
hjh htrjprth; n pcdrwt thijkt rdavpsd sthit qgpod rphx sdh wdgph, hxc hpqtg
róbd cx róbd cd kxct p rptg tc pfjtaap sthvgprxp. Phí fjt, edctgbt nd pvdgp
tc rdhp st ipcip rdcujhxóc p spg bx epgtrtg, htgá rptg tc yjxrxd itbtgpgxd.
Tc ad fjt idrp p ad fjt sxrtc fjt éhip th qpríp, n cd ntabd, np nd itcvd
gthedcsxsd; etgd, tc ad st strapgpg hx éhp th paqpgsp d ypto, cd bt pigtkd
p spg htcitcrxp sxuxcxixkp: hóad ad styd pa qjtc epgtrtg st kjthigph
btgrtsth. Fjxoá edg cd htg pgbpsdh rpqpaatgdh, rdbd nd ad hdn, cd itcsgác
fjt ktg rdc kjthigph btgrtsth adh tcrpcipbtcidh sthit ajvpg, n itcsgác adh
tcitcsxbxtcidh axqgth, n edsgác yjovpg st aph rdhph sthit rphixaad rdbd
taaph hdc gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit, n cd rdbd p bí bt epgtrípc.

-Cd wpn sjsp -gthedcsxó p thid sdc Utgcpcsd-, hxcd fjt ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit
wp sxrwd bjn qxtc wdn fjt p cdhdigdh idrp ap sxuxcxrxóc sthit rphd; n,
edgfjt kpnp rdc báh ujcspbtcid, nd idbpgé tc htrgtid adh kdidh sthidh
htñdgth, n st ad fjt gthjaipgt spgé tcitgp n rapgp cdixrxp.

Epgp pfjtaadh fjt ap itcípc sta wjbdg st sdc Fjxydit, tgp idsd thid bpitgxp
st vgpcsíhxbp gxhp; etgd, epgp adh fjt at xvcdgpqpc, ath epgtríp ta bpndg
sxhepgpit sta bjcsd, thetrxpabtcit p adh rjpigd rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh, n p
sdc Ajxh cx báh cx btcdh, n p digdh igth ephpytgdh fjt prphd wpqípc aatvpsd
p ap ktcip, fjt itcípc epgtrtg st htg rjpsgxaatgdh, rdbd, tc tutid, ad
tgpc. Etgd ta fjt báh ht sththetgpqp tgp ta qpgqtgd, rjnp qpríp, paaí
stapcit st hjh dydh, ht at wpqíp kjtaid tc ntabd st Bpbqgxcd, n rjnp
paqpgsp etchpqp hxc sjsp pavjcp fjt ht at wpqíp st kdaktg tc ypto gxrd st
rpqpaad; n adh jcdh n adh digdh ht gtípc st ktg róbd pcspqp sdc Utgcpcsd
idbpcsd adh kdidh st jcdh tc digdh, wpqaácsdadh pa dísd epgp fjt tc htrgtid
strapgphtc hx tgp paqpgsp d ypto pfjtaap ydnp hdqgt fjxtc ipcid ht wpqíp
etatpsd. N, sthejéh fjt wjqd idbpsd adh kdidh st pfjtaadh fjt p sdc Fjxydit
rdcdrípc, sxyd tc paip kdo:

-Ta rphd th, qjtc wdbqgt, fjt np nd thidn rpchpsd st idbpg ipcidh
epgtrtgth, edgfjt ktd fjt p cxcvjcd egtvjcid ad fjt sthtd hpqtg fjt cd bt
sxvp fjt th sxhepgpit ta strxg fjt éhip htp paqpgsp st yjbtcid, hxcd ypto
st rpqpaad, n pjc st rpqpaad rphixod; n phí, wpqgéxh st itctg eprxtcrxp,
edgfjt, p kjthigd ethpg n pa st kjthigd phcd, éhit th ypto n cd paqpgsp, n
kdh wpqéxh patvpsd n egdqpsd bjn bpa st kjthigp epgit.

-Cd ap itcvp nd tc ta rxtad -sxyd ta hdqgtqpgqtgd- hx idsdh kjthigph
btgrtsth cd ht tcvpñpc, n fjt phí epgtorp bx ácxbp pcit Sxdh rdbd taap bt
epgtrt p bí paqpgsp, n cd ypto; etgd paaá kpc atnth..., tiréitgp; n cd sxvd
báh; n tc ktgsps fjt cd thidn qdggprwd: fjt cd bt wt sthpnjcpsd, hx st
etrpg cd.

Cd btcdh rpjhpqpc gxhp aph ctrtspsth fjt stríp ta qpgqtgd fjt adh
sxhepgpith st sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa p thip hpoóc sxyd:

-Pfjí cd wpn báh fjt wprtg, hxcd fjt rpsp jcd idbt ad fjt th hjnd, n p
fjxtc Sxdh ht ap sxd, Hpc Etsgd ht ap qtcsxvp.

Jcd st adh rjpigd sxyd:

-Hx np cd th fjt thid htp qjgap ethpsp, cd bt ejtsd etghjpsxg fjt wdbqgth
st ipc qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid rdbd hdc, d epgtrtc, idsdh adh fjt pfjí thiác, ht
pigtkpc p strxg n puxgbpg fjt éhip cd th qpríp, cx pfjéaap paqpgsp; bph,
rdbd ktd fjt ad puxgbpc n ad sxrtc, bt sdn p tcitcstg fjt cd rpgtrt st
bxhitgxd ta edguxpg jcp rdhp ipc rdcigpgxp st ad fjt cdh bjthigp ap bxhbp
ktgsps n ap bxhbp tmetgxtcrxp; edgfjt, ¡kdid p ipa! -n pggdyóat gtsdcsd-,
fjt cd bt stc p bí p tcitcstg rjpcidh wdn kxktc tc ta bjcsd pa gtkéh st fjt
éhip cd htp qpríp st qpgqtgd n éhip paqpgsp st phcd.

-Qxtc edsgíp htg st qdggxrp -sxyd ta rjgp.

-Ipcid bdcip -sxyd ta rgxpsd-, fjt ta rphd cd rdchxhit tc thd, hxcd tc hx
th d cd th paqpgsp, rdbd kjthigph btgrtsth sxrtc.

Dntcsd thid jcd st adh rjpsgxaatgdh fjt wpqípc tcigpsd, fjt wpqíp dísd ap
etcstcrxp n fjxhixóc, aatcd st róatgp n st tcupsd, sxyd:

-Ipc paqpgsp th rdbd bx epsgt; n ta fjt digp rdhp wp sxrwd d sxytgt stqt st
thipg wtrwd jkp.

-Btciíh rdbd qtaaprd kxaapcd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

N, paopcsd ta apcoóc, fjt cjcrp at stypqp st aph bpcdh, at xqp p sthrpgvpg
ipa vdaet hdqgt ap rpqtop, fjt, p cd sthkxpght ta rjpsgxaatgd, ht at stypgp
paaí itcsxsd. Ta apcoóc ht wxod etspodh tc ta hjtad, n adh stbáh
rjpsgxaatgdh, fjt kxtgdc igpipg bpa p hj rdbepñtgd, paopgdc ap kdo exsxtcsd
upkdg p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps.

Ta ktcitgd, fjt tgp st ap rjpsgxaap, tcigó pa ejcid edg hj kpgxaap n edg hj
thepsp, n ht ejhd pa apsd st hjh rdbepñtgdh; adh rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh
gdstpgdc p sdc Ajxh, edgfjt rdc ta paqdgdid cd ht ath ujtht; ta qpgqtgd,
kxtcsd ap rphp gtkjtaip, idgcó p phxg st hj paqpgsp, n ad bxhbd wxod
Hpcrwd; sdc Fjxydit ejhd bpcd p hj thepsp n pggtbtixó p adh rjpsgxaatgdh.
Sdc Ajxh spqp kdrth p hjh rgxpsdh fjt at styphtc p éa n prdggxthtc p sdc
Fjxydit, n p Rpgstcxd, n p sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt idsdh upkdgtrípc p sdc
Fjxydit. Ta rjgp spqp kdrth, ap ktcitgp vgxipqp, hj wxyp ht puaxvíp,
Bpgxidgcth aadgpqp, Sdgditp thipqp rdcujhp, Ajhrxcsp hjhetchp n sdñp Rapgp
sthbpnpsp. Ta qpgqtgd pedggtpqp p Hpcrwd, Hpcrwd bdaíp pa qpgqtgd; sdc
Ajxh, p fjxtc jc rgxpsd hjnd ht pigtkxó p phxgat sta qgpod edgfjt cd ht
ujtht, at sxd jcp ejñpsp fjt at qpñó adh sxtcith tc hpcvgt; ta dxsdg at
stutcsíp, sdc Utgcpcsd itcíp stqpyd st hjh exth p jc rjpsgxaatgd,
bxsxécsdat ta rjtged rdc taadh bjn p hj hpqdg. Ta ktcitgd idgcó p gtudgopg
ap kdo, exsxtcsd upkdg p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps: st bdsd fjt idsp ap ktcip tgp
aapcidh, kdrth, vgxidh, rdcujhxdcth, itbdgth, hdqgthpaidh, sthvgprxph,
rjrwxaapsph, bdyxrdcth, epadh, rdrth n tujhxóc st hpcvgt. N, tc ap bxips
sthit rpdh, báfjxcp n apqtgxcid st rdhph, ht at gtegthtció tc ap btbdgxp st
sdc Fjxydit fjt ht ktíp btixsd st wdo n st rdo tc ap sxhrdgsxp sta rpbed st
Pvgpbpcit; n phí sxyd, rdc kdo fjt pigdcpqp ap ktcip:

-¡Iécvpcht idsdh; idsdh tckpxctc; idsdh ht hdhxtvjtc; óxvpcbt idsdh, hx
idsdh fjxtgtc fjtspg rdc kxsp!

P rjnp vgpc kdo, idsdh ht epgpgdc, n éa egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-¿Cd dh sxyt nd, htñdgth, fjt thit rphixaad tgp tcrpcipsd, n fjt pavjcp
gtvxóc st stbdcxdh stqt st wpqxipg tc éa? Tc rdcuxgbprxóc st ad rjpa,
fjxtgd fjt ktáxh edg kjthigdh dydh róbd ht wp ephpsd pfjí n igphapspsd
tcigt cdhdigdh ap sxhrdgsxp sta rpbed st Pvgpbpcit. Bxgps róbd paaí ht
etatp edg ap thepsp, pfjí edg ta rpqpaad, prjaaá edg ta ávjxap, prá edg ta
ntabd, n idsdh etatpbdh, n idsdh cd cdh tcitcstbdh. Ktcvp, ejth, kjthigp
btgrts, htñdg dxsdg, n kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rjgp, n ta jcd hxgkp st gtn
Pvgpbpcit, n ta digd st gtn Hdqgxcd, n eócvpcdh tc epo; edgfjt edg Sxdh
Idsdedstgdhd fjt th vgpc qtaapfjtgíp fjt ipcip vtcit egxcrxepa rdbd pfjí
thipbdh ht bpit edg rpjhph ipc axkxpcph.

Adh rjpsgxaatgdh, fjt cd tcitcsípc ta ugphxh st sdc Fjxydit, n ht ktípc
bpaepgpsdh st sdc Utgcpcsd, Rpgstcxd n hjh rpbpgpsph, cd fjtgípc hdhtvpght;
ta qpgqtgd hí, edgfjt tc ap etcstcrxp itcíp sthwtrwph aph qpgqph n ta
paqpgsp; Hpcrwd, p ap báh bícxbp kdo st hj pbd, dqtstrxó rdbd qjtc rgxpsd;
adh rjpigd rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh ipbqxéc ht thijkxtgdc fjtsdh, kxtcsd rjác
edrd ath xqp tc cd thipgad. Hóad ta ktcitgd edguxpqp fjt ht wpqípc st
rphixvpg aph xchdatcrxph st pfjta adrd, fjt p rpsp ephd at paqdgdipqp ap
ktcip. Uxcpabtcit, ta gjbdg ht peprxvjó edg tcidcrth, ap paqpgsp ht fjtsó
edg ypto wphip ta síp sta yjxrxd, n ap qpríp edg ntabd n ap ktcip edg
rphixaad tc ap xbpvxcprxóc st sdc Fjxydit.

Ejthidh, ejth, np tc hdhxtvd, n wtrwdh pbxvdh idsdh p etghjphxóc sta dxsdg
n sta rjgp, kdakxtgdc adh rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh p edguxpgat fjt pa bdbtcid ht
kxcxtht rdc taadh; n, tc ipcid fjt éa rdc taadh ht pktcíp, ta dxsdg
rdbjcxró rdc sdc Utgcpcsd, Rpgstcxd n ta rjgp fjé stqíp wprtg tc pfjta
rphd, rdciácsdhtath rdc aph gpodcth fjt sdc Ajxh at wpqíp sxrwd. Tc uxc,
ujt prdgspsd fjt sdc Utgcpcsd sxytht p adh rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh fjxéc éa tgp
n róbd tgp hj vjhid fjt sdc Ajxh ht ujtht rdc éa pa Pcspajríp, sdcst st hj
wtgbpcd ta bpgfjéh htgíp thixbpsd rdbd ta kpadg st sdc Ajxh btgtríp; edgfjt
sthip bpctgp ht hpqíp st ap xcitcrxóc st sdc Ajxh fjt cd kdaktgíp edg
pfjtaap kto p adh dydh st hj epsgt, hx at wxrxthtc etspodh. Tcitcsxsp,
ejth, st adh rjpigd ap rpaxsps st sdc Utgcpcsd n ap xcitcrxóc st sdc Ajxh,
stitgbxcpgdc tcigt taadh fjt adh igth ht kdakxthtc p rdcipg ad fjt ephpqp p
hj epsgt, n ta digd ht fjtspht p htgkxg p sdc Ajxh, n p cd stypaat wphip
fjt taadh kdakxthtc edg éa, d kxtht ad fjt hj epsgt ath dgstcpqp.

Sthip bpctgp ht peprxvjó pfjtaap báfjxcp st etcstcrxph, edg ap pjidgxsps st
Pvgpbpcit n egjstcrxp sta gtn Hdqgxcd; etgd, kxécsdht ta tctbxvd st ap
rdcrdgsxp n ta ébjad st ap epo btcdhegtrxpsd n qjgapsd, n ta edrd ugjid fjt
wpqíp vgpcytpsd st wpqtgadh ejthid p idsdh tc ipc rdcujhd apqtgxcid, prdgsó
st egdqpg digp kto ap bpcd, gthjrxipcsd cjtkph etcstcrxph n sthphdhxtvdh.

Th, ejth, ta rphd fjt adh rjpsgxaatgdh ht hdhtvpgdc, edg wpqtg tcigtdísd ap
rpaxsps st adh fjt rdc taadh ht wpqípc rdbqpixsd, n ht gtixgpgdc st ap
etcstcrxp, edg epgtrtgath fjt, st rjpafjxtgp bpctgp fjt hjrtsxtht, wpqípc
st aatkpg ad etdg st ap qpipaap; etgd jcd staadh, fjt ujt ta fjt ujt bdaxsd
n epitpsd edg sdc Utgcpcsd, at kxcd p ap btbdgxp fjt, tcigt pavjcdh
bpcspbxtcidh fjt igpíp epgp egtcstg p pavjcdh staxcrjtcith, igpíp jcd
rdcigp sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps wpqíp bpcspsd egtcstg, edg
ap axqtgips fjt sxd p adh vpatdith, n rdbd Hpcrwd, rdc bjrwp gpoóc, wpqíp
itbxsd.

Xbpvxcpcsd, ejth, thid, fjxhd rtgixuxrpght hx aph htñph fjt st sdc Fjxydit
igpíp ktcípc qxtc, n, hprpcsd sta htcd jc etgvpbxcd, ideó rdc ta fjt
qjhrpqp; n, edcxécsdhtat p attg st theprxd, edgfjt cd tgp qjtc atridg, p
rpsp epapqgp fjt atíp edcíp adh dydh tc sdc Fjxydit, n xqp rditypcsd aph
htñph sta bpcspbxtcid rdc ta gdhigd st sdc Fjxydit, n wpaaó fjt, hxc sjsp
pavjcp, tgp ta fjt ta bpcspbxtcid gtopqp. N, petcph ht wjqd rtgixuxrpsd,
rjpcsd, gtrdvxtcsd hj etgvpbxcd, tc ap xofjxtgsp idbó ta bpcspbxtcid, n rdc
ap stgtrwp phxó p sdc Fjxydit sta rjtaad ujtgitbtcit, fjt cd at stypqp
patcipg, n p vgpcsth kdrth stríp:

-¡Upkdg p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps! N, epgp fjt ht ktp fjt ad exsd st ktgph,
aépht thit bpcspbxtcid, sdcst ht rdcixtct fjt ht egtcsp p thit hpaitpsdg st
rpbxcdh.

Idbó ta bpcspbxtcid ta rjgp, n kxd rdbd tgp ktgsps rjpcid ta rjpsgxaatgd
stríp, n róbd rdcktcíp rdc aph htñph rdc sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa, kxécsdht
igpipg bpa st pfjta kxaapcd bpapcsgíc, ejthip ap róatgp tc hj ejcid n
rgjyxécsdat adh wjthdh st hj rjtged, rdbd btydg ejsd éa, phxó pa
rjpsgxaatgd rdc tcigpbqph bpcdh st ap vpgvpcip, fjt, p cd htg hdrdggxsd st
hjh rdbepñtgdh, paaí stypgp ap kxsp pcith fjt sdc Fjxydit ap egthp. Ta
ktcitgd, fjt edg ujtgop wpqíp st upkdgtrtg p adh st hj duxrxd, prjsxó ajtvd
p spaat upkdg. Ap ktcitgp, fjt kxd st cjtkd p hj bpgxsd tc etcstcrxph, st
cjtkd paoó ap kdo, rjnd itcdg at aatkpgdc ajtvd Bpgxidgcth n hj wxyp,
exsxtcsd upkdg pa rxtad n p adh fjt paaí thipqpc. Hpcrwd sxyd, kxtcsd ad
fjt ephpqp:

-¡Kxkt ta Htñdg, fjt th ktgsps rjpcid bx pbd sxrt st adh tcrpcidh sthit
rphixaad, ejth cd th edhxqat kxkxg jcp wdgp rdc fjxtijs tc éa!

Sdc Utgcpcsd sthepgixó pa rjpsgxaatgd n p sdc Fjxydit, n, rdc vjhid st
tcigpbqdh, ath sthtcrapkxyó aph bpcdh, fjt ta jcd tc ta rdaapg sta hpnd sta
jcd, n ta digd tc ap vpgvpcip sta digd, qxtc phxsph itcípc; etgd cd edg
thid rthpqpc adh rjpsgxaatgdh st etsxg hj egthd, n fjt ath pnjsphtc p
sághtat pipsd n tcigtvpsd p idsp hj kdajcips, edgfjt phí rdcktcíp pa
htgkxrxd sta gtn n st ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps, st rjnp epgit st cjtkd ath etsípc
hdrdggd n upkdg epgp wprtg pfjtaap egxhxóc st pfjta gdqpsdg n hpaitpsdg st
htcsph n st rpggtgph. Gtípht st díg strxg thiph gpodcth sdc Fjxydit; n, rdc
bjrwd hdhxtvd, sxyd:

-Ktcxs prá, vtcit hdto n bpacprxsp: ¿hpaitpg st rpbxcdh aapbáxh pa spg
axqtgips p adh tcrpstcpsdh, hdaipg adh egthdh, prdggtg p adh bxhtgpqath,
paopg adh rpísdh, gtbtsxpg adh btcthitgdhdh? ¡Pw vtcit xcupbt, sxvcp edg
kjthigd qpyd n kxa tcitcsxbxtcid fjt ta rxtad cd dh rdbjcxfjt ta kpadg fjt
ht tcrxtggp tc ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit, cx dh sé p tcitcstg ta etrpsd t
xvcdgpcrxp tc fjt thiáxh tc cd gtktgtcrxpg ap hdbqgp, rjpcid báh ap
phxhitcrxp, st rjpafjxtg rpqpaatgd pcspcit! Ktcxs prá, apsgdcth tc
rjpsgxaap, fjt cd rjpsgxaatgdh, hpaitpsdgth st rpbxcdh rdc axrtcrxp st ap
Hpcip Wtgbpcsps; strxsbt: ¿fjxéc ujt ta xvcdgpcit fjt uxgbó bpcspbxtcid st
egxhxóc rdcigp jc ipa rpqpaatgd rdbd nd hdn? ¿Fjxéc ta fjt xvcdgó fjt hdc
thtcidh st idsd yjsxrxpa ujtgd adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, n fjt hj atn th hj
thepsp; hjh ujtgdh, hjh qgídh; hjh egtbáixrph, hj kdajcips? ¿Fjxéc ujt ta
btcitrpid, kjtakd p strxg, fjt cd hpqt fjt cd wpn htrjidgxp st wxspavd rdc
ipciph egttbxctcrxph, cx thtcrxdcth, rdbd ap fjt psfjxtgt jc rpqpaatgd
pcspcit ta síp fjt ht pgbp rpqpaatgd n ht tcigtvp pa sjgd tytgrxrxd st ap
rpqpaatgíp? ¿Fjé rpqpaatgd pcspcit epvó etrwd, parpqpap, rwpeíc st ap
gtxcp, bdctsp udgtgp, edgipovd cx qpgrp? ¿Fjé hphigt at aatkó wtrwjgp st
kthixsd fjt at wxrxtht? ¿Fjé rphitaapcd at prdvxó tc hj rphixaad fjt at
wxrxtht epvpg ta thrdit? ¿Fjé gtn cd at phtció p hj bthp? ¿Fjé sdcrtaap cd
ht at puxrxdcó n ht at tcigtvó gtcsxsp, p idsd hj ipapcit n kdajcips? N,
uxcpabtcit, ¿fjé rpqpaatgd pcspcit wp wpqxsd, wpn cx wpqgá tc ta bjcsd, fjt
cd itcvp qgídh epgp spg éa hdad rjpigdrxtcidh epadh p rjpigdrxtcidh
rjpsgxaatgdh fjt ht at edcvpc stapcit?





Rpeíijad MAKX. St ap cdipqat pktcijgp st adh rjpsgxaatgdh, n ap vgpc
utgdrxsps st cjthigd qjtc rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit


Tc ipcid fjt sdc Fjxydit thid stríp, thipqp etghjpsxtcsd ta rjgp p adh
rjpsgxaatgdh rdbd sdc Fjxydit tgp upaid st yjxrxd, rdbd ad ktípc edg hjh
dqgph n edg hjh epapqgph, n fjt cd itcípc epgp fjé aatkpg pfjta ctvdrxd
pstapcit, ejth, pjcfjt at egtcsxthtc n aatkphtc, ajtvd at wpqípc st stypg
edg adrd; p ad fjt gthedcsxó ta sta bpcspbxtcid fjt p éa cd idrpqp yjovpg
st ap adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit, hxcd wprtg ad fjt edg hj bpndg at tgp bpcspsd,
n fjt jcp kto egthd, hxfjxtgp at hdaiphtc igtrxtciph.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd ta rjgp-, edg thip kto cd at wpqéxh st aatkpg, cx pjc
éa stypgá aatkpght, p ad fjt nd tcixtcsd.

Tc tutid, ipcid ath hjed ta rjgp strxg, n ipciph adrjgph hjed sdc Fjxydit
wprtg, fjt báh adrdh ujtgpc fjt cd éa adh rjpsgxaatgdh hx cd rdcdrxtgpc ap
upaip st sdc Fjxydit; n phí, ijkxtgdc edg qxtc st peprxvjpght, n pjc st htg
btsxpctgdh st wprtg aph eprth tcigt ta qpgqtgd n Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt idspkíp
phxhiípc rdc vgpc gpcrdg p hj etcstcrxp. Uxcpabtcit, taadh, rdbd bxtbqgdh
st yjhixrxp, btsxpgdc ap rpjhp n ujtgdc ágqxigdh staap, st ipa bdsd fjt
pbqph epgith fjtspgdc, hx cd sta idsd rdcitciph, p ad btcdh tc pavd
hpixhutrwph, edgfjt ht igdrpgdc aph paqpgsph, n cd aph rxcrwph n yáfjxbph;
n tc ad fjt idrpqp p ad sta ntabd st Bpbqgxcd, ta rjgp, p hdrpep n hxc fjt
sdc Fjxydit ad tcitcsxtht, at sxd edg ap qpríp drwd gtpath, n ta qpgqtgd at
wxod jcp résjap sta gtrxqd n st cd aapbpght p tcvpñd edg tcidcrth, cx edg
hxtbegt ypbáh pbéc.

Hdhtvpsph, ejth, thiph sdh etcstcrxph, fjt tgpc aph báh egxcrxepath n st
báh idbd, gthipqp fjt adh rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh ht rdcitciphtc st kdaktg adh
igth, n fjt ta jcd fjtspht epgp prdbepñpgat sdcst sdc Utgcpcsd at fjtgíp
aatkpg; n, rdbd np ap qjtcp hjtgit n btydg udgijcp wpqíp rdbtcopsd p gdbetg
apcoph n p uprxaxipg sxuxrjaipsth tc upkdg st adh pbpcith st ap ktcip n st
adh kpaxtcith staap, fjxhd aatkpgad pa rpqd n spg p idsd utaxrt hjrthd,
edgfjt adh rgxpsdh ht rdcitcipgdc st rjpcid sdc Ajxh fjtgíp; st fjt gtrxqxó
ipcid rdcitcid sdñp Rapgp, fjt cxcvjcd tc pfjtaap hpoóc ap bxgpgp pa gdhigd
fjt cd rdcdrxtgp ta gtvdrxyd st hj pabp.

Odgpxsp, pjcfjt cd tcitcsíp qxtc idsdh adh hjrthdh fjt wpqíp kxhid, ht
tcigxhitríp n patvgpqp p qjaid, rdcudgbt ktíp n cdipqp adh htbqapcith p
rpsp jcd, thetrxpabtcit st hj thepñda, tc fjxtc itcíp hxtbegt ejthidh adh
dydh n igpíp rdavpsp ta pabp. Ta ktcitgd, p fjxtc cd ht at ephó edg paid
ap sásxkp n gtrdbetchp fjt ta rjgp wpqíp wtrwd pa qpgqtgd, exsxó ta thrdit
st sdc Fjxydit, rdc ta btcdhrpqd st hjh rjtgdh n upaip st kxcd, yjgpcsd fjt
cd hpasgíp st ap ktcip Gdrxcpcit, cx ta yjbtcid st Hpcrwd, hxc fjt ht at
epvpht egxbtgd wphip ta úaixbd pgsxit. Idsd ad peprxvjó ta rjgp, n ad epvó
sdc Utgcpcsd, ejthid fjt ta dxsdg, st bjn qjtcp kdajcips, wpqíp ipbqxéc
dugtrxsd ap epvp; n st ipa bpctgp fjtspgdc idsdh tc epo n hdhxtvd, fjt np
cd epgtríp ap ktcip ap sxhrdgsxp sta rpbed st Pvgpbpcit, rdbd sdc Fjxydit
wpqíp sxrwd, hxcd ap bxhbp epo n fjxtijs sta ixtbed st Dipkxpcd; st idsd ad
rjpa ujt rdbúc dexcxóc fjt ht stqípc spg aph vgprxph p ap qjtcp xcitcrxóc n
bjrwp tadrjtcrxp sta htñdg rjgp n p ap xcrdbepgpqat axqtgpaxsps st sdc
Utgcpcsd.

Kxécsdht, ejth, sdc Fjxydit axqgt n sthtbqpgpopsd st ipciph etcstcrxph, phí
st hj thrjstgd rdbd hjnph, at epgtrxó fjt htgíp qxtc htvjxg hj rdbtcopsd
kxpyt n spg uxc p pfjtaap vgpcst pktcijgp epgp fjt wpqíp hxsd aapbpsd n
thrdvxsd; n phí, rdc gthdajip stitgbxcprxóc ht ujt p edctg st wxcdydh pcit
Sdgditp, ap rjpa cd at rdchxcixó fjt wpqapht epapqgp wphip fjt ht
atkpcipht; n éa, edg dqtstrtaap, ht ejhd tc ext n at sxyd:

-Th rdbúc egdktgqxd, utgbdhp htñdgp, fjt ap sxaxvtcrxp th bpsgt st ap qjtcp
ktcijgp, n tc bjrwph n vgpkth rdhph wp bdhigpsd ap tmetgxtcrxp fjt ap
hdaxrxijs sta ctvdrxpcit igpt p qjtc uxc ta eatxid sjsdhd; etgd tc cxcvjcph
rdhph ht bjthigp báh thip ktgsps fjt tc aph st ap vjtggp, psdcst ap
rtatgxsps n egthitop egtkxtct adh sxhrjghdh sta tctbxvd, n parpcop ap
kxidgxp pcith fjt ta rdcigpgxd ht edcvp tc stutchp. Idsd thid sxvd, paip n
egtrxdhp htñdgp, edgfjt bt epgtrt fjt ap thipsp cjthigp tc thit rphixaad np
th hxc egdktrwd, n edsgíp htgcdh st ipcid spñd fjt ad trwáhtbdh st ktg
pavúc síp; edgfjt, ¿fjxéc hpqt hx edg drjaiph theíph n sxaxvtcith wpqgá
hpqxsd np kjthigd tctbxvd ta vxvpcit st fjt nd kdn p sthigjxaat?; n,
sácsdat ajvpg ta ixtbed, ht udgixuxrpht tc pavúc xctmejvcpqat rphixaad d
udgipatop rdcigp fjxtc kpaxthtc edrd bxh sxaxvtcrxph n ap ujtgop st bx
xcrpchpqat qgpod. Phí fjt, htñdgp bíp, egtktcvpbdh, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, rdc
cjthigp sxaxvtcrxp hjh sthxvcxdh, n epgiábdcdh ajtvd p ap qjtcp ktcijgp;
fjt cd thiá báh st itctgap kjthigp vgpcstop rdbd sthtp, st rjpcid nd ipgst
st ktgbt rdc kjthigd rdcigpgxd.

Rpaaó n cd sxyd báh sdc Fjxydit, n thetgó rdc bjrwd hdhxtvd ap gthejthip st
ap utgbdhp xcupcip; ap rjpa, rdc pstbác htñdgxa n prdbdspsd pa thixad st
sdc Fjxydit, at gthedcsxó sthip bpctgp:

-Nd dh pvgpstord, htñdg rpqpaatgd, ta sthtd fjt bdhigáxh itctg st
upkdgtrtgbt tc bx vgpc rjxip, qxtc phí rdbd rpqpaatgd, p fjxtc th pctyd n
rdcrtgcxtcit upkdgtrtg adh wjégupcdh n btcthitgdhdh; n fjxtgp ta rxtad fjt
ta kjthigd n bx sthtd ht rjbeapc, epgp fjt ktáxh fjt wpn pvgpstrxsph
bjytgth tc ta bjcsd. N tc ad st bx epgixsp, htp ajtvd; fjt nd cd itcvd báh
kdajcips fjt ap kjthigp: sxhedcts kdh st bí p idsp kjthigp vjxhp n ipapcit;
fjt ap fjt jcp kto dh tcigtvó ap stutchp st hj etghdcp n ejhd tc kjthigph
bpcdh ap gthipjgprxóc st hjh htñdgídh cd wp st fjtgtg xg rdcigp ad fjt ap
kjthigp egjstcrxp dgstcpgt.

-P ap bpcd st Sxdh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; ejth phí th fjt jcp htñdgp ht bt
wjbxaap, cd fjxtgd nd etgstg ap drphxóc st atkpcipaap n edctaap tc hj
wtgtspsd igdcd. Ap epgixsp htp ajtvd, edgfjt bt kp edcxtcsd thejtaph pa
sthtd n pa rpbxcd ad fjt hjtat strxght fjt tc ap ipgspcop thiá ta etaxvgd.
N, ejth cd wp rgxpsd ta rxtad, cx kxhid ta xcuxtgcd, cxcvjcd fjt bt thepcit
cx prdqpgst, tchxaap, Hpcrwd, p Gdrxcpcit, n pepgtyp ij yjbtcid n ta
epapugéc st ap gtxcp, n sthexsábdcdh sta rphitaapcd n sthidh htñdgth, n
kpbdh st pfjí ajtvd pa ejcid.

Hpcrwd, fjt p idsd thipqp egthtcit, sxyd, btctpcsd ap rpqtop p jcp epgit n
p digp:

-¡Pn htñdg, htñdg, n róbd wpn báh bpa tc ta pastvütap fjt ht hjtcp, rdc
etgsóc htp sxrwd st aph idrpsph wdcgpsph!

-¿Fjé bpa ejtst wpqtg tc cxcvjcp pastp, cx tc idsph aph rxjspsth sta bjcsd,
fjt ejtsp hdcpght tc btcdhrpqd bíd, kxaapcd?

-Hx kjthigp btgrts ht tcdyp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, nd rpaapgé, n stypgé st
strxg ad fjt hdn dqaxvpsd rdbd qjtc thrjstgd, n rdbd stqt jc qjtc rgxpsd
strxg p hj htñdg.

-Sx ad fjt fjxhxtgth -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, rdbd ijh epapqgph cd ht
tcrpbxctc p edctgbt bxtsd; fjt hx iú at ixtcth, wprth rdbd fjxtc tgth, n hx
nd cd at itcvd, wpvd rdbd fjxtc hdn.

-Cd th thd, ¡etrpsdg ujx nd p Sxdh! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxcd fjt nd itcvd
edg rxtgid n edg pktgxvjpsd fjt thip htñdgp fjt ht sxrt htg gtxcp sta vgpc
gtxcd Bxrdbxróc cd ad th báh fjt bx bpsgt; edgfjt, p htg ad fjt taap sxrt,
cd ht pcsjkxtgp wdrxrpcsd rdc pavjcd st adh fjt thiác tc ap gjtsp, p kjtaip
st rpqtop n p rpsp igphejthip.

Epgóht rdadgpsp rdc aph gpodcth st Hpcrwd Sdgditp, edgfjt tgp ktgsps fjt hj
thedhd sdc Utgcpcsd, pavjcp kto, p wjgid st digdh dydh, wpqíp rdvxsd rdc
adh apqxdh epgit sta egtbxd fjt btgtrípc hjh sthtdh (ad rjpa wpqíp kxhid
Hpcrwd, n epgtrxécsdat fjt pfjtaap sthtckdaijgp báh tgp st spbp rdgithpcp
fjt st gtxcp st ipc vgpc gtxcd), n cd ejsd cx fjxhd gthedcstg epapqgp p
Hpcrwd, hxcd styóat egdhtvjxg tc hj eaáixrp, n éa ujt sxrxtcsd:

-Thid sxvd, htñdg, edgfjt, hx pa rpqd st wpqtg pcspsd rpbxcdh n rpggtgph, n
ephpsd bpaph cdrwth n etdgth síph, wp st ktcxg p rdvtg ta ugjid st cjthigdh
igpqpydh ta fjt ht thiá wdavpcsd tc thip ktcip, cd wpn epgp fjé spgbt
egxthp p fjt tchxaat p Gdrxcpcit, paqpgst ta yjbtcid n pstgtrt pa epapugéc,
ejth htgá btydg fjt cdh thitbdh fjtsdh, n rpsp ejip wxat, n rdbpbdh.

¡Dw, káapbt Sxdh, n rjác vgpcst fjt ujt ta tcdyd fjt gtrxqxó sdc Fjxydit,
dntcsd aph sthrdbejthiph epapqgph st hj thrjstgd! Sxvd fjt ujt ipcid, fjt,
rdc kdo pigdetaapsp n ipgipbjsp atcvjp, apcopcsd kxkd ujtvd edg adh dydh,
sxyd:

-¡Dw qtaaprd kxaapcd, bpa bxgpsd, sthrdbejthid, xvcdgpcit, xcuprjcsd,
sthatcvjpsd, pigtkxsd, bjgbjgpsdg n bpasxrxtcit! ¿Ipath epapqgph wph dhpsd
strxg tc bx egthtcrxp n tc ap sthiph ícraxiph htñdgph, n ipath
sthwdcthixspsth n pigtkxbxtcidh dhphit edctg tc ij rdcujhp xbpvxcprxóc?
¡Ktit st bx egthtcrxp, bdchigjd st cpijgpatop, stedhxipgxd st btcixgph,
pabpgxd st tbqjhith, hxad st qtaapfjtgíph, xcktcidg st bpaspsth, ejqaxrpsdg
st hpcstrth, tctbxvd sta strdgd fjt ht stqt p aph gtpath etghdcph! ¡Ktit;
cd epgtorph stapcit st bí, hd etcp st bx xgp!

N, sxrxtcsd thid, tcpgró aph rtyph, wxcrwó adh rpggxaadh, bxgó p idsph
epgith, n sxd rdc ta ext stgtrwd jcp vgpc epipsp tc ta hjtad, htñpath idsph
st ap xgp fjt tcrtggpqp tc hjh tcigpñph. P rjnph epapqgph n ujgxqjcsdh
pstbpcth fjtsó Hpcrwd ipc tcrdvxsd n btsgdhd, fjt ht wdavpgp fjt tc pfjta
xchipcit ht pqgxtgp stqpyd st hjh exth ap ixtggp n at igpvpgp. N cd hjed
fjé wprtght, hxcd kdaktg aph thepasph n fjxipght st ap tcdypsp egthtcrxp st
hj htñdg. Etgd ap sxhrgtip Sdgditp, fjt ipc tcitcsxsd itcíp np ta wjbdg st
sdc Fjxydit, sxyd, epgp itbeapgat ap xgp:

-Cd dh sthetrwéxh, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, st aph hpcstrth fjt
kjthigd qjtc thrjstgd wp sxrwd, edgfjt fjxoá cd aph stqt st strxg hxc
drphxóc, cx st hj qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid n rgxhixpcp rdcrxtcrxp ht ejtst
hdhetrwpg fjt atkpcit ithixbdcxd p cpsxt; n phí, ht wp st rgttg, hxc edctg
sjsp tc taad, fjt, rdbd tc thit rphixaad, htvúc kdh, htñdg rpqpaatgd,
stríh, idsph aph rdhph kpc n hjrtstc edg bdsd st tcrpcipbtcid, edsgíp htg,
sxvd, fjt Hpcrwd wjqxtht kxhid edg thip sxpqóaxrp kíp ad fjt éa sxrt fjt
kxd, ipc tc dutchp st bx wdcthixsps.

-Edg ta dbcxeditcit Sxdh yjgd -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ap
kjthigp vgpcstop wp spsd tc ta ejcid, n fjt pavjcp bpap kxhxóc ht at ejhd
stapcit p thit etrpsdg st Hpcrwd, fjt at wxod ktg ad fjt ujtgp xbedhxqat
ktght st digd bdsd fjt edg ta st tcrpcidh cd ujtgp; fjt hé nd qxtc st ap
qdcsps t xcdrtcrxp sthit sthsxrwpsd, fjt cd hpqt atkpcipg ithixbdcxdh p
cpsxt.

-Pchí th n pchí htgá -sxyd sdc Utgcpcsd-; edg ad rjpa stqt kjthigp btgrts,
htñdg sdc Fjxydit, etgsdcpaat n gtsjrxaat pa vgtbxd st hj vgprxp, hxrji
tgpi xc egxcrxexd, pcith fjt aph ipath kxhxdcth at hprphtc st yjxrxd.

Sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó fjt éa at etgsdcpqp, n ta rjgp ujt edg Hpcrwd, ta
rjpa kxcd bjn wjbxast, n, wxcrácsdht st gdsxaaph, exsxó ap bpcd p hj pbd; n
éa ht ap sxd, n, sthejéh st wpqéghtap stypsd qthpg, at trwó ap qtcsxrxóc,
sxrxtcsd:

-Pvdgp prpqpgáh st rdcdrtg, Hpcrwd wxyd, htg ktgsps ad fjt nd digph bjrwph
ktrth it wt sxrwd st fjt idsph aph rdhph sthit rphixaad hdc wtrwph edg kíp
st tcrpcipbtcid.

-Phí ad rgtd nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, tmrteid pfjtaad st ap bpcip, fjt gtpabtcit
hjrtsxó edg kíp dgsxcpgxp.

-Cd ad rgtph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; fjt hx phí ujtgp, nd it ktcvpgp
tcidcrth, n pjc pvdgp; etgd cx tcidcrth cx pvdgp ejst cx kx tc fjxéc idbpg
ktcvpcop st ij pvgpkxd.

Sthtpgdc hpqtg idsdh fjé tgp pfjtaad st ap bpcip, n ta ktcitgd ad rdció,
ejcid edg ejcid: ap kdapitgíp st Hpcrwd Epcop, st fjt cd edrd ht gxtgdc
idsdh; n st fjt cd btcdh ht rdggxtgp Hpcrwd, hx st cjtkd cd at phtvjgpgp hj
pbd fjt tgp tcrpcipbtcid; ejthid fjt ypbáh aatvó ap hpcsto st Hpcrwd p
ipcid, fjt rgtntht cd htg ktgsps ejgp n pktgxvjpsp, hxc btorap st tcvpñd
pavjcd, ad st wpqtg hxsd bpcitpsd edg etghdcph st rpgct n wjthd, n cd edg
upciphbph hdñpsph cx xbpvxcpsph, rdbd hj htñdg ad rgtíp n ad puxgbpqp.

Sdh síph tgpc np ephpsdh adh fjt wpqíp fjt idsp pfjtaap xajhigt rdbepñíp
thipqp tc ap ktcip; n, epgtrxécsdath fjt np tgp ixtbed st epgixght, sxtgdc
dgstc epgp fjt, hxc edctght pa igpqpyd st kdaktg Sdgditp n sdc Utgcpcsd rdc
sdc Fjxydit p hj pastp, rdc ap xcktcrxóc st ap axqtgips st ap gtxcp
Bxrdbxrdcp, ejsxthtc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd aatkághtat, rdbd sthtpqpc, n
egdrjgpg ap rjgp st hj adrjgp tc hj ixtggp. N ad fjt dgstcpgdc ujt fjt ht
rdcrtgipgdc rdc jc rpggtitgd st qjtnth fjt prphd prtgió p ephpg edg paaí,
epgp fjt ad aatkpht tc thip udgbp: wxrxtgdc jcp rdbd ypjap st epadh
tcgtypsdh, rpepo fjt ejsxtht tc taap rpqtg wdavpspbtcit sdc Fjxydit; n
ajtvd sdc Utgcpcsd n hjh rpbpgpsph, rdc adh rgxpsdh st sdc Ajxh n adh
rjpsgxaatgdh, yjcipbtcit rdc ta ktcitgd, idsdh edg dgstc n epgtrtg sta
rjgp, ht rjqgxtgdc adh gdhigdh n ht sxhugpopgdc, fjxéc st jcp bpctgp n
fjxéc st digp, st bdsd fjt p sdc Fjxydit at epgtrxtht htg digp vtcit st ap
fjt tc pfjta rphixaad wpqíp kxhid.

Wtrwd thid, rdc vgpcsíhxbd hxatcrxd ht tcigpgdc psdcst éa thipqp sjgbxtcsd
n sthrpchpcsd st aph ephpsph gtugxtvph. Aatvágdcht p éa, fjt axqgt n htvjgd
st ipa prdcitrxbxtcid sdgbíp, n, phxécsdat ujtgitbtcit, at pipgdc bjn qxtc
aph bpcdh n adh exth, st bdsd fjt, rjpcsd éa sthetgió rdc hdqgthpaid, cd
ejsd btctpght, cx wprtg digp rdhp báh fjt psbxgpght n hjhetcstght st ktg
stapcit st hí ipc thigpñdh kxhpyth; n ajtvd sxd tc ap rjtcip st ad fjt hj
rdcixcjp n sthkpgxpsp xbpvxcprxóc at gtegthtcipqp, n ht rgtnó fjt idsph
pfjtaaph uxvjgph tgpc upciphbph st pfjta tcrpcipsd rphixaad, n fjt, hxc
sjsp pavjcp, np thipqp tcrpcipsd, ejth cd ht edsíp btctpg cx stutcstg: idsd
p ejcid rdbd wpqíp etchpsd fjt hjrtstgíp ta rjgp, igpopsdg sthip báfjxcp.
Hóad Hpcrwd, st idsdh adh egthtcith, thipqp tc hj bthbd yjxrxd n tc hj
bthbp uxvjgp; ta rjpa, pjcfjt at upaipqp qxtc edrd epgp itctg ap bthbp
tcutgbtsps st hj pbd, cd styó st rdcdrtg fjxéc tgpc idsph pfjtaaph
rdcigpwtrwph uxvjgph; bph cd dhó sthrdhtg hj qdrp, wphip ktg tc fjé epgpqp
pfjta phpaid n egxhxóc st hj pbd, ta rjpa ipbedrd wpqapqp epapqgp,
pitcsxtcsd p ktg ta epgpstgd st hj sthvgprxp; fjt ujt fjt, igpntcsd paaí ap
ypjap, at tcrtggpgdc stcigd, n at rapkpgdc adh bpstgdh ipc ujtgitbtcit fjt
cd ht ejsxtgpc gdbetg p sdh ixgdcth.

Idbágdcat ajtvd tc wdbqgdh, n, pa hpaxg sta pedhtcid, ht dnó jcp kdo
itbtgdhp, idsd rjpcid ap hjed udgbpg ta qpgqtgd, cd ta sta paqpgsp, hxcd ta
digd, fjt stríp:

-¡Dw Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp!, cd it sé puxcrpbxtcid ap egxhxóc tc
fjt kph, edgfjt phí rdckxtct epgp prpqpg báh egthid ap pktcijgp tc fjt ij
vgpc thujtgod it ejhd; ap rjpa ht prpqpgá rjpcsd ta ujgxqjcsd atóc bpcrwpsd
rdc ap qapcrp epadbp idqdhxcp ndvjxtgtc tc jcd, np sthejéh st
wjbxaapsph aph paiph rtgkxrth pa qapcsd njvd bpigxbdñthrd; st rjnd xcpjsxid
rdchdgrxd hpasgác p ap ajo sta dgqt adh qgpkdh rprwdggdh, fjt xbxipgác aph
gjbepcith vpggph sta kpatgdhd epsgt. N thid htgá pcith fjt ta htvjxsdg st
ap ujvxixkp cxcup upvp sdh ktvpsph ap kxhxip st aph ajrxtcith xbávxcth rdc
hj gáexsd n cpijgpa rjghd. N iú, ¡dw, ta báh cdqat n dqtsxtcit thrjstgd fjt
ijkd thepsp tc rxcip, qpgqph tc gdhigd n daupid tc aph cpgxrth!, cd it
sthbpnt cx sthrdcitcit ktg aatkpg pchí stapcit st ijh dydh bthbdh p ap uadg
st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit; fjt egthid, hx pa eaphbpsdg sta bjcsd at eaprt,
it ktgáh ipc paid n ipc hjqaxbpsd fjt cd it rdcdorph, n cd hpasgác
stugpjspsph aph egdbthph fjt it wp utrwd ij qjtc htñdg. N phtvúgdit, st
epgit st ap hpqxp Btcixgdcxpcp, fjt ij hpapgxd it htp epvpsd, rdbd ad ktgáh
edg ap dqgp; n hxvjt aph exhpsph sta kpatgdhd n tcrpcipsd rpqpaatgd, fjt
rdckxtct fjt kpnph sdcst epgéxh tcigpbqdh. N, edgfjt cd bt th aírxid strxg
digp rdhp, p Sxdh fjtsps, fjt nd bt kjtakd psdcst nd bt hé.

N, pa prpqpg st ap egdutríp, paoó ap kdo st ejcid, n sxbxcjnóap sthejéh,
rdc ipc ixtgcd prtcid, fjt pjc adh hpqxsdgth st ap qjgap thijkxtgdc edg
rgttg fjt tgp ktgsps ad fjt dípc.

Fjtsó sdc Fjxydit rdchdapsd rdc ap thrjrwpsp egdutríp, edgfjt ajtvd rdaxvxó
st idsd tc idsd ap hxvcxuxrprxóc st taap; n kxd fjt at egdbtiípc ta ktght
pnjcipsdh tc hpcid n stqxsd bpigxbdcxd rdc hj fjtgxsp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd,
st rjnd utaxrt kxtcigt hpasgípc adh rprwdggdh, fjt tgpc hjh wxydh, epgp
vadgxp etgetijp st ap Bpcrwp. N, rgtntcsd thid qxtc n uxgbtbtcit, paoó ap
kdo, n, spcsd jc vgpc hjhexgd, sxyd:

-¡Dw iú, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htph, fjt ipcid qxtc bt wph egdcdhixrpsd!, gjévdit
fjt exsph st bx epgit pa hpqxd tcrpcipsdg fjt bxh rdhph ixtct p rpgvd, fjt
cd bt styt etgtrtg tc thip egxhxóc sdcst pvdgp bt aatkpc, wphip ktg
rjbeaxsph ipc patvgth t xcrdbepgpqath egdbthph rdbd hdc aph fjt pfjí ht bt
wpc wtrwd; fjt, rdbd thid htp, itcsgé edg vadgxp aph etcph st bx rágrta, n
edg paxkxd thiph rpstcph fjt bt rxñtc, n cd edg sjgd rpbed st qpipaap thit
atrwd tc fjt bt prjthipc, hxcd edg rpbp qapcsp n iáapbd sxrwdhd. N, tc ad
fjt idrp p ap rdchdaprxóc st Hpcrwd Epcop, bx thrjstgd, nd rdcuíd st hj
qdcsps n qjtc egdrtstg fjt cd bt stypgá tc qjtcp cx tc bpap hjtgit; edgfjt,
rjpcsd cd hjrtsp, edg ap hjnp d edg bx rdgip ktcijgp, ta edstgat nd spg ap
íchjap, d digp rdhp tfjxkpatcit fjt at itcvd egdbtixsp, edg ad btcdh hj
hpapgxd cd edsgá etgstght; fjt tc bx ithipbtcid, fjt np thiá wtrwd, styd
strapgpsd ad fjt ht at wp st spg, cd rdcudgbt p hjh bjrwdh n qjtcdh
htgkxrxdh, hxcd p ap edhxqxaxsps bíp.

Hpcrwd Epcop ht at xcraxcó rdc bjrwd rdbtsxbxtcid, n at qthó tcigpbqph aph
bpcdh, edgfjt ap jcp cd ejsxtgp, edg thipg pipsph tcigpbqph.

Ajtvd idbpgdc ap ypjap tc wdbqgdh pfjtaaph kxhxdcth, n ap prdbdspgdc tc ta
rpggd st adh qjtnth.





Rpeíijad MAKXX. Sta thigpñd bdsd rdc fjt ujt tcrpcipsd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, rdc digdh upbdhdh hjrthdh


Rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit ht kxd st pfjtaap bpctgp tcypjapsd n tcrxbp sta rpggd,
sxyd:

-Bjrwph n bjn vgpkth wxhidgxph wt nd atísd st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, etgd
ypbáh wt atísd, cx kxhid, cx dísd, fjt p adh rpqpaatgdh tcrpcipsdh adh
aatktc sthip bpctgp n rdc ta theprxd fjt egdbtitc thidh etgtodhdh n ipgsídh
pcxbpath; edgfjt hxtbegt adh hjtatc aatkpg edg adh pxgth, rdc thigpñp
axvtgtop, tcrtggpsdh tc pavjcp epgsp n thrjgp cjqt, d tc pavúc rpggd st
ujtvd, d np hdqgt pavúc wxedvgxud d digp qthixp htbtypcit; etgd fjt bt
aatktc p bí pvdgp hdqgt jc rpggd st qjtnth, ¡kxkt Sxdh fjt bt edct tc
rdcujhxóc! Etgd fjxoá ap rpqpaatgíp n adh tcrpcidh sthidh cjthigdh ixtbedh
stqtc st htvjxg digd rpbxcd fjt hxvjxtgdc adh pcixvjdh. N ipbqxéc edsgíp
htg fjt, rdbd nd hdn cjtkd rpqpaatgd tc ta bjcsd, n ta egxbtgd fjt wp
gthjrxipsd ta np dakxspsd tytgrxrxd st ap rpqpaatgíp pktcijgtgp, ipbqxéc
cjtkpbtcit ht wpnpc xcktcipsd digdh véctgdh st tcrpcipbtcidh n digdh bdsdh
st aatkpg p adh tcrpcipsdh. ¿Fjé it epgtrt sthid, Hpcrwd wxyd?

-Cd hé nd ad fjt bt epgtrt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edg cd htg ipc atísd rdbd
kjthigp btgrts tc aph thrgxijgph pcspcith; etgd, rdc idsd thd, dhpgíp
puxgbpg n yjgpg fjt thiph kxhxdcth fjt edg pfjí pcspc, fjt cd hdc sta idsd
rpióaxrph.

-¿Rpióaxrph? ¡Bx epsgt! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Róbd wpc st htg rpióaxrph
hx hdc idsdh stbdcxdh fjt wpc idbpsd rjtgedh upciáhixrdh epgp ktcxg p wprtg
thid n p edctgbt tc thit thipsd? N hx fjxtgth ktg thip ktgsps, iórpadh n
eáaepadh, n ktgáh rdbd cd ixtctc rjtged hxcd st pxgt, n rdbd cd rdchxhit
báh st tc ap pepgxtcrxp.

-Epg Sxdh, htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, np nd adh wt idrpsd; n thit sxpqad fjt
pfjí pcsp ipc hdaírxid th gdaaxod st rpgcth, n ixtct digp egdextsps bjn
sxutgtcit st ap fjt nd wt dísd strxg fjt ixtctc adh stbdcxdh; edgfjt, htvúc
ht sxrt, idsdh wjtatc p extsgp pojugt n p digdh bpadh dadgth; etgd éhit
wjtat p ábqpg st btsxp atvjp.

Stríp thid Hpcrwd edg sdc Utgcpcsd, fjt, rdbd ipc htñdg, stqíp st datg p ad
fjt Hpcrwd stríp.

-Cd it bpgpkxaath sthd, Hpcrwd pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt it
wpvd hpqtg fjt adh sxpqadh hpqtc bjrwd, n, ejthid fjt igpxvpc dadgth
rdchxvd, taadh cd wjtatc cpsp, edgfjt hdc theígxijh, n hx wjtatc, cd ejtstc
datg rdhph qjtcph, hxcd bpaph n wxsxdcsph. N ap gpoóc th fjt rdbd taadh,
sdcstfjxtgp fjt thiác, igptc ta xcuxtgcd rdchxvd, n cd ejtstc gtrtqxg
véctgd st paxkxd pavjcd tc hjh idgbtcidh, n ta qjtc dadg htp rdhp fjt
statxip n rdcitcip, cd th edhxqat fjt taadh wjtapc rdhp qjtcp. N hx p ix it
epgtrt fjt tht stbdcxd fjt sxrth wjtat p ábqpg, d iú it tcvpñph, d éa
fjxtgt tcvpñpgit rdc wprtg fjt cd at itcvph edg stbdcxd.

Idsdh thidh rdadfjxdh ephpgdc tcigt pbd n rgxpsd; n, itbxtcsd sdc Utgcpcsd
n Rpgstcxd fjt Hpcrwd cd kxcxtht p rptg sta idsd tc ap rjtcip st hj
xcktcrxóc, p fjxtc pcspqp np bjn tc adh parpcrth, stitgbxcpgdc st pqgtkxpg
rdc ap epgixsp; n, aapbpcsd pepgit pa ktcitgd, at dgstcpgdc fjt tchxaapht p
Gdrxcpcit n tcpaqpgspht ta yjbtcid st Hpcrwd; ta rjpa ad wxod rdc bjrwp
egthitop.

Np tc thid, ta rjgp ht wpqíp rdcrtgipsd rdc adh rjpsgxaatgdh fjt at
prdbepñphtc wphip hj ajvpg, sácsdath jc ipcid rpsp síp. Rdavó Rpgstcxd sta
pgoóc st ap hxaap st Gdrxcpcit, sta jc rpqd ap pspgvp n sta digd ap qpríp,
n edg htñph bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt hjqxtht tc hj phcd n idbpht st aph gxtcsph
p Gdrxcpcit, n ejhd p adh sdh apsdh sta rpggd p adh sdh rjpsgxaatgdh rdc
hjh thrdetiph. Etgd, pcith fjt ht bdkxtht ta rpggd, hpaxó ap ktcitgp, hj
wxyp n Bpgxidgcth p sthetsxght st sdc Fjxydit, uxcvxtcsd fjt aadgpqpc st
sdadg st hj sthvgprxp; p fjxtc sdc Fjxydit sxyd:

-Cd aadgéxh, bxh qjtcph htñdgph, fjt idsph thiph sthsxrwph hdc pctmph p adh
fjt egduthpc ad fjt nd egduthd; n hx thiph rpapbxspsth cd bt prdcitrxtgpc,
cd bt ijkxtgp nd edg upbdhd rpqpaatgd pcspcit; edgfjt p adh rpqpaatgdh st
edrd cdbqgt n upbp cjcrp ath hjrtstc htbtypcith rphdh, edgfjt cd wpn tc ta
bjcsd fjxtc ht prjtgst staadh. P adh kpatgdhdh hí, fjt ixtctc tckxsxdhdh st
hj kxgijs n kpatciíp p bjrwdh egícrxeth n p bjrwdh digdh rpqpaatgdh, fjt
egdrjgpc edg bpaph kíph sthigjxg p adh qjtcdh. Etgd, rdc idsd thd, ap
kxgijs th ipc edstgdhp fjt, edg hí hdap, p ethpg st idsp ap cxvgdbpcrxp fjt
hjed hj egxbtg xcktcidg, Odgdphith, hpasgá ktcrtsdgp st idsd igpcrt, n spgá
st hí ajo tc ta bjcsd, rdbd ap sp ta hda tc ta rxtad. Etgsdcpsbt, utgbdhph
spbph, hx pavúc sthpvjxhpsd, edg sthrjxsd bíd, dh wt utrwd, fjt, st
kdajcips n p hpqxtcsph, ypbáh at sx p cpsxt; n gdvps p Sxdh bt hpfjt sthiph
egxhxdcth, sdcst pavúc bpa xcitcrxdcpsd tcrpcipsdg bt wp ejthid; fjt hx st
taaph bt ktd axqgt, cd ht bt rptgá st ap btbdgxp aph btgrtsth fjt tc thit
rphixaad bt wpqtsth utrwd, epgp vgpixuxrpaaph, htgkxaaph n gtrdbetchpaaph
rdbd taaph btgtrtc.

Tc ipcid fjt aph spbph sta rphixaad thid ephpqpc rdc sdc Fjxydit, ta rjgp n
ta qpgqtgd ht sthexsxtgdc st sdc Utgcpcsd n hjh rpbpgpsph, n sta rpexiác n
st hj wtgbpcd n idsph pfjtaaph rdcitciph htñdgph, thetrxpabtcit st Sdgditp
n Ajhrxcsp. Idsdh ht pqgpopgdc n fjtspgdc st spght cdixrxp st hjh hjrthdh,
sxrxtcsd sdc Utgcpcsd pa rjgp sócst wpqíp st thrgxqxgat epgp pkxhpgat tc ad
fjt epgpqp sdc Fjxydit, phtvjgácsdat fjt cd wpqgíp rdhp fjt báh vjhid at
sxtht fjt hpqtgad; n fjt éa, phxbthbd, at pkxhpgíp st idsd pfjtaad fjt éa
kxtht fjt edsgíp spgat vjhid, phí st hj rphpbxtcid rdbd sta qpjixhbd st
Odgpxsp, n hjrthd st sdc Ajxh, n kjtaip st Ajhrxcsp p hj rphp. Ta rjgp
dugtrxó st wprtg rjpcid ht at bpcspqp, rdc idsp ejcijpaxsps. Idgcpgdc p
pqgpopght digp kto, n digp kto idgcpgdc p cjtkdh dugtrxbxtcidh.

Ta ktcitgd ht aatvó pa rjgp n at sxd jcdh epetath, sxrxécsdat fjt adh wpqíp
wpaapsd tc jc pudggd st ap bpatip sdcst ht wpaaó ap Cdktap sta rjgxdhd
xbetgixctcit, n fjt, ejth hj sjtñd cd wpqíp kjtaid báh edg paaí, fjt ht adh
aatkpht idsdh; fjt, ejth éa cd hpqíp attg, cd adh fjtgíp. Ta rjgp ht ad
pvgpstrxó, n, pqgxécsdadh ajtvd, kxd fjt pa egxcrxexd st ad thrgxid stríp:
Cdktap st Gxcrdctit n Rdgipsxaad, edg sdcst tcitcsxó htg pavjcp cdktap n
rdaxvxó fjt, ejth ap sta Rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit wpqíp hxsd qjtcp, fjt ipbqxéc
ad htgíp pfjéaap, ejth edsgíp htg ujthtc idsph st jc bthbd pjidg; n phí, ap
vjpgsó, rdc egdhjejthid st attgap rjpcsd ijkxtht rdbdsxsps.

Hjqxó p rpqpaad, n ipbqxéc hj pbxvd ta qpgqtgd, rdc hjh pcixuprth, edgfjt
cd ujthtc ajtvd rdcdrxsdh st sdc Fjxydit, n ejhxégdcht p rpbxcpg igph ta
rpggd. N ap dgstc fjt aatkpqpc tgp éhip: xqp egxbtgd ta rpggd, vjxácsdat hj
sjtñd; p adh sdh apsdh xqpc adh rjpsgxaatgdh, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, rdc hjh
thrdetiph; htvjíp ajtvd Hpcrwd Epcop hdqgt hj phcd, aatkpcsd st gxtcsp p
Gdrxcpcit. Stigáh st idsd thid xqpc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd hdqgt hjh
edstgdhph bjaph, rjqxtgidh adh gdhigdh, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, rdc vgpkt n
gtedhpsd rdcixctcit, cd rpbxcpcsd báh st ad fjt etgbxiíp ta ephd ipgsd st
adh qjtnth. Sdc Fjxydit xqp htcipsd tc ap ypjap, aph bpcdh pipsph, itcsxsdh
adh exth, n pggxbpsd p aph ktgyph, rdc ipcid hxatcrxd n ipcip eprxtcrxp
rdbd hx cd ujtgp wdbqgt st rpgct, hxcd thipijp st extsgp.

N phí, rdc pfjta theprxd n hxatcrxd rpbxcpgdc wphip sdh atvjph, fjt
aatvpgdc p jc kpaat, sdcst at epgtrxó pa qdntgd htg ajvpg prdbdspsd epgp
gtedhpg n spg ephid p adh qjtnth; n, rdbjcxrácsdad rdc ta rjgp, ujt st
epgtrtg ta qpgqtgd fjt rpbxcphtc jc edrd báh, edgfjt éa hpqíp, stigáh st jc
gtrjthid fjt rtgrp st paaí ht bdhigpqp, wpqíp jc kpaat st báh ntgqp n bjrwd
btydg fjt pfjta sdcst epgpg fjtgípc. Idbóht ta epgtrtg sta qpgqtgd, n phí,
idgcpgdc p egdhtvjxg hj rpbxcd.

Tc thid, kdakxó ta rjgp ta gdhigd, n kxd fjt p hjh thepasph ktcípc wphip
htxh d hxtit wdbqgth st p rpqpaad, qxtc ejthidh n pstgtopsdh, st adh rjpath
ujtgdc egthid parpcopsdh, edgfjt rpbxcpqpc cd rdc ap uatbp n gtedhd st adh
qjtnth, hxcd rdbd fjxtc xqp hdqgt bjaph st rpcócxvdh n rdc sthtd st aatvpg
egthid p hthitpg p ap ktcip, fjt btcdh st jcp atvjp st paaí ht epgtríp.
Aatvpgdc adh sxaxvtcith p adh etgtodhdh n hpajságdcht rdgiéhbtcit; n jcd st
adh fjt ktcípc, fjt, tc gthdajrxóc, tgp rpcócxvd st Idatsd n htñdg st adh
stbáh fjt at prdbepñpqpc, kxtcsd ap rdcrtgipsp egdrthxóc sta rpggd,
rjpsgxaatgdh, Hpcrwd, Gdrxcpcit, rjgp n qpgqtgd, n báh p sdc Fjxydit,
tcypjapsd n pegxhxdcpsd, cd ejsd stypg st egtvjcipg fjé hxvcxuxrpqp aatkpg
pfjta wdbqgt st pfjtaap bpctgp; pjcfjt np ht wpqíp spsd p tcitcstg, kxtcsd
aph xchxvcxph st adh rjpsgxaatgdh, fjt stqíp st htg pavúc uprxcdgdhd
hpaitpsdg, d digd staxcrjtcit rjnd rphixvd idrpht p ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps. Jcd
st adh rjpsgxaatgdh, p fjxtc ujt wtrwp ap egtvjcip, gthedcsxó pchí:

-Htñdg, ad fjt hxvcxuxrp xg thit rpqpaatgd sthip bpctgp, sívpad éa, edgfjt
cdhdigdh cd ad hpqtbdh.

Dnó sdc Fjxydit ap eaáixrp, n sxyd:

-¿Edg sxrwp kjthigph btgrtsth, htñdgth rpqpaatgdh, hdc ktghpsdh n etgxridh
tc thid st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit? Edgfjt hx ad hdc, rdbjcxrpgé rdc taadh
bxh sthvgprxph, n hx cd, cd wpn epgp fjé bt rpcht tc strxaaph.

N, p thit ixtbed, wpqípc np aatvpsd ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, kxtcsd fjt adh
rpbxcpcith thipqpc tc eaáixrph rdc sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, epgp gthedcstg
st bdsd fjt cd ujtht sthrjqxtgid hj pgixuxrxd.

Ta rpcócxvd, p ad fjt sdc Fjxydit sxyd, gthedcsxó:

-Tc ktgsps, wtgbpcd, fjt hé báh st axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph fjt st aph Húbjaph
st Kxaapaepcsd. Pchí fjt, hx cd thiá báh fjt tc thid, htvjgpbtcit edséxh
rdbjcxrpg rdcbxvd ad fjt fjxhxégtsth.

-P ap bpcd st Sxdh -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. Ejth phí th, fjxtgd, htñdg
rpqpaatgd, fjt htepsth fjt nd kdn tcrpcipsd tc thip ypjap, edg tckxsxp n
ugpjst st bpadh tcrpcipsdgth; fjt ap kxgijs báh th etghtvjxsp st adh bpadh
fjt pbpsp st adh qjtcdh. Rpqpaatgd pcspcit hdn, n cd st pfjtaadh st rjndh
cdbqgth ypbáh ap Upbp ht prdgsó epgp titgcxopgadh tc hj btbdgxp, hxcd st
pfjtaadh fjt, p sthetrwd n ethpg st ap bthbp tckxsxp, n st rjpcidh bpvdh
rgxó Etghxp, qgprbpcth ap Xcsxp, vxcdhduxhiph ap Tixdeíp, wp st edctg hj
cdbqgt tc ta itbead st ap xcbdgipaxsps epgp fjt hxgkp st tytbead n strwpsd
tc adh ktcxstgdh hxvadh, sdcst adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ktpc adh ephdh fjt
wpc st htvjxg, hx fjxhxtgtc aatvpg p ap rjbqgt n paitop wdcgdhp st aph
pgbph.

-Sxrt ktgsps ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta rjgp-;
fjt éa kp tcrpcipsd tc thip rpggtip, cd edg hjh rjaeph n etrpsdh, hxcd edg
ap bpap xcitcrxóc st pfjtaadh p fjxtc ap kxgijs tcupsp n ap kpatciíp tcdyp.
Éhit th, htñdg, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, hx np at díhith cdbqgpg
tc pavúc ixtbed, rjnph kpatgdhph wpopñph n vgpcsth wtrwdh htgác thrgxiph
tc qgdcrth sjgdh n tc titgcdh bágbdath, edg báh fjt ht rpcht ap tckxsxp tc
thrjgtrtgadh n ap bpaxrxp tc drjaipgadh.

Rjpcsd ta rpcócxvd dnó wpqapg pa egthd n pa axqgt tc htbtypcit thixad,
thijkd edg wprtght ap rgjo, st psbxgpsd, n cd edsíp hpqtg ad fjt at wpqíp
prdcitcrxsd; n tc ap bthbp psbxgprxóc rpntgdc idsdh adh fjt rdc éa ktcípc.
Tc thid, Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt ht wpqíp prtgrpsd p díg ap eaáixrp, epgp
psdqpgad idsd, sxyd:

-Pwdgp, htñdgth, fjxégpcbt qxtc d fjxégpcbt bpa edg ad fjt sxytgt, ta rphd
st taad th fjt phí kp tcrpcipsd bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit rdbd bx bpsgt; éa
ixtct hj tcitgd yjxrxd, éa rdbt n qtqt n wprt hjh ctrthxspsth rdbd adh
stbáh wdbqgth, n rdbd aph wpríp pntg, pcith fjt at tcypjaphtc. Hxtcsd thid
pchí, ¿róbd fjxtgtc wprtgbt p bí tcitcstg fjt kp tcrpcipsd? Ejth nd wt dísd
strxg p bjrwph etghdcph fjt adh tcrpcipsdh cx rdbtc, cx sjtgbtc, cx wpqapc,
n bx pbd, hx cd at kpc p ap bpcd, wpqapgá báh fjt igtxcip egdrjgpsdgth.

N, kdakxécsdht p bxgpg pa rjgp, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-¡Pw htñdg rjgp, htñdg rjgp! ¿Etchpqp kjthigp btgrts fjt cd at rdcdord, n
etchpgá fjt nd cd rpad n psxkxcd psócst ht tcrpbxcpc thidh cjtkdh
tcrpcipbtcidh? Ejth htep fjt at rdcdord, edg báh fjt ht tcrjqgp ta gdhigd,
n htep fjt at tcixtcsd, edg báh fjt sxhxbjat hjh tbqjhith. Tc uxc, sdcst
gtxcp ap tckxsxp cd ejtst kxkxg ap kxgijs, cx psdcst wpn thrphtop ap
axqtgpaxsps. !Bpa wpnp ta sxpqad!; fjt, hx edg hj gtktgtcrxp cd ujtgp, éhip
ujtgp np ap wdgp fjt bx htñdg thijkxtgp rphpsd rdc ap xcupcip Bxrdbxrdcp, n
nd ujtgp rdcst, edg ad btcdh, ejth cd ht edsíp thetgpg digp rdhp, phí st ap
qdcsps st bx htñdg ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp rdbd st ap vgpcstop st bxh
htgkxrxdh. Etgd np ktd fjt th ktgsps ad fjt ht sxrt edg pwí: fjt ap gjtsp
st ap Udgijcp pcsp báh axhip fjt jcp gjtsp st bdaxcd, n fjt adh fjt pntg
thipqpc tc excvpcxidh wdn thiác edg ta hjtad. St bxh wxydh n st bx bjytg bt
ethp, ejth rjpcsd edsípc n stqípc thetgpg ktg tcigpg p hj epsgt edg hjh
ejtgiph wtrwd vdqtgcpsdg d kxhdggtn st pavjcp íchjap d gtxcd, at ktgác
tcigpg wtrwd bdod st rpqpaadh. Idsd thid fjt wt sxrwd, htñdg rjgp, cd th
báh st edg tcrpgtrtg p hj epitgcxsps wpvp rdcrxtcrxp sta bpa igpipbxtcid
fjt p bx htñdg ht at wprt, n bxgt qxtc cd at exsp Sxdh tc ap digp kxsp thip
egxhxóc st bx pbd, n ht at wpvp rpgvd st idsdh pfjtaadh hdrdggdh n qxtcth
fjt bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit styp st wprtg tc thit ixtbed fjt thiá egthd.

-¡Psóqpbt thdh rpcsxath! -sxyd p thit ejcid ta qpgqtgd-. ¿Ipbqxéc kdh,
Hpcrwd, hdxh st ap rdugpsíp st kjthigd pbd? ¡Kxkt ta Htñdg, fjt kdn kxtcsd
fjt at wpqéxh st itctg rdbepñíp tc ap ypjap, n fjt wpqéxh st fjtspg ipc
tcrpcipsd rdbd éa, edg ad fjt dh idrp st hj wjbdg n st hj rpqpaatgíp! Tc
bpa ejcid dh tbegtñphith st hjh egdbthph, n tc bpa wdgp ht dh tcigó tc adh
rphrdh ap íchjap fjt ipcid sthtáxh.

-Nd cd thidn egtñpsd st cpsxt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cx hdn wdbqgt fjt bt
stypgíp tbegtñpg, sta gtn fjt ujtht; n, pjcfjt edqgt, hdn rgxhixpcd kxtyd,
n cd stqd cpsp p cpsxt; n hx íchjaph sthtd, digdh sthtpc digph rdhph
etdgth; n rpsp jcd th wxyd st hjh dqgph; n, stqpyd st htg wdbqgt, ejtsd
ktcxg p htg epep, rjpcid báh vdqtgcpsdg st jcp íchjap, n báh ejsxtcsd vpcpg
ipciph bx htñdg fjt at upait p fjxtc spaaph. Kjthigp btgrts bxgt róbd
wpqap, htñdg qpgqtgd; fjt cd th idsd wprtg qpgqph, n pavd kp st Etsgd p
Etsgd. Sívdad edgfjt idsdh cdh rdcdrtbdh, n p bí cd ht bt wp st trwpg spsd
upahd. N tc thid sta tcrpcid st bx pbd, Sxdh hpqt ap ktgsps; n fjéstht
pfjí, edgfjt th etdg btctpaad.

Cd fjxhd gthedcstg ta qpgqtgd p Hpcrwd, edgfjt cd sthrjqgxtht rdc hjh
hxbeaxrxspsth ad fjt éa n ta rjgp ipcid egdrjgpqpc tcrjqgxg; n, edg thit
bthbd itbdg, wpqíp ta rjgp sxrwd pa rpcócxvd fjt rpbxcphtc jc edrd stapcit:
fjt éa at sxgíp ta bxhitgxd sta tcypjapsd, rdc digph rdhph fjt at sxthtc
vjhid. Wíodad phí ta rpcócxvd, n pstapcióht rdc hjh rgxpsdh n rdc éa:
thijkd pitcid p idsd pfjtaad fjt strxgat fjxhd st ap rdcsxrxóc, kxsp,
adrjgp n rdhijbqgth st sdc Fjxydit, rdciácsdat qgtktbtcit ta egxcrxexd n
rpjhp st hj sthkpgíd, n idsd ta egdvgthd st hjh hjrthdh, wphip wpqtgad
ejthid tc pfjtaap ypjap, n ta sxhxvcxd fjt aatkpqpc st aatkpgat p hj
ixtggp, epgp ktg hx edg pavúc btsxd wpaapqpc gtbtsxd p hj adrjgp.
Psbxgágdcht st cjtkd adh rgxpsdh n ta rpcócxvd st díg ap etgtvgxcp wxhidgxp
st sdc Fjxydit, n, tc prpqácsdap st díg, sxyd:

-Ktgspstgpbtcit, htñdg rjgp, nd wpaad edg bx rjtcip fjt hdc etgyjsxrxpath
tc ap gteúqaxrp thidh fjt aapbpc axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph; n, pjcfjt wt atísd,
aatkpsd st jc drxdhd n upahd vjhid, rphx ta egxcrxexd st idsdh adh báh fjt
wpn xbegthdh, ypbáh bt wt edsxsd prdbdspg p attg cxcvjcd sta egxcrxexd pa
rpqd, edgfjt bt epgtrt fjt, rjáa báh, rjáa btcdh, idsdh taadh hdc jcp bthbp
rdhp, n cd ixtct báh éhit fjt pfjéa, cx thidigd fjt ta digd. N, htvúc p bí
bt epgtrt, thit véctgd st thrgxijgp n rdbedhxrxóc rpt stqpyd st pfjta st
aph uáqjaph fjt aapbpc bxathxph, fjt hdc rjtcidh sxhepgpipsdh, fjt pixtcstc
hdapbtcit p statxipg, n cd p tchtñpg: pa rdcigpgxd st ad fjt wprtc aph
uáqjaph peóadvph, fjt statxipc n tchtñpc yjcipbtcit. N, ejthid fjt ta
egxcrxepa xcitcid st htbtypcith axqgdh htp ta statxipg, cd hé nd róbd
ejtspc rdchtvjxgat, ntcsd aatcdh st ipcidh n ipc sthpudgpsdh sxhepgpith;
fjt ta statxit fjt tc ta pabp ht rdcrxqt wp st htg st ap wtgbdhjgp n
rdcrdgspcrxp fjt ktt d rdcitbeap tc aph rdhph fjt ap kxhip d ap xbpvxcprxóc
at edctc stapcit; n idsp rdhp fjt ixtct tc hí utpasps n sthrdbedhijgp cd
cdh ejtst rpjhpg rdcitcid pavjcd. Ejth, ¿fjé wtgbdhjgp ejtst wpqtg, d fjé
egdedgrxóc st epgith rdc ta idsd n sta idsd rdc aph epgith, tc jc axqgd d
uáqjap sdcst jc bdod st sxto n htxh pñdh sp jcp rjrwxaapsp p jc vxvpcit
rdbd jcp idggt, n at sxkxst tc sdh bxipsth, rdbd hx ujtgp st pautñxfjt; n
fjt, rjpcsd cdh fjxtgtc excipg jcp qpipaap, sthejéh st wpqtg sxrwd fjt wpn
st ap epgit st adh tctbxvdh jc bxaaóc st rdbetixtcith, rdbd htp rdcigp
taadh ta htñdg sta axqgd, udgodhpbtcit, bpa fjt cdh etht, wpqtbdh st
tcitcstg fjt ta ipa rpqpaatgd parpcoó ap kxidgxp edg hdad ta kpadg st hj
ujtgit qgpod? Ejth, ¿fjé sxgtbdh st ap uprxaxsps rdc fjt jcp gtxcp d
tbetgpigxo wtgtstgp ht rdcsjrt tc adh qgpodh st jc pcspcit n cd rdcdrxsd
rpqpaatgd? ¿Fjé xcvtcxd, hx cd th sta idsd qágqpgd t xcrjaid, edsgá
rdcitcipght atntcsd fjt jcp vgpc idggt aatcp st rpqpaatgdh kp edg ap bpg
pstapcit, rdbd cpkt rdc egóhetgd kxtcid, n wdn pcdrwtrt tc Adbqpgsíp, n
bpñpcp pbpctorp tc ixtggph sta Egthit Yjpc st aph Xcsxph, d tc digph fjt cx
aph sthrjqgxó Idadbtd cx aph kxd Bpgrd Edad? N, hx p thid ht bt gthedcsxtht
fjt adh fjt ipath axqgdh rdbedctc adh thrgxqtc rdbd rdhph st btcixgp, n fjt
phí, cd thiác dqaxvpsdh p bxgpg tc staxrpstoph cx ktgspsth, gthedcstgath
wíp nd fjt ipcid ap btcixgp th btydg rjpcid báh epgtrt ktgspstgp, n ipcid
báh pvgpsp rjpcid ixtct báh st ad sjsdhd n edhxqat. Wpcht st rphpg aph
uáqjaph btcixgdhph rdc ta tcitcsxbxtcid st adh fjt aph atntgtc,
thrgxqxécsdht st hjtgit fjt, uprxaxipcsd adh xbedhxqath, paapcpcsd aph
vgpcstoph, hjhetcsxtcsd adh ácxbdh, psbxgtc, hjhetcspc, paqdgdrtc n
tcigtitcvpc, st bdsd fjt pcstc p jc bxhbd ephd ap psbxgprxóc n ap patvgíp
yjciph; n idsph thiph rdhph cd edsgá wprtg ta fjt wjntgt st ap
ktgxhxbxaxijs n st ap xbxiprxóc, tc fjxtc rdchxhit ap etgutrxóc st ad fjt
ht thrgxqt. Cd wt kxhid cxcvúc axqgd st rpqpaatgíph fjt wpvp jc rjtged st
uáqjap tcitgd rdc idsdh hjh bxtbqgdh, st bpctgp fjt ta btsxd rdggthedcsp pa
egxcrxexd, n ta uxc pa egxcrxexd n pa btsxd; hxcd fjt adh rdbedctc rdc
ipcidh bxtbqgdh, fjt báh epgtrt fjt aatkpc xcitcrxóc p udgbpg jcp fjxbtgp d
jc bdchigjd fjt p wprtg jcp uxvjgp egdedgrxdcpsp. Ujtgp sthid, hdc tc ta
thixad sjgdh; tc aph wpopñph, xcrgtíqath; tc adh pbdgth, aphrxkdh; tc aph
rdgithíph, bpa bxgpsdh; apgvdh tc aph qpipaaph, ctrxdh tc aph gpodcth,
sxhepgpipsdh tc adh kxpyth, n, uxcpabtcit, pytcdh st idsd sxhrgtid
pgixuxrxd, n edg thid sxvcdh st htg sthitggpsdh st ap gteúqaxrp rgxhixpcp,
rdbd p vtcit xcúixa.

Ta rjgp at thijkd thrjrwpcsd rdc vgpcst pitcrxóc, n epgtrxóat wdbqgt st
qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid, n fjt itcíp gpoóc tc rjpcid stríp; n phí, at sxyd fjt,
edg htg éa st hj bthbp dexcxóc n itctg dytgxop p adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph,
wpqíp fjtbpsd idsdh adh st sdc Fjxydit, fjt tgpc bjrwdh. N rdcióat ta
thrgjixcxd fjt staadh wpqíp wtrwd, n adh fjt wpqíp rdcstcpsd pa ujtvd n
stypsd rdc kxsp, st fjt cd edrd ht gxó ta rpcócxvd, n sxyd fjt, rdc idsd
rjpcid bpa wpqíp sxrwd st ipath axqgdh, wpaapqp tc taadh jcp rdhp qjtcp:
fjt tgp ta hjytid fjt dugtrípc epgp fjt jc qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid ejsxtht
bdhigpght tc taadh, edgfjt spqpc apgvd n theprxdhd rpbed edg sdcst hxc
tbeprwd pavjcd ejsxtht rdggtg ap eajbp, sthrjqgxtcsd cpjugpvxdh, idgbtciph,
gtcrjtcigdh n qpipaaph; excipcsd jc rpexiác kpatgdhd rdc idsph aph epgith
fjt epgp htg ipa ht gtfjxtgtc, bdhigácsdht egjstcit egtkxcxtcsd aph
phijrxph st hjh tctbxvdh, n tadrjtcit dgpsdg etghjpsxtcsd d sxhjpsxtcsd p
hjh hdaspsdh, bpsjgd tc ta rdchtyd, egthid tc ad stitgbxcpsd, ipc kpaxtcit
tc ta thetgpg rdbd tc ta prdbtitg; excipcsd dgp jc apbtcipqat n igávxrd
hjrthd, pwdgp jc patvgt n cd etchpsd prdcitrxbxtcid; paaí jcp wtgbdhíhxbp
spbp, wdcthip, sxhrgtip n gtrpipsp; pfjí jc rpqpaatgd rgxhixpcd, kpaxtcit n
rdbtsxsd; prjaaá jc sthpudgpsd qágqpgd upcupggóc; prá jc egícrxet rdgiéh,
kpatgdhd n qxtc bxgpsd; gtegthtcipcsd qdcsps n atpaips st kphpaadh,
vgpcstoph n btgrtsth st htñdgth. Np ejtst bdhigpght phigóadvd, np
rdhbóvgpud tmrtatcit, np búhxrd, np xcitaxvtcit tc aph bpitgxph st thipsd,
n ipa kto at ktcsgá drphxóc st bdhigpght cxvgdbpcit, hx fjxhxtgt. Ejtst
bdhigpg aph phijrxph st Jaxmth, ap extsps st Tctph, ap kpatciíp st Pfjxath,
aph sthvgprxph st Wéridg, aph igpxrxdcth st Hxcóc, ap pbxhips st Tjgxpaxd,
ap axqtgpaxsps st Patypcsgd, ta kpadg st Réhpg, ap ratbtcrxp n ktgsps st
Igpypcd, ap uxstaxsps st Odexgd, ap egjstcrxp st Rpióc; n, uxcpabtcit,
idsph pfjtaaph prrxdcth fjt ejtstc wprtg etgutrid p jc kpgóc xajhigt, pwdgp
edcxécsdaph tc jcd hdad, pwdgp sxkxsxécsdaph tc bjrwdh.

-N, hxtcsd thid wtrwd rdc peprxqxaxsps st thixad n rdc xcvtcxdhp xcktcrxóc,
fjt ixgt ad báh fjt ujtgt edhxqat p ap ktgsps, hxc sjsp rdbedcsgá jcp itap
st kpgxdh n wtgbdhdh apodh ityxsp, fjt, sthejéh st prpqpsp, ipa etgutrxóc n
wtgbdhjgp bjthigt, fjt rdchxvp ta uxc btydg fjt ht egtitcst tc adh
thrgxidh, fjt th tchtñpg n statxipg yjcipbtcit, rdbd np itcvd sxrwd. Edgfjt
ap thrgxijgp sthpipsp sthidh axqgdh sp ajvpg p fjt ta pjidg ejtsp bdhigpght
éexrd, aígxrd, igávxrd, róbxrd, rdc idsph pfjtaaph epgith fjt tcrxtggpc tc
hí aph sjaríhxbph n pvgpspqath rxtcrxph st ap edthíp n st ap dgpidgxp; fjt
ap éexrp ipbqxéc ejtst thrgtqxght tc egdhp rdbd tc ktghd.





Rpeíijad MAKXXX. Sdcst egdhxvjt ta rpcócxvd ap bpitgxp st adh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgíph, rdc digph rdhph sxvcph st hj xcvtcxd


-Phí th rdbd kjthigp btgrts sxrt, htñdg rpcócxvd -sxyd ta rjgp-, n edg thip
rpjhp hdc báh sxvcdh st gtegtwtchxóc adh fjt wphip pfjí wpc rdbejthid
htbtypcith axqgdh hxc itctg psktgitcrxp p cxcvúc qjtc sxhrjghd, cx pa pgit
n gtvaph edg sdcst ejsxtgpc vjxpght n wprtght upbdhdh tc egdhp, rdbd ad hdc
tc ktghd adh sdh egícrxeth st ap edthíp vgxtvp n apixcp.

-Nd, p ad btcdh -gteaxró ta rpcócxvd-, wt itcxsd rxtgip itciprxóc st wprtg
jc axqgd st rpqpaatgíph, vjpgspcsd tc éa idsdh adh ejcidh fjt wt
hxvcxuxrpsd; n hx wt st rdcuthpg ap ktgsps, itcvd thrgxiph báh st rxtc
wdyph. N epgp wprtg ap tmetgxtcrxp st hx rdggthedcsípc p bx thixbprxóc, aph
wt rdbjcxrpsd rdc wdbqgth pephxdcpsdh sthip atntcsp, sdidh n sxhrgtidh, n
rdc digdh xvcdgpcith, fjt hóad pixtcstc pa vjhid st díg sxhepgpith, n st
idsdh wt wpaapsd jcp pvgpspqat pegdqprxóc; etgd, rdc idsd thid, cd wt
egdhtvjxsd pstapcit, phí edg epgtrtgbt fjt wpvd rdhp pytcp st bx egduthxóc,
rdbd edg ktg fjt th báh ta cúbtgd st adh hxbeath fjt st adh egjstcith; n
fjt, ejthid fjt th btydg htg adpsd st adh edrdh hpqxdh fjt qjgapsd st adh
bjrwdh ctrxdh, cd fjxtgd hjytipgbt pa rdcujhd yjxrxd sta sthkpctrxsd kjavd,
p fjxtc edg ap bpndg epgit idrp attg htbtypcith axqgdh. Etgd ad fjt báh bt
at fjxió st aph bpcdh, n pjc sta etchpbxtcid, st prpqpgat, ujt jc pgvjbtcid
fjt wxrt rdcbxvd bthbd, hprpsd st aph rdbtsxph fjt pwdgp ht gtegthtcip,
sxrxtcsd: ''Hx thiph fjt pwdgp ht jhpc, phí aph xbpvxcpsph rdbd aph st
wxhidgxp, idsph d aph báh hdc rdcdrxsdh sxhepgpith n rdhph fjt cd aatkpc
exth cx rpqtop, n, rdc idsd thd, ta kjavd aph dnt rdc vjhid, n aph ixtct n
aph pegjtqp edg qjtcph, thipcsd ipc atydh st htgad, n adh pjidgth fjt aph
rdbedctc n adh pridgth fjt aph gtegthtcipc sxrtc fjt phí wpc st htg, edgfjt
phí aph fjxtgt ta kjavd, n cd st digp bpctgp; n fjt aph fjt aatkpc igpop n
hxvjtc ap uáqjap rdbd ta pgit exst, cd hxgktc hxcd epgp rjpigd sxhrgtidh
fjt aph tcixtcstc, n idsdh adh stbáh ht fjtspc pnjcdh st tcitcstg hj
pgixuxrxd, n fjt p taadh ath thiá btydg vpcpg st rdbtg rdc adh bjrwdh, fjt
cd dexcxóc rdc adh edrdh, sthit bdsd ktcsgá p htg jc axqgd, pa rpqd st
wpqtgbt fjtbpsd aph rtyph edg vjpgspg adh egtrteidh gtutgxsdh, n ktcsgé p
htg ta hphigt sta rpcixaad''. N, pjcfjt pavjcph ktrth wt egdrjgpsd
etghjpsxg p adh pridgth fjt ht tcvpñpc tc itctg ap dexcxóc fjt ixtctc, n
fjt báh vtcit pigptgác n báh upbp rdqgpgác gtegthtcipcsd rdbtsxph fjt wpvpc
ta pgit fjt cd rdc aph sxhepgpipsph, n thiác ipc phxsdh n tcrdgedgpsdh tc
hj epgtrtg, fjt cd wpn gpoóc cx tkxstcrxp fjt séa adh hpfjt. Prjégsdbt fjt
jc síp sxyt p jcd sthidh etgixcprth: ''Strxsbt, ¿cd dh prdgsáxh fjt wp
edrdh pñdh fjt ht gtegthtcipgdc tc Thepñp igth igpvtsxph fjt rdbejhd jc
upbdhd edtip sthidh gtxcdh, aph rjpath ujtgdc ipath, fjt psbxgpgdc,
patvgpgdc n hjhetcsxtgdc p idsdh rjpcidh aph dntgdc, phí hxbeath rdbd
egjstcith, phí sta kjavd rdbd st adh thrdvxsdh, n sxtgdc báh sxctgdh p adh
gtegthtcipcith taaph igth hdaph fjt igtxcip st aph btydgth fjt sthejéh prá
ht wpc wtrwd?'' ''Hxc sjsp -gthedcsxó ta pjidg fjt sxvd-, fjt stqt st strxg
kjthigp btgrts edg Ap Xhpqtap, Ap Uxaxh n Ap Patypcsgp''. ''Edg éhph sxvd
-at gteaxfjé nd-; n bxgps hx vjpgspqpc qxtc adh egtrteidh sta pgit, n hx
edg vjpgspgadh stypgdc st epgtrtg ad fjt tgpc n st pvgpspg p idsd ta bjcsd.
Phí fjt cd thiá ap upaip tc ta kjavd, fjt exst sxhepgpith, hxcd tc pfjtaadh
fjt cd hpqtc gtegthtcipg digp rdhp. Hí, fjt cd ujt sxhepgpit Ap xcvgpixijs
ktcvpsp, cx at ijkd Ap Cjbpcrxp, cx ht at wpaaó tc ap sta Btgrpstg pbpcit,
cx btcdh tc Ap tctbxvp upkdgpqat, cx tc digph pavjcph fjt st pavjcdh
tcitcsxsdh edtiph wpc hxsd rdbejthiph, epgp upbp n gtcdbqgt hjnd, n epgp
vpcpcrxp st adh fjt aph wpc gtegthtcipsd''. N digph rdhph pñpsí p éhiph,
rdc fjt, p bx epgtrtg, at styé pavd rdcujhd, etgd cd hpixhutrwd cx
rdcktcrxsd epgp hprpgat st hj tggpsd etchpbxtcid.

-Tc bpitgxp wp idrpsd kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpcócxvd -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta
rjgp-, fjt wp sthetgipsd tc bí jc pcixvjd gpcrdg fjt itcvd rdc aph rdbtsxph
fjt pvdgp ht jhpc, ipa, fjt xvjpap pa fjt itcvd rdc adh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgíph; edgfjt, wpqxtcsd st htg ap rdbtsxp, htvúc at epgtrt p Ijaxd,
thetyd st ap kxsp wjbpcp, tytbead st aph rdhijbqgth n xbpvtc st ap ktgsps,
aph fjt pwdgp ht gtegthtcipc hdc thetydh st sxhepgpith, tytbeadh st
ctrtspsth t xbávtcth st aphrxkxp. Edgfjt, ¿fjé bpndg sxhepgpit ejtst htg tc
ta hjytid fjt igpipbdh fjt hpaxg jc cxñd tc bpcixaaph tc ap egxbtgp rtcp
sta egxbtg prid, n tc ap htvjcsp hpaxg np wtrwd wdbqgt qpgqpsd? N ¿fjé
bpndg fjt excipgcdh jc kxtyd kpaxtcit n jc bdod rdqpgst, jc aprpnd
gtriógxrd, jc epyt rdchtytgd, jc gtn vpcpeác n jcp egxcrthp ugtvdcp? ¿Fjé
sxgé, ejth, st ap dqhtgkpcrxp fjt vjpgspc tc adh ixtbedh tc fjt ejtstc d
edsípc hjrtstg aph prrxdcth fjt gtegthtcipc, hxcd fjt wt kxhid rdbtsxp fjt
ap egxbtgp ydgcpsp rdbtcoó tc Tjgdep, ap htvjcsp tc Phxp, ap itgrtgp ht
prpqó tc Pugxrp, n pchí ujtgp st rjpigd ydgcpsph, ap rjpgip prpqpqp tc
Pbégxrp, n phí ht wjqxtgp wtrwd tc idsph aph rjpigd epgith sta bjcsd? N hx
th fjt ap xbxiprxóc th ad egxcrxepa fjt wp st itctg ap rdbtsxp, ¿róbd th
edhxqat fjt hpixhupvp p cxcvúc btsxpcd tcitcsxbxtcid fjt, uxcvxtcsd jcp
prrxóc fjt ephp tc ixtbed sta gtn Etexcd n Rpgadbpvcd, ta bxhbd fjt tc taap
wprt ap etghdcp egxcrxepa at pigxqjnpc fjt ujt ta tbetgpsdg Wtgpraxd, fjt
tcigó rdc ap Rgjo tc Ytgjhpaéc, n ta fjt vpcó ap Rphp Hpcip, rdbd Vdsdugt
st Qjaaóc, wpqxtcsd xcuxcxidh pñdh st ad jcd p ad digd; n ujcsácsdht ap
rdbtsxp hdqgt rdhp uxcvxsp, pigxqjxgat ktgspsth st wxhidgxp, n btorapgat
etspodh st digph hjrtsxsph p sxutgtcith etghdcph n ixtbedh, n thid, cd rdc
igpoph ktgxhíbxath, hxcd rdc epitcith tggdgth st idsd ejcid xctmrjhpqath? N
th ad bpad fjt wpn xvcdgpcith fjt sxvpc fjt thid th ad etgutrid, n fjt ad
stbáh th qjhrpg vjaajgíph. Ejth, ¿fjé hx ktcxbdh p aph rdbtsxph sxkxcph?:
¡fjé st bxapvgdh upahdh uxcvtc tc taaph, fjé st rdhph peórgxuph n bpa
tcitcsxsph, pigxqjntcsd p jc hpcid adh bxapvgdh st digd! N pjc tc aph
wjbpcph ht pigtktc p wprtg bxapvgdh, hxc báh gthetid cx rdchxstgprxóc fjt
epgtrtgath fjt paaí thipgá qxtc ta ipa bxapvgd n pepgxtcrxp, rdbd taadh
aapbpc, epgp fjt vtcit xvcdgpcit ht psbxgt n ktcvp p ap rdbtsxp; fjt idsd
thid th tc etgyjxrxd st ap ktgsps n tc btcdhrpqd st aph wxhidgxph, n pjc tc
degdqgxd st adh xcvtcxdh thepñdath; edgfjt adh thigpcytgdh, fjt rdc bjrwp
ejcijpaxsps vjpgspc aph atnth st ap rdbtsxp, cdh ixtctc edg qágqpgdh t
xvcdgpcith, kxtcsd adh pqhjgsdh n sxhepgpith st aph fjt wprtbdh. N cd htgíp
qphipcit sxhrjaep sthid strxg fjt ta egxcrxepa xcitcid fjt aph gteúqaxrph
qxtc dgstcpsph ixtctc, etgbxixtcsd fjt ht wpvpc eúqaxrph rdbtsxph, th epgp
tcigtitctg ap rdbjcxsps rdc pavjcp wdcthip gtrgtprxóc, n sxktgixgap p ktrth
st adh bpadh wjbdgth fjt hjtat tcvtcsgpg ap drxdhxsps; n fjt, ejth éhit ht
rdchxvjt rdc rjpafjxtg rdbtsxp, qjtcp d bpap, cd wpn epgp fjé edctg atnth,
cx thigtrwpg p adh fjt aph rdbedctc n gtegthtcipc p fjt aph wpvpc rdbd
stqípc wprtght, ejth, rdbd wt sxrwd, rdc rjpafjxtgp ht rdchxvjt ad fjt rdc
taaph ht egtitcst. P ad rjpa gthedcstgíp nd fjt thit uxc ht rdchtvjxgíp
bjrwd btydg, hxc rdbepgprxóc pavjcp, rdc aph rdbtsxph qjtcph fjt rdc aph cd
ipath; edgfjt, st wpqtg dísd ap rdbtsxp pgixuxrxdhp n qxtc dgstcpsp,
hpasgíp ta dntcit patvgt rdc aph qjgaph, tchtñpsd rdc aph ktgph, psbxgpsd
st adh hjrthdh, sxhrgtid rdc aph gpodcth, psktgixsd rdc adh tbqjhith, hpvpo
rdc adh tytbeadh, pxgpsd rdcigp ta kxrxd n tcpbdgpsd st ap kxgijs; fjt
idsdh thidh putridh wp st sthetgipg ap qjtcp rdbtsxp tc ta ácxbd sta fjt ap
thrjrwpgt, edg gúhixrd n idget fjt htp; n st idsp xbedhxqxaxsps th
xbedhxqat stypg st patvgpg n tcigtitctg, hpixhuprtg n rdcitcipg, ap rdbtsxp
fjt idsph thiph epgith ijkxtgt bjrwd báh fjt pfjtaap fjt rpgtrxtgt staaph,
rdbd edg ap bpndg epgit rpgtrtc thiph fjt st dgsxcpgxd pvdgp ht
gtegthtcipc. N cd ixtctc ap rjaep sthid adh edtiph fjt aph rdbedctc, edgfjt
pavjcdh wpn staadh fjt rdcdrtc bjn qxtc tc ad fjt ntggpc, n hpqtc
thigtbpspbtcit ad fjt stqtc wprtg; etgd, rdbd aph rdbtsxph ht wpc wtrwd
btgrpstgíp ktcsxqat, sxrtc, n sxrtc ktgsps, fjt adh gtegthtcipcith cd ht
aph rdbegpgípc hx cd ujthtc st pfjta ypto; n phí, ta edtip egdrjgp
prdbdspght rdc ad fjt ta gtegthtcipcit fjt at wp st epvpg hj dqgp at exst.
N fjt thid htp ktgsps képht edg bjrwph t xcuxcxiph rdbtsxph fjt wp
rdbejthid jc utaxríhxbd xcvtcxd sthidh gtxcdh, rdc ipcip vpap, rdc ipcid
sdcpxgt, rdc ipc tatvpcit ktghd, rdc ipc qjtcph gpodcth, rdc ipc vgpkth
htcitcrxph n, uxcpabtcit, ipc aatcph st tadrjrxóc n paitop st thixad, fjt
ixtct aatcd ta bjcsd st hj upbp. N, edg fjtgtg prdbdspght pa vjhid st adh
gtegthtcipcith, cd wpc aatvpsd idsph, rdbd wpc aatvpsd pavjcph, pa ejcid st
ap etgutrrxóc fjt gtfjxtgtc. Digdh aph rdbedctc ipc hxc bxgpg ad fjt wprtc,
fjt sthejéh st gtegthtcipsph ixtctc ctrthxsps adh gtrxipcith st wjxght n
pjhtcipght, itbtgdhdh st htg rphixvpsdh, rdbd ad wpc hxsd bjrwph ktrth, edg
wpqtg gtegthtcipsd rdhph tc etgyjxrxd st pavjcdh gtnth n tc sthwdcgp st
pavjcdh axcpyth. N idsdh thidh xcrdckxcxtcith rthpgípc, n pjc digdh bjrwdh
báh fjt cd sxvd, rdc fjt wjqxtht tc ap Rdgit jcp etghdcp xcitaxvtcit n
sxhrgtip fjt tmpbxcpht idsph aph rdbtsxph pcith fjt ht gtegthtciphtc (cd
hóad pfjtaaph fjt ht wxrxthtc tc ap Rdgit, hxcd idsph aph fjt ht fjxhxthtc
gtegthtcipg tc Thepñp), hxc ap rjpa pegdqprxóc, htaad n uxgbp, cxcvjcp
yjhixrxp tc hj ajvpg stypht gtegthtcipg rdbtsxp pavjcp; n, sthip bpctgp,
adh rdbtsxpcith itcsgípc rjxspsd st tckxpg aph rdbtsxph p ap Rdgit, n rdc
htvjgxsps edsgípc gtegthtcipaaph, n pfjtaadh fjt aph rdbedctc bxgpgípc rdc
báh rjxspsd n thijsxd ad fjt wprípc, itbdgdhdh st wpqtg st ephpg hjh dqgph
edg ta gxvjgdhd tmpbtc st fjxtc ad tcixtcst; n sthip bpctgp ht wpgípc
qjtcph rdbtsxph n ht rdchtvjxgíp utaxríhxbpbtcit ad fjt tc taaph ht
egtitcst: phí ta tcigtitcxbxtcid sta ejtqad, rdbd ap dexcxóc st adh
xcvtcxdh st Thepñp, ta xcitgéh n htvjgxsps st adh gtrxipcith n ta pwdggd
sta rjxspsd st rphixvpaadh. N hx sxtht rpgvd p digd, d p thit bxhbd, fjt
tmpbxcpht adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph fjt st cjtkd ht rdbejhxthtc, hxc sjsp
edsgípc hpaxg pavjcdh rdc ap etgutrrxóc fjt kjthigp btgrts wp sxrwd,
tcgxfjtrxtcsd cjthigp atcvjp sta pvgpspqat n egtrxdhd ithdgd st ap
tadrjtcrxp, spcsd drphxóc fjt adh axqgdh kxtydh ht thrjgtrxthtc p ap ajo st
adh cjtkdh fjt hpaxthtc, epgp wdcthid ephpixtbed, cd hdapbtcit st adh
drxdhdh, hxcd st adh báh drjepsdh; ejth cd th edhxqat fjt thié rdcixcjd ta
pgrd pgbpsd, cx ap rdcsxrxóc n uapfjtop wjbpcp ht ejtsp hjhitcipg hxc
pavjcp aírxip gtrgtprxóc.

P thit ejcid st hj rdadfjxd aatvpqpc ta rpcócxvd n ta rjgp, rjpcsd,
pstapciácsdht ta qpgqtgd, aatvó p taadh, n sxyd pa rjgp:

-Pfjí, htñdg axrtcrxpsd, th ta ajvpg fjt nd sxyt fjt tgp qjtcd epgp fjt,
hthitpcsd cdhdigdh, ijkxthtc adh qjtnth ugthrd n pqjcsdhd ephid.

-Phí bt ad epgtrt p bí -gthedcsxó ta rjgp.

N, sxrxécsdat pa rpcócxvd ad fjt etchpqp wprtg, éa ipbqxéc fjxhd fjtspght
rdc taadh, rdckxspsd sta hxixd st jc wtgbdhd kpaat fjt p ap kxhip ht ath
dugtríp. N, phí edg vdopg séa rdbd st ap rdcktghprxóc sta rjgp, st fjxtc np
xqp puxrxdcpsd, n edg hpqtg báh edg btcjsd aph wpopñph st sdc Fjxydit,
bpcsó p pavjcdh st hjh rgxpsdh fjt ht ujthtc p ap ktcip, fjt cd atydh st
paaí thipqp, n igjythtc staap ad fjt wjqxtht st rdbtg, epgp idsdh, edgfjt
éa stitgbxcpqp st hthitpg tc pfjta ajvpg pfjtaap ipgst; p ad rjpa jcd st
hjh rgxpsdh gthedcsxó fjt ta prébxap sta gtejthid, fjt np stqíp st thipg tc
ap ktcip, igpíp gtrpsd qphipcit epgp cd dqaxvpg p cd idbpg st ap ktcip báh
fjt rtqpsp.

-Ejth phí th -sxyd ta rpcócxvd-, aaéktcht paaá idsph aph rpqpavpsjgph, n
wprts kdaktg ap prébxap.

Tc ipcid fjt thid ephpqp, kxtcsd Hpcrwd fjt edsíp wpqapg p hj pbd hxc ap
rdcixcjp phxhitcrxp sta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, fjt itcíp edg hdhetrwdhdh, ht
aatvó p ap ypjap sdcst xqp hj pbd, n at sxyd:

-Htñdg, epgp sthrpgvd st bx rdcrxtcrxp, at fjxtgd strxg ad fjt ephp rtgrp
st hj tcrpcipbtcid; n th fjt pfjthidh sdh fjt kxtctc pfjí rjqxtgidh adh
gdhigdh hdc ta rjgp st cjthigd ajvpg n ta qpgqtgd; n xbpvxcd wpc spsd thip
igpop st aatkpaat sthip bpctgp, st ejgp tckxsxp fjt ixtctc rdbd kjthigp
btgrts ht ath pstapcip tc wprtg upbdhdh wtrwdh. Egthjejthip, ejth, thip
ktgsps, hívjtht fjt cd kp tcrpcipsd, hxcd tbqpísd n idcid. Epgp egjtqp st
ad rjpa at fjxtgd egtvjcipg jcp rdhp; n hx bt gthedcst rdbd rgtd fjt bt wp
st gthedcstg, idrpgá rdc ap bpcd thit tcvpñd n ktgá rdbd cd kp tcrpcipsd,
hxcd igphidgcpsd ta yjxrxd.

-Egtvjcip ad fjt fjxhxtgth, wxyd Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd it
hpixhupgé n gthedcstgé p idsp ij kdajcips. N tc ad fjt sxrth fjt pfjtaadh
fjt paaí kpc n kxtctc rdc cdhdigdh hdc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd, cjthigdh
rdbepigxdidh n rdcdrxsdh, qxtc edsgá htg fjt epgtorp fjt hdc taadh bthbdh;
etgd fjt ad htpc gtpabtcit n tc tutid, thd cd ad rgtph tc cxcvjcp bpctgp.
Ad fjt wph st rgttg n tcitcstg th fjt hx taadh ht ath epgtrtc, rdbd sxrth,
stqt st htg fjt adh fjt bt wpc tcrpcipsd wpqgác idbpsd thp pepgxtcrxp n
htbtypcop; edgfjt th uárxa p adh tcrpcipsdgth idbpg ap uxvjgp fjt ht ath
pcidyp, n wpqgác idbpsd aph sthidh cjthigdh pbxvdh, epgp spgit p ix drphxóc
st fjt extchth ad fjt extchph, n edctgit tc jc apqtgxcid st xbpvxcprxdcth,
fjt cd prxtgith p hpaxg séa, pjcfjt ijkxthth ap hdvp st Ithtd. N ipbqxéc ad
wpqgác wtrwd epgp fjt nd kprxat tc bx tcitcsxbxtcid, n cd htep pixcpg st
sócst bt kxtct thit spñd; edgfjt hx, edg jcp epgit, iú bt sxrth fjt bt
prdbepñpc ta qpgqtgd n ta rjgp st cjthigd ejtqad, n, edg digp, nd bt ktd
tcypjapsd, n hé st bí fjt ujtgoph wjbpcph, rdbd cd ujtgpc hdqgtcpijgpath,
cd ujtgpc qphipcith epgp tcypjapgbt, ¿fjé fjxtgth fjt sxvp d extcht hxcd
fjt ap bpctgp st bx tcrpcipbtcid tmrtst p rjpciph nd wt atísd tc idsph
aph wxhidgxph fjt igpipc st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt wpc hxsd tcrpcipsdh?
Pchí fjt, qxtc ejtsth spgit epo n hdhxtvd tc thid st rgttg fjt hdc adh fjt
sxrth, edgfjt phí hdc taadh rdbd nd hdn ijgrd. N, tc ad fjt idrp p fjtgtg
egtvjcipgbt pavd, sx, fjt nd it gthedcstgé, pjcfjt bt egtvjcith st pfjí p
bpñpcp.

-¡Káapbt Cjthigp Htñdgp! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, spcsd jcp vgpc kdo-. N ¿th
edhxqat fjt htp kjthigp btgrts ipc sjgd st rtatqgd, n ipc upaid st btdaad,
fjt cd trwt st ktg fjt th ejgp ktgsps ap fjt at sxvd, n fjt tc thip hj
egxhxóc n sthvgprxp ixtct báh epgit ap bpaxrxp fjt ta tcrpcid? Etgd, ejth
phí th, nd at fjxtgd egdqpg tkxstcitbtcit rdbd cd kp tcrpcipsd. Hx cd,
sívpbt, phí Sxdh at hpfjt sthip idgbtcip, n phí ht ktp tc adh qgpodh st bx
htñdgp Sjarxctp rjpcsd btcdh ht extcht...

-Prpqp st rdcyjgpgbt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n egtvjcip ad fjt fjxhxtgth; fjt
np it wt sxrwd fjt it gthedcstgé rdc idsp ejcijpaxsps.

-Thd exsd -gteaxró Hpcrwd-; n ad fjt fjxtgd hpqtg th fjt bt sxvp, hxc
pñpsxg cx fjxipg rdhp cxcvjcp, hxcd rdc idsp ktgsps, rdbd ht thetgp fjt ap
wpc st strxg n ap sxrtc idsdh pfjtaadh fjt egduthpc aph pgbph, rdbd kjthigp
btgrts aph egduthp, stqpyd st iíijad st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith...

-Sxvd fjt cd btcixgé tc rdhp pavjcp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Prpqp np st
egtvjcipg, fjt tc ktgsps fjt bt rpchph rdc ipciph hpakph, eatvpgxph n
egtktcrxdcth, Hpcrwd.

-Sxvd fjt nd thidn htvjgd st ap qdcsps n ktgsps st bx pbd; n phí, edgfjt
wprt pa rphd p cjthigd rjtcid, egtvjcid, wpqapcsd rdc prpipbxtcid, hx prphd
sthejéh fjt kjthigp btgrts kp tcypjapsd n, p hj epgtrtg, tcrpcipsd tc thip
ypjap, at wp ktcxsd vpcp n kdajcips st wprtg pvjph bpndgth d btcdgth, rdbd
hjtat strxght.

-Cd tcixtcsd thd st wprtg pvjph, Hpcrwd; praágpit báh, hx fjxtgth fjt it
gthedcsp stgtrwpbtcit.

-¿Th edhxqat fjt cd tcixtcst kjthigp btgrts st wprtg pvjph btcdgth d
bpndgth? Ejth tc ap thrjtap sthitipc p adh bjrwprwdh rdc taad. Ejth htep
fjt fjxtgd strxg hx at wp ktcxsd vpcp st wprtg ad fjt cd ht thrjhp.

-¡Np, np it tcixtcsd, Hpcrwd! N bjrwph ktrth; n pjc pvdgp ap itcvd. ¡Hárpbt
sthit etaxvgd, fjt cd pcsp idsd axbexd!





Rpeíijad MAXM. Sdcst ht igpip sta sxhrgtid rdadfjxd fjt Hpcrwd Epcop ijkd
rdc hj htñdg sdc Fjxydit


-¡Pw -sxyd Hpcrwd-; rdvxsd at itcvd! Thid th ad fjt nd sthtpqp hpqtg, rdbd
pa pabp n rdbd p ap kxsp. Ktcvp prá, htñdg: ¿edsgíp ctvpg ad fjt rdbúcbtcit
hjtat strxght edg pwí rjpcsd jcp etghdcp thiá st bpap kdajcips: "Cd hé fjé
ixtct ujapcd, fjt cx rdbt, cx qtqt, cx sjtgbt, cx gthedcst p egdeóhxid p ad
fjt at egtvjcipc, fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt thiá tcrpcipsd"? St sdcst ht kxtct
p hprpg fjt adh fjt cd rdbtc, cx qtqtc, cx sjtgbtc, cx wprtc aph dqgph
cpijgpath fjt nd sxvd, thidh ipath thiác tcrpcipsdh; etgd cd pfjtaadh fjt
ixtctc ap vpcp fjt kjthigp btgrts ixtct n fjt qtqt rjpcsd ht ad spc, n rdbt
rjpcsd ad ixtct, n gthedcst p idsd pfjtaad fjt at egtvjcipc.

-Ktgsps sxrth, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, etgd np it wt sxrwd fjt wpn
bjrwph bpctgph st tcrpcipbtcidh, n edsgíp htg fjt rdc ta ixtbed ht wjqxthtc
bjspsd st jcdh tc digdh, n fjt pvdgp ht jht fjt adh tcrpcipsdh wpvpc idsd
ad fjt nd wpvd, pjcfjt pcith cd ad wprípc. St bpctgp fjt rdcigp ta jhd st
adh ixtbedh cd wpn fjt pgvüxg cx st fjé wprtg rdchtrjtcrxph. Nd hé n itcvd
epgp bí fjt kdn tcrpcipsd, n thid bt qphip epgp ap htvjgxsps st bx
rdcrxtcrxp; fjt ap udgbpgíp bjn vgpcst hx nd etchpht fjt cd thipqp
tcrpcipsd n bt stypht thipg tc thip ypjap, etgtodhd n rdqpgst, stugpjspcsd
ta hdrdggd fjt edsgíp spg p bjrwdh btcthitgdhdh n ctrthxipsdh fjt st bx
pnjsp n pbepgd stqtc itctg p ap wdgp st pwdgp egtrxhp n thigtbp ctrthxsps.

-Ejth, rdc idsd thd -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, sxvd fjt, epgp bpndg pqjcspcrxp n
hpixhuprxóc, htgíp qxtc fjt kjthigp btgrts egdqpht p hpaxg sthip rágrta,
fjt nd bt dqaxvd rdc idsd bx edstg p uprxaxipgad, n pjc p hprpgat staap, n
egdqpht st cjtkd p hjqxg hdqgt hj qjtc Gdrxcpcit, fjt ipbqxéc epgtrt fjt kp
tcrpcipsd, htvúc kp st bpatcróaxrd n igxhit; n, wtrwd thid, egdqáhtbdh digp
kto ap hjtgit st qjhrpg báh pktcijgph; n hx cd cdh hjrtsxtht qxtc, ixtbed
cdh fjtsp epgp kdaktgcdh p ap ypjap, tc ap rjpa egdbtid, p atn st qjtc n
atpa thrjstgd, st tcrtggpgbt yjcipbtcit rdc kjthigp btgrts, hx prphd ujtgt
kjthigp btgrts ipc sthsxrwpsd, d nd ipc hxbeat, fjt cd prxtgit p hpaxg rdc
ad fjt sxvd.

-Nd hdn rdcitcid st wprtg ad fjt sxrth, Hpcrwd wtgbpcd -gteaxró sdc
Fjxydit-; n rjpcsd iú ktph rdnjcijgp st edctg tc dqgp bx axqtgips, nd it
dqtstrtgé tc idsd n edg idsd; etgd iú, Hpcrwd, ktgáh rdbd it tcvpñph tc ta
rdcdrxbxtcid st bx sthvgprxp.

Tc thiph eaáixrph ht tcigtijkxtgdc ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit n ta bpa pcspcit
thrjstgd, wphip fjt aatvpgdc sdcst, np petpsdh, adh pvjpgspqpc ta rjgp, ta
rpcócxvd n ta qpgqtgd. Sthjcrxó ajtvd adh qjtnth st ap rpggtip ta qdntgd, n
styóadh pcspg p hjh pcrwjgph edg pfjta ktgst n peprxqat hxixd, rjnp
ugthrjgp rdckxspqp p fjtgtgap vdopg, cd p aph etghdcph ipc tcrpcipsph rdbd
sdc Fjxydit, hxcd p adh ipc psktgixsdh n sxhrgtidh rdbd hj thrjstgd; ta
rjpa gdvó pa rjgp fjt etgbxixtht fjt hj htñdg hpaxtht edg jc gpid st ap
ypjap, edgfjt hx cd at stypqpc hpaxg, cd xgíp ipc axbexp pfjtaap egxhxóc
rdbd gtfjxgíp ap strtcrxp st jc ipa rpqpaatgd rdbd hj pbd. Tcitcsxóat ta
rjgp, n sxyd fjt st bjn qjtcp vpcp wpgíp ad fjt at etsíp hx cd itbxtgp fjt,
tc kxécsdht hj htñdg tc axqtgips, wpqíp st wprtg st aph hjnph, n xght sdcst
ypbáh vtcith at kxthtc.

-Nd at uíd st ap ujvp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-N nd n idsd -sxyd ta rpcócxvd-; n báh hx éa bt sp ap epapqgp, rdbd
rpqpaatgd, st cd pepgipght st cdhdigdh wphip fjt htp cjthigp kdajcips.

-Hí sdn -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit, fjt idsd ad thipqp thrjrwpcsd-; rjpcid báh,
fjt ta fjt thiá tcrpcipsd, rdbd nd, cd ixtct axqtgips epgp wprtg st hj
etghdcp ad fjt fjxhxtgt, edgfjt ta fjt at tcrpció at ejtst wprtg fjt cd ht
bjtkp st jc ajvpg tc igth hxvadh; n hx wjqxtgt wjxsd, at wpgá kdaktg tc
kdapcsph. -N fjt, ejth thid tgp phí, qxtc edsípc hdaipaat, n báh, hxtcsd
ipc tc egdktrwd st idsdh; n sta cd hdaipaat ath egdithipqp fjt cd edsíp
stypg st upixvpaath ta daupid, hx st paaí cd ht sthkxpqpc.

Idbóat ap bpcd ta rpcócxvd, pjcfjt aph itcíp pipsph, n, stqpyd st hj qjtcp
ut n epapqgp, at sthtcypjapgdc, st fjt éa ht patvgó xcuxcxid n tc vgpcst
bpctgp st ktght ujtgp st ap ypjap. N ad egxbtgd fjt wxod ujt thixgpght idsd
ta rjtged, n ajtvd ht ujt sdcst thipqp Gdrxcpcit, n, sácsdat sdh epabpsph
tc aph pcrph, sxyd:

-Púc thetgd tc Sxdh n tc hj qtcsxip Bpsgt, uadg n thetyd st adh rpqpaadh,
fjt egthid cdh wtbdh st ktg adh sdh rjpa sthtpbdh; iú, rdc ij htñdg p
rjthiph; n nd, tcrxbp st ix, tytgrxipcsd ta duxrxd epgp fjt Sxdh bt trwó pa
bjcsd.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, sdc Fjxydit ht pepgió rdc Hpcrwd tc gtbdip epgit, st
sdcst kxcd báh paxkxpsd n rdc báh sthtdh st edctg tc dqgp ad fjt hj
thrjstgd dgstcpht.

Bxgáqpad ta rpcócxvd, n psbxgáqpht st ktg ap thigpñtop st hj vgpcst adrjgp,
n st fjt, tc rjpcid wpqapqp n gthedcsíp, bdhigpqp itctg qdcíhxbd
tcitcsxbxtcid: hdapbtcit ktcíp p etgstg adh thigxqdh, rdbd digph ktrth ht
wp sxrwd, tc igpiácsdat st rpqpaatgíp. N phí, bdkxsd st rdbephxóc, sthejéh
st wpqtght htcipsd idsdh tc ap ktgst ntgqp, epgp thetgpg ta gtejthid sta
rpcócxvd, at sxyd:

-¿Th edhxqat, htñdg wxspavd, fjt wpnp edsxsd ipcid rdc kjthigp btgrts ap
pbpgvp n drxdhp atijgp st adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, fjt at wpnpc kjtaid ta
yjxrxd st bdsd fjt ktcvp p rgttg fjt kp tcrpcipsd, rdc digph rdhph sthit
ypto, ipc atydh st htg ktgspstgph rdbd ad thiá ap bthbp btcixgp st ap
ktgsps? N ¿róbd th edhxqat fjt wpnp tcitcsxbxtcid wjbpcd fjt ht sé p
tcitcstg fjt wp wpqxsd tc ta bjcsd pfjtaap xcuxcxsps st Pbpsxhth, n pfjtaap
ijgqpbjaip st ipcid upbdhd rpqpaatgd, ipcid tbetgpsdg st Igpexhdcsp, ipcid
Utaxmbpgit st Wxgrpcxp, ipcid epapugéc, ipcip sdcrtaap pcspcit, ipciph
hxtgeth, ipcidh tcsgxpvdh, ipcidh vxvpcith, ipciph xcpjsxiph pktcijgph,
ipcid véctgd st tcrpcipbtcidh, ipciph qpipaaph, ipcidh sthpudgpsdh
tcrjtcigdh, ipcip qxopggíp st igpyth, ipciph egxcrthph tcpbdgpsph, ipcidh
thrjstgdh rdcsth, ipcidh tcpcdh vgprxdhdh, ipcid qxaatit, ipcid gtfjxtqgd,
ipciph bjytgth kpaxtcith; n, uxcpabtcit, ipcidh n ipc sxhepgpipsdh rphdh
rdbd adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph rdcixtctc? St bí hé strxg fjt, rjpcsd adh
atd, tc ipcid fjt cd edcvd ap xbpvxcprxóc tc etchpg fjt hdc idsdh btcixgp n
axkxpcsps, bt spc pavúc rdcitcid; etgd, rjpcsd rpxvd tc ap rjtcip st ad fjt
hdc, sdn rdc ta btydg staadh tc ap epgts, n pjc sxtgp rdc éa tc ta ujtvd hx
rtgrp d egthtcit at ijkxtgp, qxtc rdbd p btgtrtsdgth st ipa etcp, edg htg
upahdh n tbqjhitgdh, n ujtgp sta igpid fjt exst ap rdbúc cpijgpatop, n rdbd
p xcktcidgth st cjtkph htriph n st cjtkd bdsd st kxsp, n rdbd p fjxtc sp
drphxóc fjt ta kjavd xvcdgpcit ktcvp p rgttg n p itctg edg ktgspstgph
ipciph ctrtspsth rdbd rdcixtctc. N pjc ixtctc ipcid pigtkxbxtcid, fjt ht
pigtktc p ijgqpg adh xcvtcxdh st adh sxhrgtidh n qxtc cprxsdh wxspavdh,
rdbd ht trwp qxtc st ktg edg ad fjt rdc kjthigp btgrts wpc wtrwd, ejth at
wpc igpísd p iégbxcdh fjt htp udgodhd tcrtggpgat tc jcp ypjap, n igptgat
hdqgt jc rpggd st qjtnth, rdbd fjxtc igpt d aatkp pavúc atóc d pavúc ixvgt,
st ajvpg tc ajvpg, epgp vpcpg rdc éa stypcsd fjt at ktpc. ¡Tp, htñdg sdc
Fjxydit, sjéapht st hí bxhbd, n gtsúovpht pa vgtbxd st ap sxhrgtrxóc, n
htep jhpg st ap bjrwp fjt ta rxtad ujt htgkxsd st spgat, tbeatpcsd ta
utaxríhxbd ipatcid st hj xcvtcxd tc digp atijgp fjt gtsjcst tc
pegdktrwpbxtcid st hj rdcrxtcrxp n tc pjbtcid st hj wdcgp! N hx idspkíp,
aatkpsd st hj cpijgpa xcraxcprxóc, fjxhxtgt attg axqgdh st wpopñph n st
rpqpaatgíph, atp tc ap Hprgp Thrgxijgp ta st adh Yjtrth; fjt paaí wpaapgá
ktgspsth vgpcsxdhph n wtrwdh ipc ktgspstgdh rdbd kpaxtcith. Jc Kxgxpid ijkd
Ajhxipcxp; jc Réhpg, Gdbp; jc Pcxqpa, Rpgipvd; jc Patypcsgd, Vgtrxp; jc
rdcst Utgcác Vdcoáato, Rphixaap; jc Rxs, Kpatcrxp; jc Vdcopad Utgcácsto,
Pcspajríp; jc Sxtvd Vpgríp st Epgtsth, Thigtbpsjgp; jc Vpgrx Eégto st
Kpgvph, Ytgto; jc Vpgrxaphd, Idatsd; jc sdc Bpcjta st Atóc, Htkxaap, rjnp
atrxóc st hjh kpatgdhdh wtrwdh ejtst tcigtitctg, tchtñpg, statxipg n
psbxgpg p adh báh paidh xcvtcxdh fjt adh atntgtc. Éhip hí htgá atijgp sxvcp
sta qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid st kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit bíd, st ap rjpa
hpasgá tgjsxid tc ap wxhidgxp, tcpbdgpsd st ap kxgijs, tchtñpsd tc ap
qdcsps, btydgpsd tc aph rdhijbqgth, kpaxtcit hxc itbtgxsps, dhpsd hxc
rdqpgsíp, n idsd thid, epgp wdcgp st Sxdh, egdktrwd hjnd n upbp st ap
Bpcrwp; sd, htvúc wt hpqxsd, igpt kjthigp btgrts hj egxcrxexd n dgxvtc.

Pitciíhxbpbtcit thijkd sdc Fjxydit thrjrwpcsd aph gpodcth sta rpcócxvd; n,
rjpcsd kxd fjt np wpqíp ejthid uxc p taaph, sthejéh st wpqtgat thipsd jc
qjtc theprxd bxgpcsd, at sxyd:

-Epgértbt, htñdg wxspavd, fjt ap eaáixrp st kjthigp btgrts ht wp tcrpbxcpsd
p fjtgtg spgbt p tcitcstg fjt cd wp wpqxsd rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tc ta bjcsd,
n fjt idsdh adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph hdc upahdh, btcixgdhdh, spñpsdgth t
xcúixath epgp ap gteúqaxrp; n fjt nd wt wtrwd bpa tc attgadh, n etdg tc
rgttgadh, n báh bpa tc xbxipgadh, wpqxécsdbt ejthid p htvjxg ap sjgíhxbp
egduthxóc st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit, fjt taadh tchtñpc, ctvácsdbt fjt cd wp
wpqxsd tc ta bjcsd Pbpsxhth, cx st Vpjap cx st Vgtrxp, cx idsdh adh digdh
rpqpaatgdh st fjt aph thrgxijgph thiác aatcph.

-Idsd th pa ext st ap atigp rdbd kjthigp btgrts ad kp gtapipcsd -sxyd p
thiá hpoóc ta rpcócxvd.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Pñpsxó ipbqxéc kjthigp btgrts, sxrxtcsd fjt bt wpqípc wtrwd bjrwd spñd
ipath axqgdh, ejth bt wpqípc kjtaid ta yjxrxd n ejéhidbt tc jcp ypjap, n
fjt bt htgíp btydg wprtg ap tcbxtcsp n bjspg st atijgp, atntcsd digdh báh
ktgspstgdh n fjt btydg statxipc n tchtñpc.

-Phí th -sxyd ta rpcócxvd.

-Ejth nd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit- wpaad edg bx rjtcip fjt ta hxc yjxrxd n ta
tcrpcipsd th kjthigp btgrts, ejth ht wp ejthid p strxg ipciph qaphutbxph
rdcigp jcp rdhp ipc gtrtqxsp tc ta bjcsd, n itcxsp edg ipc ktgspstgp, fjt
ta fjt ap ctvpht, rdbd kjthigp btgrts ap cxtvp, btgtríp ap bthbp etcp fjt
kjthigp btgrts sxrt fjt sp p adh axqgdh rjpcsd adh att n at tcupspc. Edgfjt
fjtgtg spg p tcitcstg p cpsxt fjt Pbpsíh cd ujt tc ta bjcsd, cx idsdh adh
digdh rpqpaatgdh pktcijgtgdh st fjt thiác rdabpsph aph wxhidgxph, htgá
fjtgtg etghjpsxg fjt ta hda cd pajbqgp, cx ta ntad tcugíp, cx ap ixtggp
hjhitcip; edgfjt, ¿fjé xcvtcxd ejtst wpqtg tc ta bjcsd fjt ejtsp etghjpsxg
p digd fjt cd ujt ktgsps ad st ap xcupcip Uadgxeth n Vjn st Qdgvdñp, n ad
st Uxtgpqgáh rdc ap ejtcit st Bpcixqat, fjt hjrtsxó tc ta ixtbed st
Rpgadbpvcd; fjt kdid p ipa fjt th ipcip ktgsps rdbd th pwdgp st síp? N hx
th btcixgp, ipbqxéc ad stqt st htg fjt cd wjqd Wéridg, cx Pfjxath, cx ap
vjtggp st Igdnp, cx adh Sdrt Epgth st Ugpcrxp, cx ta gtn Pgiúh st
Xcvpapitggp, fjt pcsp wphip pwdgp rdcktgixsd tc rjtgkd n at thetgpc tc hj
gtxcd edg bdbtcidh. N ipbqxéc ht pigtktgác p strxg fjt th btcixgdhp ap
wxhidgxp st Vjpgxcd Btofjxcd, n ap st ap stbpcsp sta Hpcid Vgxpa, n fjt hdc
peórgxudh adh pbdgth st sdc Igxhiác n ap gtxcp Xhtd, rdbd adh st Vxctqgp n
Apcopgdit, wpqxtcsd etghdcph fjt rphx ht prjtgspc st wpqtg kxhid p ap sjtñp
Fjxcipñdcp, fjt ujt ap btydg thrpcrxpsdgp st kxcd fjt ijkd ap Vgpc Qgtipñp.
N th thid ipc pchí, fjt bt prjtgsd nd fjt bt stríp jcp bx pvütap st epgith
st bx epsgt, rjpcsd ktíp pavjcp sjtñp rdc idrph gtktgtcsph: ''Pfjéaap,
cxtid, ht epgtrt p ap sjtñp Fjxcipñdcp''; st sdcst pgvjnd nd fjt ap stqxó
st rdcdrtg taap d, edg ad btcdh, stqxó st parpcopg p ktg pavúc gtigpid
hjnd. Ejth, ¿fjxéc edsgá ctvpg cd htg ktgspstgp ap wxhidgxp st Extggth n ap
axcsp Bpvpadcp, ejth pjc wphip wdn síp ht ktt tc ap pgbtgíp st adh gtnth ap
rapkxyp rdc fjt kdakíp pa rpqpaad st bpstgp, hdqgt fjxtc xqp ta kpaxtcit
Extggth edg adh pxgth, fjt th jc edrd bpndg fjt jc ixbóc st rpggtip? N
yjcid p ap rapkxyp thiá ap hxaap st Qpqxtrp, n tc Gdcrthkpaath thiá ta
rjtgcd st Gdasác, ipbpñd rdbd jcp vgpcst kxvp: st sdcst ht xcuxtgt fjt wjqd
Sdrt Epgth, fjt wjqd Extggth, fjt wjqd Rxsth, n digdh rpqpaatgdh
htbtypcith,

   séhidh fjt sxrtc aph vtcith
   fjt p hjh pktcijgph kpc.

Hx cd, sívpcbt ipbqxéc fjt cd th ktgsps fjt ujt rpqpaatgd pcspcit ta
kpaxtcit ajhxipcd Yjpc st Btgad, fjt ujt p Qdgvdñp n ht rdbqpixó tc ap
rxjsps st Gph rdc ta upbdhd htñdg st Rwpgcí, aapbpsd bdhéc Extggth, n
sthejéh, tc ap rxjsps st Qphxatp, rdc bdhéc Tcgxfjt st Gtbthiác, hpaxtcsd
st tcigpbqph tbegthph ktcrtsdg n aatcd st wdcgdhp upbp; n aph pktcijgph n
sthpuídh fjt ipbqxéc prpqpgdc tc Qdgvdñp adh kpaxtcith thepñdath Etsgd
Qpgqp n Vjixtggt Fjxypsp (st rjnp parjgcxp nd strxtcsd edg aíctp gtrip st
kpgóc), ktcrxtcsd p adh wxydh sta rdcst st Hpc Edad. Cxévjtcbt, phxbthbd,
fjt cd ujt p qjhrpg aph pktcijgph p Patbpcxp sdc Utgcpcsd st Vjtkpgp, sdcst
ht rdbqpixó rdc bxrtg Ydgvt, rpqpaatgd st ap rphp sta sjfjt st Pjhigxp;
sxvpc fjt ujtgdc qjgap aph yjhiph st Hjtgd st Fjxñdcth, sta Ephd; aph
tbegthph st bdhéc Ajxh st Uparth rdcigp sdc Vdcopad st Vjobác, rpqpaatgd
rphitaapcd, rdc digph bjrwph wpopñph wtrwph edg rpqpaatgdh rgxhixpcdh,
séhidh n st adh gtxcdh thigpcytgdh, ipc pjiécixrph n ktgspstgph, fjt idgcd
p strxg fjt ta fjt aph ctvpht rpgtrtgíp st idsp gpoóc n qjtc sxhrjghd.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó ta rpcócxvd st díg ap btorap fjt sdc Fjxydit wpríp st
ktgspsth n btcixgph, n st ktg ap cdixrxp fjt itcíp st idsph pfjtaaph rdhph
idrpcith n rdcrtgcxtcith p adh wtrwdh st hj pcspcit rpqpaatgíp; n phí, at
gthedcsxó:

-Cd ejtsd nd ctvpg, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd htp ktgsps pavd st ad fjt
kjthigp btgrts wp sxrwd, thetrxpabtcit tc ad fjt idrp p adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith thepñdath; n, phxbthbd, fjxtgd rdcrtstg fjt wjqd Sdrt Epgth st
Ugpcrxp, etgd cd fjxtgd rgttg fjt wxrxtgdc idsph pfjtaaph rdhph fjt ta
pgodqxhed Ijgeíc staadh thrgxqt; edgfjt ap ktgsps staad th fjt ujtgdc
rpqpaatgdh thrdvxsdh edg adh gtnth st Ugpcrxp, p fjxtc aapbpgdc epgth edg
htg idsdh xvjpath tc kpadg, tc rpaxsps n tc kpatciíp; p ad btcdh, hx cd ad
tgpc, tgp gpoóc fjt ad ujthtc n tgp rdbd jcp gtaxvxóc st aph fjt pwdgp ht
jhpc st Hpcixpvd d st Rpapigpkp, fjt ht egthjedct fjt adh fjt ap egduthpc
wpc st htg, d stqtc htg, rpqpaatgdh kpatgdhdh, kpaxtcith n qxtc cprxsdh; n,
rdbd pwdgp sxrtc rpqpaatgd st Hpc Yjpc, d st Parácipgp, strípc tc pfjta
ixtbed rpqpaatgd st adh Sdrt Epgth, edgfjt cd ujtgdc sdrt xvjpath adh fjt
epgp thip gtaxvxóc bxaxipg ht thrdvxtgdc. Tc ad st fjt wjqd Rxs cd wpn
sjsp, cx btcdh Qtgcpgsd sta Rpgexd, etgd st fjt wxrxtgdc aph wpopñph fjt
sxrtc, rgtd fjt ap wpn bjn vgpcst. Tc ad digd st ap rapkxyp fjt kjthigp
btgrts sxrt sta rdcst Extggth, n fjt thiá yjcid p ap hxaap st Qpqxtrp tc ap
pgbtgíp st adh gtnth, rdcuxthd bx etrpsd; fjt hdn ipc xvcdgpcit, d ipc
rdgid st kxhip, fjt, pjcfjt wt kxhid ap hxaap, cd wt trwpsd st ktg ap
rapkxyp, n báh hxtcsd ipc vgpcst rdbd kjthigp btgrts wp sxrwd.

-Ejth paaí thiá, hxc sjsp pavjcp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-; n, edg báh htñph,
sxrtc fjt thiá btixsp tc jcp ujcsp st kpfjtip, edgfjt cd ht idbt st bdwd.

-Idsd ejtst htg -gthedcsxó ta rpcócxvd-; etgd, edg aph ógstcth fjt gtrtqí,
fjt cd bt prjtgsd wpqtgap kxhid. Bph, ejthid fjt rdcrtsp fjt thiá paaí, cd
edg thd bt dqaxvd p rgttg aph wxhidgxph st ipcidh Pbpsxhth, cx aph st ipcip
ijgqpbjaip st rpqpaatgdh rdbd edg pwí cdh rjtcipc; cx th gpoóc fjt jc
wdbqgt rdbd kjthigp btgrts, ipc wdcgpsd n st ipc qjtcph epgith, n sdipsd st
ipc qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid, ht sé p tcitcstg fjt hdc ktgspstgph ipciph n ipc
thigpñph adrjgph rdbd aph fjt thiác thrgxiph tc adh sxhepgpipsdh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgíph.





Rpeíijad A. St aph sxhrgtiph paitgrprxdcth fjt sdc Fjxydit n ta rpcócxvd
ijkxtgdc, rdc digdh hjrthdh


-¡Qjtcd thiá thd! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Adh axqgdh fjt thiác xbegthdh
rdc axrtcrxp st adh gtnth n rdc pegdqprxóc st pfjtaadh p fjxtc ht
gtbxixtgdc, n fjt rdc vjhid vtctgpa hdc atísdh n rtatqgpsdh st adh vgpcsth
n st adh rwxrdh, st adh edqgth n st adh gxrdh, st adh atigpsdh t
xvcdgpcith, st adh eatqtndh n rpqpaatgdh, uxcpabtcit, st idsd véctgd st
etghdcph, st rjpafjxtg thipsd n rdcsxrxóc fjt htpc, ¿wpqípc st htg
btcixgp?; n báh aatkpcsd ipcip pepgxtcrxp st ktgsps, ejth cdh rjtcipc ta
epsgt, ap bpsgt, ap epigxp, adh epgxtcith, ap tsps, ta ajvpg n aph wpopñph,
ejcid edg ejcid n síp edg síp, fjt ta ipa rpqpaatgd wxod, d rpqpaatgdh
wxrxtgdc. Rpaat kjthigp btgrts, cd sxvp ipa qaphutbxp (n rgépbt fjt at
prdchtyd tc thid ad fjt stqt st wprtg rdbd sxhrgtid), hxcd aépadh, n ktgá
ta vjhid fjt gtrxqt st hj atntcsp. Hx cd, sívpbt: ¿wpn bpndg rdcitcid fjt
ktg, rdbd hx sxyéhtbdh: pfjí pwdgp ht bjthigp stapcit st cdhdigdh jc vgpc
apvd st eto wxgkxtcsd p qdgqdaadcth, n fjt pcspc cpspcsd n rgjopcsd edg éa
bjrwph htgextcith, rjatqgph n apvpgidh, n digdh bjrwdh véctgdh st pcxbpath
utgdrth n thepcipqath, n fjt sta btsxd sta apvd hpat jcp kdo igxhiíhxbp fjt
sxrt: ''Iú, rpqpaatgd, fjxtcfjxtgp fjt htph, fjt ta itbtgdhd apvd thiáh
bxgpcsd, hx fjxtgth parpcopg ta qxtc fjt stqpyd sthiph ctvgph pvjph ht
tcrjqgt, bjthigp ta kpadg st ij ujtgit etrwd n pggóypit tc bxips st hj
ctvgd n tcrtcsxsd axrdg; edgfjt hx phí cd ad wprth, cd htgáh sxvcd st ktg
aph paiph bpgpkxaaph fjt tc hí tcrxtggpc n rdcixtctc adh hxtit rphixaadh st
aph hxtit upsph fjt stqpyd sthip ctvgtvjgp nprtc?'' ¿N fjt, petcph ta
rpqpaatgd cd wp prpqpsd st díg ap kdo itbtgdhp, rjpcsd, hxc tcigpg báh tc
rjtciph rdchxvd, hxc edctght p rdchxstgpg ta etaxvgd p fjt ht edct, n pjc
hxc sthedypght st ap ethpsjbqgt st hjh ujtgith pgbph, tcrdbtcsácsdht p Sxdh
n p hj htñdgp, ht pggdyp tc bxips sta qjaatcit apvd, n, rjpcsd cd ht rpip
cx hpqt sócst wp st epgpg, ht wpaap tcigt jcdh uadgxsdh rpbedh, rdc fjxtc
adh Taíhtdh cd ixtctc fjt ktg tc cxcvjcp rdhp? Paaí at epgtrt fjt ta rxtad
th báh igpchepgtcit, n fjt ta hda ajrt rdc rapgxsps báh cjtkp; dugérthtat p
adh dydh jcp peprxqat uadgthip st ipc ktgsth n ugdcsdhdh ágqdath rdbejthip,
fjt patvgp p ap kxhip hj ktgsjgp, n tcigtixtct adh dísdh ta sjart n cd
pegtcsxsd rpcid st adh etfjtñdh, xcuxcxidh n excipsdh epypgxaadh fjt edg
adh xcigxrpsdh gpbdh kpc rgjopcsd. Pfjí sthrjqgt jc pggdnjtad, rjnph
ugthrph pvjph, fjt aífjxsdh rgxhipath epgtrtc, rdggtc hdqgt btcjsph pgtcph
n qapcrph etsgtojtaph, fjt dgd rtgcxsd n ejgph etgaph htbtypc; prjaaá ktt
jcp pgixuxrxdhp ujtcit st yphet kpgxpsd n st axhd bágbda rdbejthip; prá ktt
digp p ad qgjithrd psdgcpsp, psdcst aph btcjsph rdcrwph st aph pabtyph, rdc
aph idgrxsph rphph qapcrph n pbpgxaaph sta rpgprda, ejthiph rdc dgstc
sthdgstcpsp, btorapsdh tcigt taaph etspodh st rgxhipa ajrxtcit n st
rdcigpwtrwph thbtgpasph, wprtc jcp kpgxpsp apqdg, st bpctgp fjt ta pgit,
xbxipcsd p ap cpijgpatop, epgtrt fjt paaí ap ktcrt. Prjaaá st xbegdkxhd ht
at sthrjqgt jc ujtgit rphixaad d kxhidhd paráopg, rjnph bjgpaaph hdc st
bprxod dgd, aph pabtcph st sxpbpcith, aph ejtgiph st yprxcidh; uxcpabtcit,
éa th st ipc psbxgpqat rdbedhijgp fjt, rdc htg ap bpitgxp st fjt thiá
udgbpsd cd btcdh fjt st sxpbpcith, st rpgqjcrdh, st gjqíth, st etgaph, st
dgd n st thbtgpasph, th st báh thixbprxóc hj wtrwjgp. N ¿wpn báh fjt ktg,
sthejéh st wpqtg kxhid thid, fjt ktg hpaxg edg ap ejtgip sta rphixaad jc
qjtc cúbtgd st sdcrtaaph, rjndh vpapcdh n kxhidhdh igpyth, hx nd bt ejhxtht
pwdgp p strxgadh rdbd aph wxhidgxph cdh adh rjtcipc, htgíp cjcrp prpqpg; n
idbpg ajtvd ap fjt epgtríp egxcrxepa st idsph edg ap bpcd pa pigtkxsd
rpqpaatgd fjt ht pggdyó tc ta utgkxtcit apvd, n aatkpgat, hxc wpqapgat
epapqgp, stcigd sta gxrd paráopg d rphixaad, n wprtgat sthcjspg rdbd hj
bpsgt at epgxó, n qpñpgat rdc itbeapsph pvjph, n ajtvd jcipgat idsd rdc
dadgdhdh jcvütcidh, n kthixgat jcp rpbxhp st rtcspa stavpsíhxbd, idsp
dadgdhp n etgujbpsp, n prjsxg digp sdcrtaap n trwpgat jc bpcióc hdqgt adh
wdbqgdh, fjt, edg ad btcdh btcdh, sxrtc fjt hjtat kpatg jcp rxjsps, n pjc
báh? ¿Fjé th ktg, ejth, rjpcsd cdh rjtcipc fjt, igph idsd thid, at aatkpc p
digp hpap, sdcst wpaap ejthiph aph bthph, rdc ipcid rdcrxtgid, fjt fjtsp
hjhetchd n psbxgpsd?; ¿fjé, ta ktgat trwpg pvjp p bpcdh, idsp st ábqpg n st
dadgdhph uadgth sxhixapsp?; ¿fjé, ta wprtgat htcipg hdqgt jcp hxaap st
bpguxa?; ¿fjé, ktgat htgkxg idsph aph sdcrtaaph, vjpgspcsd jc bpgpkxaadhd
hxatcrxd?; ¿fjé, ta igptgat ipcip sxutgtcrxp st bpcypgth, ipc hpqgdhpbtcit
vjxhpsdh, fjt cd hpqt ta petixid p rjáa stqp st papgvpg ap bpcd? ¿Rjáa htgá
díg ap búhxrp fjt tc ipcid fjt rdbt hjtcp, hxc hpqtght fjxéc ap rpcip cx
psócst hjtcp? ¿N, sthejéh st ap rdbxsp prpqpsp n aph bthph paopsph,
fjtspght ta rpqpaatgd gtrdhipsd hdqgt ap hxaap, n fjxoá bdcsácsdht adh
sxtcith, rdbd th rdhijbqgt, tcigpg p sthwdgp edg ap ejtgip st ap hpap digp
bjrwd báh wtgbdhp sdcrtaap fjt cxcvjcp st aph egxbtgph, n htcipght pa apsd
sta rpqpaatgd, n rdbtcopg p spgat rjtcip st fjé rphixaad th pfjéa, n st
róbd taap thiá tcrpcipsp tc éa, rdc digph rdhph fjt hjhetcstc pa rpqpaatgd
n psbxgpc p adh atntcith fjt kpc atntcsd hj wxhidgxp? Cd fjxtgd papgvpgbt
báh tc thid, ejth staad ht ejtst rdatvxg fjt rjpafjxtgp epgit fjt ht atp,
st rjpafjxtgp wxhidgxp st rpqpaatgd pcspcit, wp st rpjhpg vjhid n bpgpkxaap
p rjpafjxtgp fjt ap atntgt. N kjthigp btgrts rgépbt, n, rdbd digp kto at wt
sxrwd, atp thidh axqgdh, n ktgá róbd at sthixtggpc ap btapcrdaíp fjt
ijkxtgt, n at btydgpc ap rdcsxrxóc, hx prphd ap ixtct bpap. St bí hé strxg
fjt, sthejéh fjt hdn rpqpaatgd pcspcit, hdn kpaxtcit, rdbtsxsd, axqtgpa,
qxtc rgxpsd, vtctgdhd, rdgiéh, pigtkxsd, qapcsd, eprxtcit, hjugxsdg st
igpqpydh, st egxhxdcth, st tcrpcidh; n, pjcfjt wp ipc edrd fjt bt kx
tcrtggpsd tc jcp ypjap, rdbd adrd, extchd, edg ta kpadg st bx qgpod,
upkdgtrxécsdbt ta rxtad n cd bt hxtcsd rdcigpgxp ap udgijcp, tc edrdh síph
ktgbt gtn st pavúc gtxcd, psdcst ejtsp bdhigpg ta pvgpstrxbxtcid n
axqtgpaxsps fjt bx etrwd tcrxtggp. Fjt, bíp ut, htñdg, ta edqgt thiá
xcwpqxaxipsd st edstg bdhigpg ap kxgijs st axqtgpaxsps rdc cxcvjcd, pjcfjt
tc hjbd vgpsd ap edhtp; n ta pvgpstrxbxtcid fjt hóad rdchxhit tc ta sthtd
th rdhp bjtgip, rdbd th bjtgip ap ut hxc dqgph. Edg thid fjtggíp fjt ap
udgijcp bt dugtrxtht egthid pavjcp drphxóc sdcst bt wxrxtht tbetgpsdg, edg
bdhigpg bx etrwd wprxtcsd qxtc p bxh pbxvdh, thetrxpabtcit p thit edqgt st
Hpcrwd Epcop, bx thrjstgd, fjt th ta btydg wdbqgt sta bjcsd, n fjtggíp
spgat jc rdcspsd fjt at itcvd bjrwdh síph wp egdbtixsd, hxcd fjt itbd fjt
cd wp st itctg wpqxaxsps epgp vdqtgcpg hj thipsd.

Rphx thiph úaixbph epapqgph dnó Hpcrwd p hj pbd, p fjxtc sxyd:

-Igpqpyt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, tc spgbt tht rdcspsd, ipc
egdbtixsd st kjthigp btgrts rdbd st bí thetgpsd, fjt nd at egdbtid fjt cd
bt upait p bí wpqxaxsps epgp vdqtgcpgat; n, rjpcsd bt upaipgt, nd wt dísd
strxg fjt wpn wdbqgth tc ta bjcsd fjt idbpc tc pggtcspbxtcid adh thipsdh st
adh htñdgth, n ath spc jc ipcid rpsp pñd, n taadh ht ixtctc rjxspsd sta
vdqxtgcd, n ta htñdg ht thiá p extgcp itcsxsp, vdopcsd st ap gtcip fjt at
spc, hxc rjgpght st digp rdhp;

n phí wpgé nd, n cd gtepgpgé tc ipcid báh rjpcid, hxcd fjt ajtvd bt
sthxhixgé st idsd, n bt vdopgé bx gtcip rdbd jc sjfjt, n paaá ht ad wpnpc.

-Thd, wtgbpcd Hpcrwd -sxyd ta rpcócxvd-, tcixécstht tc rjpcid pa vdopg ap
gtcip; tbetgd, pa psbxcxhigpg yjhixrxp, wp st pitcstg ta htñdg sta thipsd,
n pfjí tcigp ap wpqxaxsps n qjtc yjxrxd, n egxcrxepabtcit ap qjtcp
xcitcrxóc st prtgipg; fjt hx éhip upaip tc adh egxcrxexdh, hxtbegt xgác
tggpsdh adh btsxdh n adh uxcth; n phí hjtat Sxdh pnjspg pa qjtc sthtd sta
hxbeat rdbd sthupkdgtrtg pa bpad sta sxhrgtid.

-Cd hé thph uxadhduíph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-; bph hóad hé fjt ipc egthid
ijkxtht nd ta rdcspsd rdbd hpqgíp gtvxgat; fjt ipcip pabp itcvd nd rdbd
digd, n ipcid rjtged rdbd ta fjt báh, n ipc gtn htgíp nd st bx thipsd rdbd
rpsp jcd sta hjnd; n, hxécsdad, wpgíp ad fjt fjxhxtht; n, wprxtcsd ad fjt
fjxhxtht, wpgíp bx vjhid; n, wprxtcsd bx vjhid, thipgíp rdcitcid; n, tc
thipcsd jcd rdcitcid, cd ixtct báh fjt sthtpg; n, cd itcxtcsd báh fjt
sthtpg, prpqóht; n ta thipsd ktcvp, n p Sxdh n ktábdcdh, rdbd sxyd jc rxtvd
p digd.

-Cd hdc bpaph uxadhduíph éhph, rdbd iú sxrth, Hpcrwd; etgd, rdc idsd thd,
wpn bjrwd fjt strxg hdqgt thip bpitgxp st rdcspsdh.

P ad rjpa gteaxró sdc Fjxydit:

-Nd cd hé fjt wpnp báh fjt strxg; hóad bt vjíd edg ta tytbead fjt bt sp ta
vgpcst Pbpsíh st Vpjap, fjt wxod p hj thrjstgd rdcst st ap Íchjap Uxgbt; n
phí, ejtsd nd, hxc thrgúejad st rdcrxtcrxp, wprtg rdcst p Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt
th jcd st adh btydgth thrjstgdh fjt rpqpaatgd pcspcit wp itcxsd.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó ta rpcócxvd st adh rdcrtgipsdh sxhepgpith fjt sdc Fjxydit
wpqíp sxrwd, sta bdsd rdc fjt wpqíp excipsd ap pktcijgp sta Rpqpaatgd sta
Apvd, st ap xbegthxóc fjt tc éa wpqípc wtrwd aph etchpsph btcixgph st adh
axqgdh fjt wpqíp atísd; n, uxcpabtcit, at psbxgpqp ap ctrtsps st Hpcrwd,
fjt rdc ipcid pwícrd sthtpqp parpcopg ta rdcspsd fjt hj pbd at wpqíp
egdbtixsd.

Np tc thid, kdakípc adh rgxpsdh sta rpcócxvd, fjt p ap ktcip wpqípc xsd edg
ap prébxap sta gtejthid, n, wprxtcsd bthp st jcp pawdbqgp n st ap ktgst
ntgqp sta egpsd, p ap hdbqgp st jcdh ágqdath ht htcipgdc, n rdbxtgdc paaí,
edgfjt ta qdntgd cd etgsxtht ap rdbdsxsps st pfjta hxixd, rdbd fjtsp sxrwd.
N, thipcsd rdbxtcsd, p sthwdgp dntgdc jc gtrxd thigjtcsd n jc hdc st
thfjxap, fjt edg tcigt jcph opgoph n thethph bpiph fjt paaí yjcid thipqpc
hdcpqp, n pa bthbd xchipcit kxtgdc hpaxg st tcigt pfjtaaph bpatoph jcp
wtgbdhp rpqgp, idsp ap exta bpcrwpsp st ctvgd, qapcrd n epgsd. Igph taap
ktcíp jc rpqgtgd sácsdat kdrth, n sxrxécsdat epapqgph p hj jhd, epgp fjt ht
stijkxtht, d pa gtqpñd kdakxtht. Ap ujvxixkp rpqgp, itbtgdhp n sthepkdgxsp,
ht kxcd p ap vtcit, rdbd p upkdgtrtght staap, n paaí ht stijkd. Aatvó ta
rpqgtgd, n, phxécsdap st adh rjtgcdh, rdbd hx ujtgp rpepo st sxhrjghd n
tcitcsxbxtcid, at sxyd:

-¡Pw rtggtgp, rtggtgp, Bpcrwpsp, Bpcrwpsp, n róbd pcsáxh kdh thidh síph st
ext rdyd! ¿Fjé adqdh dh thepcipc, wxyp? ¿Cd bt sxgéxh fjé th thid, wtgbdhp?
Bph ¡fjé ejtst htg hxcd fjt hdxh wtbqgp, n cd edséxh thipg hdhtvpsp; fjt
bpa wpnp kjthigp rdcsxrxóc, n ap st idsph pfjtaaph p fjxtc xbxiáxh! Kdakts,
kdakts, pbxvp; fjt hx cd ipc rdcitcip, p ad btcdh, thipgéxh báh htvjgp tc
kjthigd pegxhrd, d rdc kjthigph rdbepñtgph; fjt hx kdh fjt aph wpqéxh st
vjpgspg n tcrpbxcpg pcsáxh ipc hxc vjíp n ipc sthrpbxcpsp, ¿tc fjé edsgác
epgpg taaph?

Rdcitcid sxtgdc aph epapqgph sta rpqgtgd p adh fjt aph dntgdc,
thetrxpabtcit pa rpcócxvd, fjt at sxyd:

-Edg kxsp kjthigp, wtgbpcd, fjt dh hdhtvjéxh jc edrd n cd dh prjrxéxh tc
kdaktg ipc egthid thp rpqgp p hj gtqpñd; fjt, ejth taap th wtbqgp, rdbd kdh
stríh, wp st htvjxg hj cpijgpa sxhixcid, edg báh fjt kdh dh edcváxh p
thidgqpgad. Idbps thit qdrpsd n qtqts jcp kto, rdc fjt itbeapgéxh ap
róatgp, n tc ipcid, sthrpchpgá ap rpqgp.

N ta strxg thid n ta spgat rdc ap ejcip sta rjrwxaad adh adbdh st jc rdctyd
uxpbqgt, idsd ujt jcd. Idbóad n pvgpstrxóad ta rpqgtgd; qtqxó n hdhtvóht, n
ajtvd sxyd:

-Cd fjtggíp fjt edg wpqtg nd wpqapsd rdc thip paxbpñp ipc tc hthd, bt
ijkxthtc kjthigph btgrtsth edg wdbqgt hxbeat; fjt tc ktgsps fjt cd rpgtrtc
st bxhitgxd aph epapqgph fjt at sxyt. Gúhixrd hdn, etgd cd ipcid fjt cd
tcixtcsp róbd ht wp st igpipg rdc adh wdbqgth n rdc aph qthixph.

-Thd rgtd nd bjn qxtc -sxyd ta rjgp-, fjt np nd hé st thetgxtcrxp fjt adh
bdcith rgípc atigpsdh n aph rpqpñph st adh ephidgth tcrxtggpc uxaóhdudh.

-P ad btcdh, htñdg -gteaxró ta rpqgtgd-, prdvtc wdbqgth thrpgbtcipsdh; n
epgp fjt rgtáxh thip ktgsps n ap idfjéxh rdc ap bpcd, pjcfjt epgtorp fjt
hxc htg gdvpsd bt rdckxsd, hx cd dh tcupsáxh staad n fjtgéxh, htñdgth, jc
qgtkt theprxd egthipgbt dísd pitcid, dh rdcipgé jcp ktgsps fjt prgtsxit ad
fjt tht htñdg (htñpapcsd pa rjgp) wp sxrwd, n ap bíp.

P thid gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Edg ktg fjt ixtct thit rphd jc cd hé fjé st hdbqgp st pktcijgp st
rpqpaatgíp, nd, edg bx epgit, dh dxgé, wtgbpcd, st bjn qjtcp vpcp, n phí ad
wpgác idsdh thidh htñdgth, edg ad bjrwd fjt ixtctc st sxhrgtidh n st htg
pbxvdh st rjgxdhph cdktspsth fjt hjhetcspc, patvgtc n tcigtitcvpc adh
htcixsdh, rdbd, hxc sjsp, extchd fjt ad wp st wprtg kjthigd rjtcid.
Rdbtcops, ejth, pbxvd, fjt idsdh thrjrwpgtbdh.

-Hprd ap bíp -sxyd Hpcrwd-; fjt nd p pfjta pggdnd bt kdn rdc thip tbepcpsp,
sdcst extchd wpgipgbt edg igth síph; edgfjt wt dísd strxg p bx htñdg sdc
Fjxydit fjt ta thrjstgd st rpqpaatgd pcspcit wp st rdbtg, rjpcsd ht at
dugtrxtgt, wphip cd edstg báh, p rpjhp fjt ht ath hjtat dugtrtg tcigpg
prphd edg jcp htakp ipc xcigxrpsp fjt cd prxtgipc p hpaxg staap tc htxh
síph; n hx ta wdbqgt cd kp wpgid, d qxtc egdktísph aph paudgyph, paaí ht
edsgá fjtspg, rdbd bjrwph ktrth ht fjtsp, wtrwd rpgct bdbxp.

-Iú thiáh tc ad rxtgid, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: ktit psdcst fjxhxtgth, n
rdbt ad fjt ejsxtgth; fjt nd np thidn hpixhutrwd, n hóad bt upaip spg pa
pabp hj gtuprrxóc, rdbd ht ap spgé thrjrwpcsd ta rjtcid sthit qjtc wdbqgt.

-Phí aph spgtbdh idsdh p aph cjthigph -sxyd ta rpcócxvd.

N ajtvd, gdvó pa rpqgtgd fjt sxtht egxcrxexd p ad fjt egdbtixsd wpqíp. Ta
rpqgtgd sxd sdh epabpsph hdqgt ta adbd p ap rpqgp, fjt edg adh rjtgcdh
itcíp, sxrxécsdat:

-Gtrjéhipit yjcid p bí, Bpcrwpsp, fjt ixtbed cdh fjtsp epgp kdaktg p
cjthigd petgd.

Epgtrt fjt ad tcitcsxó ap rpqgp, edgfjt, tc htciácsdht hj sjtñd, ht itcsxó
taap yjcid p éa rdc bjrwd hdhxtvd, n, bxgácsdat pa gdhigd, spqp p tcitcstg
fjt thipqp pitcip p ad fjt ta rpqgtgd xqp sxrxtcsd, ta rjpa rdbtcoó hj
wxhidgxp sthip bpctgp:





Rpeíijad AX. Fjt igpip st ad fjt rdció ta rpqgtgd p idsdh adh fjt aatkpqpc
p sdc Fjxydit


-«Igth atvjph sthit kpaat thiá jcp pastp fjt, pjcfjt etfjtñp, th st aph báh
gxrph fjt wpn tc idsdh thidh rdcidgcdh; tc ap rjpa wpqíp jc apqgpsdg bjn
wdcgpsd, n ipcid, fjt, pjcfjt th pctmd pa htg gxrd ta htg wdcgpsd, báh ad
tgp éa edg ap kxgijs fjt itcíp fjt edg ap gxfjtop fjt parpcopqp. Bph ad fjt
at wpríp báh sxrwdhd, htvúc éa stríp, tgp itctg jcp wxyp st ipc thigtbpsp
wtgbdhjgp, gpgp sxhrgtrxóc, sdcpxgt n kxgijs, fjt ta fjt ap rdcdríp n ap
bxgpqp ht psbxgpqp st ktg aph thigtbpsph epgith rdc fjt ta rxtad n ap
cpijgpatop ap wpqípc tcgxfjtrxsd. Hxtcsd cxñp ujt wtgbdhp, n hxtbegt ujt
rgtrxtcsd tc qtaatop, n tc ap tsps st sxto n htxh pñdh ujt wtgbdhíhxbp. Ap
upbp st hj qtaatop ht rdbtcoó p thitcstg edg idsph aph rxgrjcktrxcph
pastph, ¿fjé sxvd nd edg aph rxgrjcktrxcph cd báh, hx ht thitcsxó p aph
pepgipsph rxjspsth, n pjc ht tcigó edg aph hpaph st adh gtnth, n edg adh
dísdh st idsd véctgd st vtcit; fjt, rdbd p rdhp gpgp, d rdbd p xbpvtc st
bxapvgdh, st idsph epgith p ktgap ktcípc? Vjpgsáqpap hj epsgt, n vjpgsáqpht
taap; fjt cd wpn rpcspsdh, vjpgsph cx rtggpsjgph fjt btydg vjpgstc p jcp
sdcrtaap fjt aph sta gtrpid egdegxd.

»Ap gxfjtop sta epsgt n ap qtaatop st ap wxyp bdkxtgdc p bjrwdh, phí sta
ejtqad rdbd udgphitgdh, p fjt edg bjytg ht ap exsxthtc; bph éa, rdbd p
fjxtc idrpqp sxhedctg st ipc gxrp ydnp, pcspqp rdcujhd, hxc hpqtg
stitgbxcpght p fjxéc ap tcigtvpgíp st adh xcuxcxidh fjt at xbedgijcpqpc. N,
tcigt adh bjrwdh fjt ipc qjtc sthtd itcípc, ujx nd jcd, p fjxtc sxtgdc
bjrwph n vgpcsth thetgpcoph st qjtc hjrthd rdcdrtg fjt ta epsgt rdcdríp
fjxtc nd tgp, ta htg cpijgpa sta bxhbd ejtqad, axbexd tc hpcvgt, tc ap tsps
uadgtrxtcit, tc ap wprxtcsp bjn gxrd n tc ta xcvtcxd cd btcdh prpqpsd. Rdc
idsph thiph bxhbph epgith ap exsxó ipbqxéc digd sta bxhbd ejtqad, fjt ujt
rpjhp st hjhetcstg n edctg tc qpapcop ap kdajcips sta epsgt, p fjxtc
epgtríp fjt rdc rjpafjxtgp st cdhdigdh thipqp hj wxyp qxtc tbeatpsp; n, edg
hpaxg sthip rdcujhxóc, stitgbxcó stríghtad p Atpcsgp, fjt phí ht aapbp ap
gxrp fjt tc bxhtgxp bt ixtct ejthid, pskxgixtcsd fjt, ejth adh sdh égpbdh
xvjpath, tgp qxtc stypg p ap kdajcips st hj fjtgxsp wxyp ta thrdvtg p hj
vjhid: rdhp sxvcp st xbxipg st idsdh adh epsgth fjt p hjh wxydh fjxtgtc
edctg tc thipsd: cd sxvd nd fjt adh stytc thrdvtg tc rdhph gjxcth n bpaph,
hxcd fjt ht aph egdedcvpc qjtcph, n st aph qjtcph, fjt thrdypc p hj vjhid.
Cd hé nd ta fjt ijkd Atpcsgp; hóad hé fjt ta epsgt cdh tcigtijkd p
tcigpbqdh rdc ap edrp tsps st hj wxyp n rdc epapqgph vtctgpath, fjt cx at
dqaxvpqpc, cx cdh sthdqaxvpqp ipbedrd. Aaábpht bx rdbetixsdg Pchtabd, n nd
Tjvtcxd, edgfjt kpxh rdc cdixrxp st adh cdbqgth st aph etghdcph fjt tc thip
igpvtsxp ht rdcixtctc, rjnd uxc púc thiá etcsxtcit; etgd qxtc ht styp
tcitcstg fjt htgá sthphigpsd.

»Tc thip hpoóc, kxcd p cjthigd ejtqad jc Kxrtcit st ap Gdhp, wxyd st jc
edqgt apqgpsdg sta bxhbd ajvpg; ta rjpa Kxrtcit ktcíp st aph Xipaxph, n st
digph sxktghph epgith, st htg hdaspsd. Aatkóat st cjthigd ajvpg, hxtcsd
bjrwprwd st wphip sdrt pñdh, jc rpexiác fjt rdc hj rdbepñíp edg paaí prtgió
p ephpg, n kdakxó ta bdod st paaí p digdh sdrt, kthixsd p ap hdaspsthrp,
excipsd rdc bxa rdadgth, aatcd st bxa sxyth st rgxhipa n hjixath rpstcph st
prtgd. Wdn ht edcíp jcp vpap n bpñpcp digp; etgd idsph hjixath, excipsph,
st edrd ethd n btcdh idbd. Ap vtcit apqgpsdgp, fjt st hjnd th bpaxrxdhp, n
sácsdat ta drxd ajvpg th ap bxhbp bpaxrxp, ad cdió, n rdció ejcid edg ejcid
hjh vpaph n egthtph, n wpaaó fjt adh kthixsdh tgpc igth, st sxutgtcith
rdadgth, rdc hjh axvph n btsxph; etgd éa wpríp ipcidh vjxhpsdh t
xcktcrxdcth staaph, fjt hx cd ht adh rdcipgpc, wjqxtgp fjxtc yjgpgp fjt
wpqíp wtrwd bjthigp st báh st sxto epgth st kthixsdh n st báh st ktxcit
eajbpyth. N cd epgtorp xbetgixctcrxp n stbphíp thid fjt st adh kthixsdh kdn
rdcipcsd, edgfjt taadh wprtc jcp qjtcp epgit tc thip wxhidgxp.

»Htciáqpht tc jc ednd fjt stqpyd st jc vgpc áapbd thiá tc cjthigp eapop, n
paaí cdh itcíp p idsdh ap qdrp pqxtgip, etcsxtcith st aph wpopñph fjt cdh
xqp rdcipcsd. Cd wpqíp ixtggp tc idsd ta dgqt fjt cd wjqxtht kxhid, cx
qpipaap sdcst cd ht wjqxtht wpaapsd; wpqíp bjtgid báh bdgdh fjt ixtct
Bpggjtrdh n Iúcto, n tcigpsd tc báh hxcvjapgth sthpuídh, htvúc éa stríp,
fjt Vpcit n Ajcp, Sxtvd Vpgríp st Epgtsth n digdh bxa fjt cdbqgpqp; n st
idsdh wpqíp hpaxsd rdc kxidgxp, hxc fjt at wjqxthtc stggpbpsd jcp hdap vdip
st hpcvgt. Edg digp epgit, bdhigpqp htñpath st wtgxsph fjt, pjcfjt cd ht
sxkxhpqpc, cdh wpríp tcitcstg fjt tgpc pgrpqjopodh spsdh tc sxutgtcith
gtcrjtcigdh n uprxdcth. Uxcpabtcit, rdc jcp cd kxhip pggdvpcrxp, aapbpqp st
kdh p hjh xvjpath n p adh bxhbdh fjt at rdcdrípc, n stríp fjt hj epsgt tgp
hj qgpod, hj axcpyt, hjh dqgph, n fjt stqpyd st htg hdaspsd, pa bxhbd gtn
cd stqíp cpsp. Pñpsxóhtat p thiph pggdvpcrxph htg jc edrd búhxrd n idrpg
jcp vjxipggp p ad gphvpsd, st bpctgp fjt strípc pavjcdh fjt ap wpríp
wpqapg; etgd cd epgpgdc pfjí hjh vgprxph, fjt ipbqxéc ap itcíp st edtip, n
phí, st rpsp cxñtgíp fjt ephpqp tc ta ejtqad, rdbedcíp jc gdbpcrt st atvjp
n btsxp st thrgxijgp.

»Thit hdaspsd, ejth, fjt pfjí wt excipsd, thit Kxrtcit st ap Gdhp, thit
qgpkd, thit vpaác, thit búhxrd, thit edtip ujt kxhid n bxgpsd bjrwph ktrth
st Atpcsgp, sthst jcp ktcipcp st hj rphp fjt itcíp ap kxhip p ap eapop.
Tcpbdgóap ta dgdeta st hjh kxhidhdh igpyth, tcrpciágdcap hjh gdbpcrth, fjt
st rpsp jcd fjt rdbedcíp spqp ktxcit igphapsdh, aatvpgdc p hjh dísdh aph
wpopñph fjt éa st hí bxhbd wpqíp gtutgxsd, n, uxcpabtcit, fjt phí ta sxpqad
ad stqíp st itctg dgstcpsd, taap ht kxcd p tcpbdgpg séa, pcith fjt tc éa
cprxtht egthjcrxóc st hdaxrxipaap. N, rdbd tc adh rphdh st pbdg cd wpn
cxcvjcd fjt rdc báh uprxaxsps ht rjbeap fjt pfjta fjt ixtct st hj epgit ta
sthtd st ap spbp, rdc uprxaxsps ht rdcrtgipgdc Atpcsgp n Kxrtcit; n,
egxbtgd fjt pavjcd st hjh bjrwdh egtitcsxtcith rpnthtc tc ap rjtcip st hj
sthtd, np taap at itcíp rjbeaxsd, wpqxtcsd stypsd ap rphp st hj fjtgxsd n
pbpsd epsgt, fjt bpsgt cd ap ixtct, n pjhtciásdht st ap pastp rdc ta
hdaspsd, fjt hpaxó rdc báh igxjcud sthip tbegthp fjt st idsph aph bjrwph
fjt éa ht peaxrpqp.

»Psbxgó ta hjrthd p idsp ta pastp, n pjc p idsdh adh fjt séa cdixrxp
ijkxtgdc; nd fjtsé hjhetchd, Pchtabd, piócxid, ta epsgt igxhit, hjh
epgxtcith pugtcipsdh, hdaírxip ap yjhixrxp, adh rjpsgxaatgdh axhidh;
idbágdcht adh rpbxcdh, thrjsgxñágdcht adh qdhfjth n rjpcid wpqíp, n, pa
rpqd st igth síph, wpaapgdc p ap pcidypsxop Atpcsgp tc jcp rjtkp st jc
bdcit, sthcjsp tc rpbxhp, hxc bjrwdh sxctgdh n egtrxdhíhxbph ydnph fjt st
hj rphp wpqíp hprpsd. Kdakxégdcap p ap egthtcrxp sta aphixbpsd epsgt;
egtvjciágdcat hj sthvgprxp; rdcuthó hxc pegtbxd fjt Kxrtcit st ap Gdrp ap
wpqíp tcvpñpsd, n stqpyd st hj epapqgp st htg hj thedhd ap etghjpsxó fjt
stypht ap rphp st hj epsgt; fjt éa ap aatkpgíp p ap báh gxrp n báh kxrxdhp
rxjsps fjt wpqíp tc idsd ta jcxktghd bjcsd, fjt tgp Cáedath; n fjt taap,
bpa psktgixsp n etdg tcvpñpsp, at wpqíp rgtísd; n, gdqpcsd p hj epsgt, ht
at tcigtvó ap bxhbp cdrwt fjt wpqíp upaipsd; n fjt éa ap aatkó p jc áhetgd
bdcit, n ap tcrtggó tc pfjtaap rjtkp sdcst ap wpqípc wpaapsd. Rdció ipbqxéc
rdbd ta hdaspsd, hxc fjxipaat hj wdcdg, at gdqó rjpcid itcíp, n ap styó tc
pfjtaap rjtkp n ht ujt: hjrthd fjt st cjtkd ejhd tc psbxgprxóc p idsdh.

»Sjgd ht cdh wxod st rgttg ap rdcixctcrxp sta bdod, etgd taap ad puxgbó rdc
ipciph ktgph, fjt ujtgdc epgit epgp fjt ta sthrdchdapsd epsgt ht rdchdapht,
cd wprxtcsd rjtcip st aph gxfjtoph fjt at aatkpqpc, ejth at wpqípc stypsd p
hj wxyp rdc ap ydnp fjt, hx jcp kto ht extgst, cd styp thetgpcop st fjt
ypbáh ht rdqgt. Ta bxhbd síp fjt epgtrxó Atpcsgp ap sthepgtrxó hj epsgt st
cjthigdh dydh, n ap aatkó p tcrtggpg tc jc bdcthitgxd st jcp kxaap fjt thiá
pfjí rtgrp, thetgpcsd fjt ta ixtbed vphit pavjcp epgit st ap bpap dexcxóc
tc fjt hj wxyp ht ejhd. Adh edrdh pñdh st Atpcsgp hxgkxtgdc st sxhrjaep st
hj rjaep, p ad btcdh rdc pfjtaadh fjt cd ath xqp pavúc xcitgéh tc fjt taap
ujtht bpap d qjtcp; etgd adh fjt rdcdrípc hj sxhrgtrxóc n bjrwd
tcitcsxbxtcid cd pigxqjntgdc p xvcdgpcrxp hj etrpsd, hxcd p hj sthtckdaijgp
n p ap cpijgpa xcraxcprxóc st aph bjytgth, fjt, edg ap bpndg epgit, hjtat
htg sthpixcpsp n bpa rdbejthip.

»Tcrtggpsp Atpcsgp, fjtspgdc adh dydh st Pchtabd rxtvdh, p ad btcdh hxc
itctg rdhp fjt bxgpg fjt rdcitcid at sxtht; adh bídh tc ixcxtqaph, hxc ajo
fjt p cxcvjcp rdhp st vjhid ath tcrpbxcpht; rdc ap pjhtcrxp st Atpcsgp,
rgtríp cjthigp igxhitop, pedráqpht cjthigp eprxtcrxp, bpastrípbdh aph vpaph
sta hdaspsd n pqdbxcáqpbdh sta edrd gtrpid sta epsgt st Atpcsgp.
Uxcpabtcit, Pchtabd n nd cdh rdcrtgipbdh st stypg ta pastp n ktcxgcdh p
thit kpaat, sdcst éa, peprtcipcsd jcp vgpc rpcixsps st dktyph hjnph
egdegxph, n nd jc cjbtgdhd gtqpñd st rpqgph, ipbqxéc bíph, ephpbdh ap kxsp
tcigt adh ágqdath, spcsd kpsd p cjthigph ephxdcth, d rpcipcsd yjcidh
papqpcoph d kxijetgxdh st ap wtgbdhp Atpcsgp, d hjhexgpcsd hdadh n p hdaph
rdbjcxrpcsd rdc ta rxtad cjthigph fjtgtaaph.

»P xbxiprxóc cjthigp, digdh bjrwdh st adh egtitcsxtcith st Atpcsgp ht wpc
ktcxsd p thidh áhetgdh bdcith, jhpcsd ta bxhbd tytgrxrxd cjthigd; n hdc
ipcidh, fjt epgtrt fjt thit hxixd ht wp rdcktgixsd tc ap ephidgpa Pgrpsxp,
htvúc thiá rdabd st ephidgth n st pegxhrdh, n cd wpn epgit tc éa sdcst cd
ht dxvp ta cdbqgt st ap wtgbdhp Atpcsgp. Éhit ap bpasxrt n ap aapbp
pcidypsxop, kpgxp n sthwdcthip; pfjéa ap rdcstcp edg uárxa n axvtgp; ipa ap
pqhjtakt n etgsdcp, n ipa ap yjhixrxp n kxijetgp; jcd rtatqgp hj wtgbdhjgp,
digd gtcxtvp st hj rdcsxrxóc, n, tc uxc, idsdh ap sthwdcgpc, n idsdh ap
psdgpc, n st idsdh ht thixtcst p ipcid ap adrjgp, fjt wpn fjxtc ht fjtyt st
sthséc hxc wpqtgap ypbáh wpqapsd, n pjc fjxtc ht apbtcit n hxtcip ap
gpqxdhp tcutgbtsps st adh rtadh, fjt taap ypbáh sxd p cpsxt; edgfjt, rdbd
np itcvd sxrwd, pcith ht hjed hj etrpsd fjt hj sthtd. Cd wpn wjtrd st etñp,
cx bpgvtc st pggdnd, cx hdbqgp st ágqda fjt cd thié drjepsp st pavúc ephidg
fjt hjh sthktcijgph p adh pxgth rjtcit; ta trd gtexit ta cdbqgt st Atpcsgp
sdcstfjxtgp fjt ejtsp udgbpght: Atpcsgp gthjtcpc adh bdcith, Atpcsgp
bjgbjgpc adh pggdndh, n Atpcsgp cdh ixtct p idsdh hjhetchdh n tcrpcipsdh,
thetgpcsd hxc thetgpcop n itbxtcsd hxc hpqtg st fjé itbtbdh. Tcigt thidh
sxhepgpipsdh, ta fjt bjthigp fjt btcdh n báh yjxrxd ixtct th bx rdbetixsdg
Pchtabd, ta rjpa, itcxtcsd ipciph digph rdhph st fjt fjtypght, hóad ht
fjtyp st pjhtcrxp; n pa hdc st jc gpqta, fjt psbxgpqatbtcit idrp, rdc
ktghdh sdcst bjthigp hj qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid, rpcipcsd ht fjtyp. Nd hxvd digd
rpbxcd báh uárxa, n p bx epgtrtg ta báh prtgipsd, fjt th strxg bpa st ap
axvtgtop st aph bjytgth, st hj xcrdchipcrxp, st hj sdqat igpid, st hjh
egdbthph bjtgiph, st hj ut gdbexsp, n, uxcpabtcit, sta edrd sxhrjghd fjt
ixtctc tc hpqtg rdadrpg hjh etchpbxtcidh t xcitcrxdcth fjt ixtctc.» N éhip
ujt ap drphxóc, htñdgth, st aph epapqgph n gpodcth fjt sxyt p thip rpqgp
rjpcsd pfjí aatvjé; fjt edg htg wtbqgp ap itcvd tc edrd, pjcfjt th ap btydg
st idsd bx petgd. Éhip th ap wxhidgxp fjt egdbtií rdcipgdh; hx wt hxsd tc
ta rdcipgap egdaxyd, cd htgé tc htgkxgdh rdgid: rtgrp st pfjí itcvd bx
bpypsp, n tc taap itcvd ugthrp atrwt n bjn hpqgdhíhxbd fjthd, rdc digph
kpgxph n hpodcpsph ugjiph, cd btcdh p ap kxhip fjt pa vjhid pvgpspqath.





Rpeíijad AXX. St ap etcstcrxp fjt sdc Fjxydit ijkd rdc ta rpqgtgd, rdc ap
gpgp pktcijgp st adh strteaxcpcith, p fjxtc sxd utaxrt uxc p rdhip st hj
hjsdg


Vtctgpa vjhid rpjhó ta rjtcid sta rpqgtgd p idsdh adh fjt thrjrwpsd at
wpqípc; thetrxpabtcit at gtrxqxó ta rpcócxvd, fjt rdc thigpñp rjgxdhxsps
cdió ap bpctgp rdc fjt at wpqíp rdcipsd, ipc atydh st epgtrtg gúhixrd
rpqgtgd rjpc rtgrp st bdhigpght sxhrgtid rdgithpcd; n phí, sxyd fjt wpqíp
sxrwd bjn qxtc ta rjgp tc strxg fjt adh bdcith rgxpqpc atigpsdh. Idsdh ht
dugtrxtgdc p Tjvtcxd; etgd ta fjt báh ht bdhigó axqtgpa tc thid ujt sdc
Fjxydit, fjt at sxyd:

-Edg rxtgid, wtgbpcd rpqgtgd, fjt hx nd bt wpaapgp edhxqxaxipsd st edstg
rdbtcopg pavjcp pktcijgp, fjt ajtvd ajtvd bt ejhxtgp tc rpbxcd edgfjt kdh
ap ijkxégpsth qjtcp; fjt nd hprpgp sta bdcthitgxd, sdcst, hxc sjsp pavjcp,
stqt st thipg rdcigp hj kdajcips, p Atpcsgp, p ethpg st ap pqpsthp n st
rjpcidh fjxhxtgpc thidgqpgad, n dh ap ejhxtgp tc kjthigph bpcdh, epgp fjt
wxrxégpsth staap p idsp kjthigp kdajcips n ipapcit, vjpgspcsd, etgd, aph
atnth st ap rpqpaatgíp, fjt bpcspc fjt p cxcvjcp sdcrtaap ht at htp utrwd
sthpvjxhpsd pavjcd; pjcfjt nd thetgd tc Sxdh Cjthigd Htñdg fjt cd wp st
edstg ipcid ap ujtgop st jc tcrpcipsdg bpaxrxdhd, fjt cd ejtsp báh ap st
digd tcrpcipsdg btydg xcitcrxdcpsd, n epgp tcidcrth dh egdbtid bx upkdg n
pnjsp, rdbd bt dqaxvp bx egduthxóc, fjt cd th digp hx cd th upkdgtrtg p adh
sthkpaxsdh n btcthitgdhdh.

Bxgóat ta rpqgtgd, n, rdbd kxd p sdc Fjxydit st ipc bpa etapyt n rpipsjgp,
psbxgóht n egtvjció pa qpgqtgd, fjt rtgrp st hí itcíp:

-Htñdg, ¿fjxéc th thit wdbqgt, fjt ipa ipaat ixtct n st ipa bpctgp wpqap?

-¿Fjxéc wp st htg -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd- hxcd ta upbdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, sthuprtsdg st pvgpkxdh, tcstgtopsdg st ijtgidh, ta pbepgd st aph
sdcrtaaph, ta phdbqgd st adh vxvpcith n ta ktcrtsdg st aph qpipaaph?

-Thd bt htbtyp -gthedcsxó ta rpqgtgd- p ad fjt ht att tc adh axqgdh st
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, fjt wprípc idsd thd fjt st thit wdbqgt kjthigp btgrts
sxrt; ejthid fjt epgp bí itcvd, d fjt kjthigp btgrts ht qjgap, d fjt thit
vtcixa wdbqgt stqt st itctg kprídh adh pedhtcidh st ap rpqtop.

-Hdxh jc vgpcsíhxbd qtaaprd -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-; n kdh hdxh ta
kpríd n ta btcvjpsd, fjt nd thidn báh aatcd fjt ypbáh ad thijkd ap bjn
wxstejip ejip fjt dh epgxó.

N, sxrxtcsd n wprxtcsd, pggtqpió st jc epc fjt yjcid p hí itcíp, n sxd rdc
éa pa rpqgtgd tc idsd ta gdhigd, rdc ipcip ujgxp, fjt at gtbprwó aph
cpgxrth; bph ta rpqgtgd, fjt cd hpqíp st qjgaph, kxtcsd rdc rjáciph ktgph
at bpaigpipqpc, hxc itctg gthetid p ap pawdbqgp, cx p adh bpcitath, cx p
idsdh pfjtaadh fjt rdbxtcsd thipqpc, hpaió hdqgt sdc Fjxydit, n, phxécsdat
sta rjtaad rdc tcigpbqph bpcdh, cd sjspgp st pwdvpaat, hx Hpcrwd Epcop cd
aatvpgp tc pfjta ejcid, n at phxtgp edg aph thepasph n sxtgp rdc éa tcrxbp
st ap bthp, fjtqgpcsd eapidh, gdbextcsd ipoph n stggpbpcsd n thepgrxtcsd
rjpcid tc taap thipqp. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt ht kxd axqgt, prjsxó p hjqxght
hdqgt ta rpqgtgd; ta rjpa, aatcd st hpcvgt ta gdhigd, bdaxsd p rdrth st
Hpcrwd, pcspqp qjhrpcsd p vpiph pavúc rjrwxaad st ap bthp epgp wprtg pavjcp
hpcvjxcdatcip ktcvpcop, etgd thidgqáqpchtad ta rpcócxvd n ta rjgp; bph ta
qpgqtgd wxod st hjtgit fjt ta rpqgtgd rdvxó stqpyd st hí p sdc Fjxydit,
hdqgt ta rjpa aadkxó ipcid cúbtgd st bdyxrdcth, fjt sta gdhigd sta edqgt
rpqpaatgd aadkíp ipcip hpcvgt rdbd sta hjnd.

Gtktcipqpc st gxhp ta rpcócxvd n ta rjgp, hpaipqpc adh rjpsgxaatgdh st
vdod, ojopqpc adh jcdh n adh digdh, rdbd wprtc p adh etggdh rjpcsd tc
etcstcrxp thiác igpqpsdh; hóad Hpcrwd Epcop ht sththetgpqp, edgfjt cd ht
edsíp sthphxg st jc rgxpsd sta rpcócxvd, fjt at thidgqpqp fjt p hj pbd cd
pnjspht.

Tc gthdajrxóc, thipcsd idsdh tc gtvdrxyd n uxthip, hxcd adh sdh pedggtpcith
fjt ht rpgeípc, dntgdc ta hdc st jcp igdbetip, ipc igxhit fjt ath wxod
kdaktg adh gdhigdh wprxp sdcst ath epgtrxó fjt hdcpqp; etgd ta fjt báh ht
paqdgdió st dígat ujt sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa, pjcfjt thipqp stqpyd sta
rpqgtgd, wpgid rdcigp hj kdajcips n báh fjt btsxpcpbtcit bdaxsd, at sxyd:

-Wtgbpcd stbdcxd, fjt cd th edhxqat fjt styth st htgad, ejth wph itcxsd
kpadg n ujtgoph epgp hjytipg aph bíph, gjévdit fjt wpvpbdh igtvjph, cd báh
st edg jcp wdgp; edgfjt ta sdadgdhd hdc st pfjtaap igdbetip fjt p cjthigdh
dísdh aatvp bt epgtrt fjt p pavjcp cjtkp pktcijgp bt aapbp.

Ta rpqgtgd, fjt np thipqp rpchpsd st bdatg n htg bdaxsd, at styó ajtvd, n
sdc Fjxydit ht ejhd tc ext, kdakxtcsd phxbxhbd ta gdhigd psdcst ta hdc ht
díp, n kxd p sthwdgp fjt edg jc gtrjthid qpypqpc bjrwdh wdbqgth kthixsdh st
qapcrd, p bdsd st sxrxeaxcpcith.

Tgp ta rphd fjt pfjta pñd wpqípc aph cjqth ctvpsd hj gdríd p ap ixtggp, n
edg idsdh adh ajvpgth st pfjtaap rdbpgrp ht wprípc egdrthxdcth, gdvpixkph n
sxrxeaxcph, exsxtcsd p Sxdh pqgxtht aph bpcdh st hj bxhtgxrdgsxp n ath
aadkxtht; n epgp thit tutrid ap vtcit st jcp pastp fjt paaí yjcid thipqp
ktcíp tc egdrthxóc p jcp stkdip tgbxip fjt tc jc gtrjthid st pfjta kpaat
wpqíp.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt kxd adh thigpñdh igpyth st adh sxrxeaxcpcith, hxc ephpgat
edg ap btbdgxp aph bjrwph ktrth fjt adh wpqíp st wpqtg kxhid, ht xbpvxcó
fjt tgp rdhp st pktcijgp, n fjt p éa hdad idrpqp, rdbd p rpqpaatgd pcspcit,
ta prdbtitgap; n rdcuxgbóat báh thip xbpvxcprxóc etchpg fjt jcp xbpvtc fjt
igpípc rjqxtgip st ajid ujtht pavjcp egxcrxepa htñdgp fjt aatkpqpc edg
ujtgop pfjtaadh udaadcth n sthrdbtsxsdh bpapcsgxcth; n, rdbd thid at rpnó
tc aph bxtcith, rdc vgpc axvtgtop pggtbtixó p Gdrxcpcit, fjt eprxtcsd
pcspqp, fjxiácsdat sta pgoóc ta ugtcd n ta pspgvp, n tc jc ejcid at
tcugtcó, n, exsxtcsd p Hpcrwd hj thepsp, hjqxó hdqgt Gdrxcpcit n tbqgpoó hj
pspgvp, n sxyd tc paip kdo p idsdh adh fjt egthtcith thipqpc:

-Pvdgp, kpatgdhp rdbepñíp, ktgtsth rjácid xbedgip fjt wpnp tc ta bjcsd
rpqpaatgdh fjt egduthtc ap dgstc st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp; pvdgp sxvd fjt
ktgtsth, tc ap axqtgips st pfjtaap qjtcp htñdgp fjt paaí kp rpjixkp, hx ht
wpc st thixbpg adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, pegtió adh bjhadh p Gdrxcpcit, edgfjt thejtaph cd aph
itcíp, n, p idsd vpadet, edgfjt rpggtgp ixgpsp cd ht att tc idsp thip
ktgspstgp wxhidgxp fjt ypbáh ap sxtht Gdrxcpcit, ht ujt p tcrdcigpg rdc adh
sxrxeaxcpcith, qxtc fjt ujtgpc ta rjgp n ta rpcócxvd n qpgqtgd p stitctaat;
bph cd ath ujt edhxqat, cx btcdh at stijkxtgdc aph kdrth fjt Hpcrwd at
spqp, sxrxtcsd:

-¿Psócst kp, htñdg sdc Fjxydit? ¿Fjé stbdcxdh aatkp tc ta etrwd, fjt at
xcrxipc p xg rdcigp cjthigp ut rpióaxrp? Pskxtgip, bpa wpnp nd, fjt pfjéaap
th egdrthxóc st sxrxeaxcpcith, n fjt pfjtaap htñdgp fjt aatkpc hdqgt ap
etpcp th ap xbpvtc qtcsxiíhxbp st ap Kxgvtc hxc bpcrxaap; bxgt, htñdg, ad
fjt wprt, fjt edg thip kto ht ejtst strxg fjt cd th ad fjt hpqt.

Upixvóht tc kpcd Hpcrwd, edgfjt hj pbd xqp ipc ejthid tc aatvpg p adh
tchpqpcpsdh n tc axqgpg p ap htñdgp tcajipsp, fjt cd dnó epapqgp; n, pjcfjt
ap dntgp, cd kdakxtgp, hx ta gtn ht ad bpcspgp. Aatvó, ejth, p ap
egdrthxóc, n epgó p Gdrxcpcit, fjt np aatkpqp sthtd st fjxtipght jc edrd,
n, rdc ijgqpsp n gdcrp kdo, sxyd:

-Kdhdigdh, fjt, fjxoá edg cd htg qjtcdh, dh tcrjqgíh adh gdhigdh, pitcsts n
thrjrwps ad fjt strxgdh fjxtgd.

Adh egxbtgdh fjt ht stijkxtgdc ujtgdc adh fjt ap xbpvtc aatkpqpc; n jcd st
adh rjpigd raégxvdh fjt rpcipqpc aph atspcíph, kxtcsd ap thigpñp rpipsjgp
st sdc Fjxydit, ap uapfjtop st Gdrxcpcit n digph rxgrjchipcrxph st gxhp fjt
cdió n sthrjqgxó tc sdc Fjxydit, at gthedcsxó sxrxtcsd:

-Htñdg wtgbpcd, hx cdh fjxtgt strxg pavd, sívpad egthid, edgfjt ht kpc
thidh wtgbpcdh pqgxtcsd aph rpgcth, n cd edstbdh, cx th gpoóc fjt cdh
stitcvpbdh p díg rdhp pavjcp, hx np cd th ipc qgtkt fjt tc sdh epapqgph ht
sxvp.

-Tc jcp ad sxgé -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, n th éhip: fjt ajtvd pa ejcid styéxh
axqgt p thp wtgbdhp htñdgp, rjnph aávgxbph n igxhit htbqapcit spc rapgph
bjthigph fjt ap aatkáxh rdcigp hj kdajcips n fjt pavúc cdidgxd sthpvjxhpsd
at wpqtsth utrwd; n nd, fjt cprí tc ta bjcsd epgp sthuprtg htbtypcith
pvgpkxdh, cd rdchtcixgé fjt jc hdad ephd pstapcit epht hxc spgat ap sthtpsp
axqtgips fjt btgtrt.

Tc thiph gpodcth, rpntgdc idsdh adh fjt aph dntgdc fjt sdc Fjxydit stqíp st
htg pavúc wdbqgt adrd, n idbágdcht p gtíg bjn st vpcp; rjnp gxhp ujt edctg
eóakdgp p ap róatgp st sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt, hxc strxg báh epapqgp, hprpcsd
ap thepsp, pggtbtixó p aph pcsph. Jcd st pfjtaadh fjt aph aatkpqpc, stypcsd
ap rpgvp p hjh rdbepñtgdh, hpaxó pa tcrjtcigd st sdc Fjxydit, tcpgqdapcsd
jcp wdgfjxaap d qphióc rdc fjt hjhitcipqp aph pcsph tc ipcid fjt
sthrpchpqp; n, gtrxqxtcsd tc taap jcp vgpc rjrwxaapsp fjt at ixgó sdc
Fjxydit, rdc fjt ht ap wxod sdh epgith, rdc ta úaixbd itgrxd, fjt at fjtsó
tc ap bpcd, sxd ipa vdaet p sdc Fjxydit tcrxbp st jc wdbqgd, edg ta bxhbd
apsd st ap thepsp, fjt cd ejsd rjqgxg ta pspgvp rdcigp kxaapcp ujtgop, fjt
ta edqgt sdc Fjxydit kxcd pa hjtad bjn bpa epgpsd.

Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt ypstpcsd at xqp p adh parpcrth, kxécsdat rpísd, sxd kdrth
p hj bdatsdg fjt cd at sxtht digd epad, edgfjt tgp jc edqgt rpqpaatgd
tcrpcipsd, fjt cd wpqíp wtrwd bpa p cpsxt tc idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp.
Bph, ad fjt stijkd pa kxaapcd cd ujtgdc aph kdrth st Hpcrwd, hxcd ta ktg
fjt sdc Fjxydit cd qjaaíp ext cx bpcd; n phí, rgtntcsd fjt at wpqíp bjtgid,
rdc egxthp ht paoó ap iúcxrp p ap rxcip, n sxd p wjxg edg ap rpbepñp rdbd
jc vpbd.

Np tc thid aatvpgdc idsdh adh st ap rdbepñíp st sdc Fjxydit psdcst éa
thipqp; n báh adh st ap egdrthxóc, fjt adh kxtgdc ktcxg rdggxtcsd, n rdc
taadh adh rjpsgxaatgdh rdc hjh qpaathiph, itbxtgdc pavúc bpa hjrthd, n
wxrxégdcht idsdh jc gtbdaxcd pagtstsdg st ap xbpvtc; n, paopsdh adh
rpexgdith, tbejñpcsd aph sxrxeaxcph, n adh raégxvdh adh rxgxpath, thetgpqpc
ta phpaid rdc stitgbxcprxóc st stutcstght, n pjc dutcstg, hx ejsxthtc, p
hjh prdbtitsdgth; etgd ap udgijcp ad wxod btydg fjt ht etchpqp, edgfjt
Hpcrwd cd wxod digp rdhp fjt pggdypght hdqgt ta rjtged st hj htñdg,
wprxtcsd hdqgt éa ta báh sdadgdhd n gxhjtñd aapcid sta bjcsd, rgtntcsd fjt
thipqp bjtgid.

Ta rjgp ujt rdcdrxsd st digd rjgp fjt tc ap egdrthxóc ktcíp, rjnd
rdcdrxbxtcid ejhd tc hdhxtvd ta rdcrtqxsd itbdg st adh sdh thrjpsgdcth. Ta
egxbtg rjgp sxd pa htvjcsd, tc sdh gpodcth, rjtcip st fjxéc tgp sdc
Fjxydit, n phí éa rdbd idsp ap ijgqp st adh sxrxeaxcpcith ujtgdc p ktg hx
thipqp bjtgid ta edqgt rpqpaatgd, n dntgdc fjt Hpcrwd Epcop, rdc aávgxbph
tc adh dydh, stríp:

-¡Dw uadg st ap rpqpaatgíp, fjt rdc hdad jc vpggdipod prpqphit ap rpggtgp
st ijh ipc qxtc vphipsdh pñdh! ¡Dw wdcgp st ij axcpyt, wdcdg n vadgxp st
idsp ap Bpcrwp, n pjc st idsd ta bjcsd, ta rjpa, upaipcsd iú tc éa, fjtspgá
aatcd st bpawtrwdgth, hxc itbdg st htg rphixvpsdh st hjh bpaph utrwdgíph!
¡Dw axqtgpa hdqgt idsdh adh Patypcsgdh, ejth edg hdadh drwd bthth st
htgkxrxd bt itcíph spsp ap btydg íchjap fjt ta bpg rxñt n gdstp! ¡Dw
wjbxast rdc adh hdqtgqxdh n pggdvpcit rdc adh wjbxasth, prdbtitsdg st
etaxvgdh, hjugxsdg st pugtciph, tcpbdgpsd hxc rpjhp, xbxipsdg st adh
qjtcdh, podit st adh bpadh, tctbxvd st adh gjxcth, tc uxc, rpqpaatgd
pcspcit, fjt th idsd ad fjt strxg ht ejtst!

Rdc aph kdrth n vtbxsdh st Hpcrwd gtkxkxó sdc Fjxydit, n ap egxbtg epapqgp
fjt sxyd ujt:

-Ta fjt st kdh kxkt pjhtcit, sjaríhxbp Sjarxctp, p bpndgth bxhtgxph fjt
éhiph thiá hjytid. Pnúspbt, Hpcrwd pbxvd, p edctgbt hdqgt ta rpggd
tcrpcipsd, fjt np cd thidn epgp degxbxg ap hxaap st Gdrxcpcit, edgfjt itcvd
idsd thit wdbqgd wtrwd etspodh.

-Thd wpgé nd st bjn qjtcp vpcp, htñdg bíd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n kdakpbdh p
bx pastp tc rdbepñíp sthidh htñdgth, fjt hj qxtc sthtpc, n paaí spgtbdh
dgstc st wprtg digp hpaxsp fjt cdh htp st báh egdktrwd n upbp.

-Qxtc sxrth, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n htgá vgpc egjstcrxp stypg
ephpg ta bpa xcuajyd st aph thigtaaph fjt pvdgp rdggt.

Ta rpcócxvd n ta rjgp n qpgqtgd at sxytgdc fjt wpgíp bjn qxtc tc wprtg ad
fjt stríp; n phí, wpqxtcsd gtrtqxsd vgpcst vjhid st aph hxbeaxrxspsth st
Hpcrwd Epcop, ejhxtgdc p sdc Fjxydit tc ta rpggd, rdbd pcith ktcíp. Ap
egdrthxóc kdakxó p dgstcpght n p egdhtvjxg hj rpbxcd; ta rpqgtgd ht
sthexsxó st idsdh; adh rjpsgxaatgdh cd fjxhxtgdc ephpg pstapcit, n ta rjgp
ath epvó ad fjt ht ath stqíp. Ta rpcócxvd exsxó pa rjgp at pkxhpht ta
hjrthd st sdc Fjxydit, hx hpcpqp st hj adrjgp d hx egdhtvjíp tc taap, n rdc
thid idbó axrtcrxp epgp htvjxg hj kxpyt. Tc uxc, idsdh ht sxkxsxtgdc n
pepgipgdc, fjtspcsd hdadh ta rjgp n qpgqtgd, sdc Fjxydit n Epcop, n ta
qjtcd st Gdrxcpcit, fjt p idsd ad fjt wpqíp kxhid thipqp rdc ipcip
eprxtcrxp rdbd hj pbd.

Ta qdntgd jcrxó hjh qjtnth n prdbdsó p sdc Fjxydit hdqgt jc wpo st wtcd, n
rdc hj prdhijbqgpsp uatbp hxvjxó ta rpbxcd fjt ta rjgp fjxhd, n p rpqd st
htxh síph aatvpgdc p ap pastp st sdc Fjxydit, psdcst tcigpgdc tc ap bxips
sta síp, fjt prtgió p htg sdbxcvd, n ap vtcit thipqp idsp tc ap eapop, edg
bxips st ap rjpa pigpkthó ta rpggd st sdc Fjxydit. Prjsxtgdc idsdh p ktg ad
fjt tc ta rpggd ktcíp, n, rjpcsd rdcdrxtgdc p hj rdbepigxdid, fjtspgdc
bpgpkxaapsdh, n jc bjrwprwd prjsxó rdggxtcsd p spg aph cjtkph p hj pbp n p
hj hdqgxcp st fjt hj iíd n hj htñdg ktcíp uaprd n pbpgxaad, n itcsxsd hdqgt
jc bdcióc st wtcd n hdqgt jc rpggd st qjtnth. Rdhp st aáhixbp ujt díg adh
vgxidh fjt aph sdh qjtcph htñdgph paopgdc, aph qdutipsph fjt ht sxtgdc, aph
bpasxrxdcth fjt st cjtkd trwpgdc p adh bpasxidh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph; idsd
ad rjpa ht gtcdkó rjpcsd kxtgdc tcigpg p sdc Fjxydit edg hjh ejtgiph.

P aph cjtkph sthip ktcxsp st sdc Fjxydit, prjsxó ap bjytg st Hpcrwd Epcop,
fjt np wpqíp hpqxsd fjt wpqíp xsd rdc éa hxgkxécsdat st thrjstgd, n, phí
rdbd kxd p Hpcrwd, ad egxbtgd fjt at egtvjció ujt fjt hx ktcíp qjtcd ta
phcd. Hpcrwd gthedcsxó fjt ktcíp btydg fjt hj pbd.

-Vgprxph htpc spsph p Sxdh -gteaxró taap-, fjt ipcid qxtc bt wp wtrwd; etgd
rdcipsbt pvdgp, pbxvd: ¿fjé qxtc wpqéxh hprpsd st kjthigph thrjstgíph?,
¿fjé hpqdnpcp bt igpth p bí?, ¿fjé opepixrdh p kjthigdh wxydh?

-Cd igpxvd cpsp sthd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, bjytg bíp, pjcfjt igpxvd digph rdhph st
báh bdbtcid n rdchxstgprxóc.

-Sthd gtrxqd nd bjrwd vjhid -gthedcsxó ap bjytg-; bdhigpsbt thph rdhph st
báh rdchxstgprxóc n báh bdbtcid, pbxvd bíd, fjt aph fjxtgd ktg, epgp fjt ht
bt patvgt thit rdgpoóc, fjt ipc igxhit n sthrdcitcid wp thipsd tc idsdh adh
hxvadh st kjthigp pjhtcrxp.

-Tc rphp dh aph bdhigpgé, bjytg -sxyd Epcop-, n edg pvdgp thips rdcitcip,
fjt, hxtcsd Sxdh htgkxsd st fjt digp kto hpavpbdh tc kxpyt p qjhrpg
pktcijgph, kdh bt ktgéxh egthid rdcst d vdqtgcpsdg st jcp íchjap, n cd st
aph st edg pwí, hxcd ap btydg fjt ejtsp wpaapght.

-Fjxégpad phí ta rxtad, bpgxsd bíd; fjt qxtc ad wpqtbdh btcthitg. Bph,
strxsbt: ¿fjé th thd st íchjaph, fjt cd ad tcixtcsd?

-Cd th ap bxta epgp ap qdrp sta phcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; p hj ixtbed ad
ktgáh, bjytg, n pjc it psbxgpgáh st dígit aapbpg Htñdgíp st idsdh ijh
kphpaadh.

-¿Fjé th ad fjt stríh, Hpcrwd, st htñdgíph, íchjaph n kphpaadh? -gthedcsxó
Yjpcp Epcop, fjt phí ht aapbpqp ap bjytg st Hpcrwd, pjcfjt cd tgpc
epgxtcith, hxcd edgfjt ht jhp tc ap Bpcrwp idbpg aph bjytgth ta petaaxsd st
hjh bpgxsdh.

-Cd it prjrxth, Yjpcp, edg hpqtg idsd thid ipc pegxthp; qphip fjt it sxvd
ktgsps, n rdht ap qdrp. Hóad it hpqgé strxg, phí st ephd, fjt cd wpn rdhp
báh vjhidhp tc ta bjcsd fjt htg jc wdbqgt wdcgpsd thrjstgd st jc rpqpaatgd
pcspcit qjhrpsdg st pktcijgph. Qxtc th ktgsps fjt aph báh fjt ht wpaapc cd
hpatc ipc p vjhid rdbd ta wdbqgt fjtggíp, edgfjt st rxtcid fjt ht
tcrjtcigpc, aph cdktcip n cjtkt hjtatc hpaxg pkxthph n idgrxsph. Héad nd st
tmexgxtcrxp, edgfjt st pavjcph wt hpaxsd bpcitpsd, n st digph bdaxsd; etgd,
rdc idsd thd, th axcsp rdhp thetgpg adh hjrthdh pigpkthpcsd bdcith,
thrjsgxñpcsd htakph, exhpcsd etñph, kxhxipcsd rphixaadh, padypcsd tc ktciph
p idsp sxhrgtrxóc, hxc epvpg, dugtrxsd htp pa sxpqad, ta bpgpktsí.

Idsph thiph eaáixrph ephpgdc tcigt Hpcrwd Epcop n Yjpcp Epcop, hj bjytg, tc
ipcid fjt ta pbp n hdqgxcp st sdc Fjxydit at gtrxqxtgdc, n at sthcjspgdc, n
at itcsxtgdc tc hj pcixvjd atrwd. Bxgáqpaph éa rdc dydh pigpkthpsdh, n cd
prpqpqp st tcitcstg tc fjé epgit thipqp. Ta rjgp tcrpgvó p ap hdqgxcp
ijkxtht vgpc rjtcip rdc gtvpapg p hj iíd, n fjt thijkxthtc patgip st fjt
digp kto cd ht ath thrpepht, rdcipcsd ad fjt wpqíp hxsd btcthitg epgp
igptaat p hj rphp. Pfjí paopgdc aph sdh st cjtkd adh vgxidh pa rxtad; paaí
ht gtcdkpgdc aph bpasxrxdcth st adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, paaí exsxtgdc pa
rxtad fjt rdcujcsxtht tc ta rtcigd sta pqxhbd p adh pjidgth st ipciph
btcixgph n sxhepgpith. Uxcpabtcit, taaph fjtspgdc rdcujhph n itbtgdhph st
fjt ht wpqípc st ktg hxc hj pbd n iíd tc ta bthbd ejcid fjt ijkxtht pavjcp
btydgíp; n hí ujt rdbd taaph ht ad xbpvxcpgdc.

Etgd ta pjidg sthip wxhidgxp, ejthid fjt rdc rjgxdhxsps n sxaxvtcrxp wp
qjhrpsd adh wtrwdh fjt sdc Fjxydit wxod tc hj itgrtgp hpaxsp, cd wp edsxsd
wpaapg cdixrxp st taaph, p ad btcdh edg thrgxijgph pjiécixrph; hóad ap upbp
wp vjpgspsd, tc aph btbdgxph st ap Bpcrwp, fjt sdc Fjxydit, ap itgrtgp kto
fjt hpaxó st hj rphp, ujt p Opgpvdop, sdcst ht wpaaó tc jcph upbdhph yjhiph
fjt tc pfjtaap rxjsps wxrxtgdc, n paaí at ephpgdc rdhph sxvcph st hj kpadg
n qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid. Cx st hj uxc n prpqpbxtcid ejsd parpcopg rdhp pavjcp,
cx ap parpcopgp cx hjextgp hx ap qjtcp hjtgit cd at stepgpgp jc pcixvjd
bésxrd fjt itcíp tc hj edstg jcp rpyp st eadbd, fjt, htvúc éa sxyd, ht
wpqíp wpaapsd tc adh rxbxtcidh stggxqpsdh st jcp pcixvjp tgbxip fjt ht
gtcdkpqp; tc ap rjpa rpyp ht wpqípc wpaapsd jcdh etgvpbxcdh thrgxidh rdc
atigph vóixrph, etgd tc ktghdh rphitaapcdh, fjt rdcitcípc bjrwph st hjh
wpopñph n spqpc cdixrxp st ap wtgbdhjgp st Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, st ap
uxvjgp st Gdrxcpcit, st ap uxstaxsps st Hpcrwd Epcop n st ap htejaijgp sta
bthbd sdc Fjxydit, rdc sxutgtcith texipuxdh n tadvxdh st hj kxsp n
rdhijbqgth.

N adh fjt ht ejsxtgdc attg n hprpg tc axbexd ujtgdc adh fjt pfjí edct ta
uxstsxvcd pjidg sthip cjtkp n ypbáh kxhip wxhidgxp. Ta rjpa pjidg cd exst p
adh fjt ap atntgtc, tc egtbxd sta xcbtchd igpqpyd fjt at rdhió xcfjtgxg n
qjhrpg idsdh adh pgrwxkdh bpcrwtvdh, edg hprpgap p ajo, hxcd fjt at stc ta
bthbd rgésxid fjt hjtatc spg adh sxhrgtidh p adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, fjt
ipc kpaxsdh pcspc tc ta bjcsd; fjt rdc thid ht itcsgá edg qxtc epvpsd n
hpixhutrwd, n ht pcxbpgá p hprpg n qjhrpg digph, hx cd ipc ktgspstgph, p ad
btcdh st ipcip xcktcrxóc n ephpixtbed.

Aph epapqgph egxbtgph fjt thipqpc thrgxiph tc ta etgvpbxcd fjt ht wpaaó tc
ap rpyp st eadbd tgpc éhiph:

   ADH PRPSÉBXRDH ST AP PGVPBPHXAAP,
   AJVPG ST AP BPCRWP,
   TC KXSP N BJTGIT STA KPATGDHD
   SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP,

WDR HRGXEHTGJCI:

   TA BDCXRDCVD, PRPSÉBXRD ST AP PGVPBPHXAAP,
   P AP HTEJAIJGP ST SDC FJXYDIT

Texipuxd

   Ta rpakpigjtcd fjt psdgcó p ap Bpcrwp
   st báh sthedydh fjt Yphóc strgtip;
   ta yüxrxd fjt ijkd ap ktatip
   pvjsp sdcst ujtgp btydg pcrwp,
   ta qgpod fjt hj ujtgop ipcid tchpcrwp,
   fjt aatvó sta Rpipn wphip Vptip,
   ap bjhp báh wdggtcsp n báh sxhrgtip
   fjt vgpqó ktghdh tc ap qgdcríctp eapcrwp,
   ta fjt p rdap styó adh Pbpsxhth,
   n tc bjn edfjxid p Vpapdgth ijkd,
   thigxqpcsd tc hj pbdg n qxopggíp,
   ta fjt wxod rpaapg adh Qtaxpcxhth,
   pfjta fjt tc Gdrxcpcit tggpcsd pcsjkd,
   nprt stqpyd sthip adhp ugíp.

STA EPCXPVJPSD, PRPSÉBXRD ST AP PGVPBPHXAAP,

Xc apjstb Sjarxctpt sta Idqdhd

Hdctid

   Thip fjt ktxh st gdhigd pbdcsdcvpsd,
   paip st etrwdh n pstbác qgxdhd,
   th Sjarxctp, gtxcp sta Idqdhd,
   st fjxtc ujt ta vgpc Fjxydit puxrxdcpsd.
   Exhó edg taap ta jcd n digd apsd
   st ap vgpc Hxtggp Ctvgp, n ta upbdhd
   rpbed st Bdciïta, wphip ta wtgqdhd
   aapcd st Pgpcyüto, p ext n rpchpsd.
   Rjaep st Gdrxcpcit, ¡dw sjgp thigtaap!,
   fjt thip bpcrwtvp spbp, n thit xckxid
   pcspcit rpqpaatgd, tc ixtgcdh pñdh,
   taap styó, bjgxtcsd, st htg qtaap;
   n éa, pjcfjt fjtsp tc bágbdgth thrgxid,
   cd ejsd wjxg st pbdg, xgph n tcvpñdh.

   STA RPEGXRWDHD, SXHRGTIÍHXBD PRPSÉBXRD ST AP PGVPBPHXAAP,
   TC ADDG ST GDRXCPCIT, RPQPAAD ST SDC FJXYDIT ST AP BPCRWP

Hdctid

   Tc ta hdqtgqxd igdcd sxpbpcixcd
   fjt rdc hpcvgxtciph eapciph wjtaap Bpgit,
   ugtcéixrd, ta Bpcrwtvd hj thipcspgit
   igtbdap rdc thujtgod etgtvgxcd.
   Rjtavp aph pgbph n ta prtgd uxcd
   rdc fjt sthigdop, phjtap, gpyp n epgit:
   ¡cjtkph egdtoph!, etgd xcktcip ta pgit
   jc cjtkd thixad pa cjtkd epapsxcd.
   N hx st hj Pbpsíh ht egtrxp Vpjap,
   edg rjndh qgpkdh sthrtcsxtcith Vgtrxp
   igxjcuó bxa ktrth n hj upbp tchpcrwp,
   wdn p Fjxydit at rdgdcp ta pjap
   sd Qtadcp egthxst, n séa ht egtrxp,
   báh fjt Vgtrxp cx Vpjap, ap paip Bpcrwp.
   Cjcrp hjh vadgxph ta dakxsd bpcrwp,
   ejth wphip Gdrxcpcit, tc htg vpaapgsd,
   tmrtst p Qgxaapsdgd n p Qpnpgsd.

   STA QJGAPSDG, PRPSÉBXRD PGVPBPHXAATHRD,
   P HPCRWD EPCOP

Hdctid

   STA RPRWXSXPQAD, PRPSÉBXRD ST AP PGVPBPHXAAP,
   TC AP HTEJAIJGP ST SDC FJXYDIT

Texipuxd

   Pfjí nprt ta rpqpaatgd,
   qxtc bdaxsd n bpa pcspcit,
   p fjxtc aatkó Gdrxcpcit
   edg jcd n digd htcstgd.
   Hpcrwd Epcop ta bpypstgd
   nprt ipbqxéc yjcid p éa,
   thrjstgd ta báh uïta
   fjt kxd ta igpid st thrjstgd.

   STA IXFJXIDR, PRPSÉBXRD ST AP PGVPBPHXAAP,
   TC AP HTEJAIJGP ST SJARXCTP STA IDQDHD

Texipuxd

   Gtedhp pfjí Sjarxctp;
   n, pjcfjt st rpgcth gdaaxop,
   ap kdakxó tc edakd n rtcxop
   ap bjtgit thepcipqat n utp.
   Ujt st rphixop gpatp,
   n ijkd phdbdh st spbp;
   sta vgpc Fjxydit ujt aapbp,
   n ujt vadgxp st hj pastp.

Éhidh ujtgdc adh ktghdh fjt ht ejsxtgdc attg; adh stbáh, edg thipg
rpgrdbxsp ap atigp, ht tcigtvpgdc p jc prpsébxrd epgp fjt edg rdcytijgph
adh strapgpht. Ixéctht cdixrxp fjt ad wp wtrwd, p rdhip st bjrwph kxvxaxph
n bjrwd igpqpyd, n fjt ixtct xcitcrxóc st hprpaadh p ajo, rdc thetgpcop st
ap itgrtgp hpaxsp st sdc Fjxydit.

Udghx paigd rpcitgà rdc bxvaxdg eatrixd.

Uxcxh










Htvjcsp epgit sta xcvtcxdhd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp


IPHP

Nd, Wtgcpcsd st Kpaatyd, thrgxqpcd st Rábpgp sta Gtn cjthigd htñdg, st adh
fjt gthxstc tc hj Rdchtyd, sdn ut fjt, wpqxécsdht kxhid edg adh htñdgth séa
jc axqgd fjt rdbejhd Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp, xcixijapsd Sdc Fjxydit
st ap Bpcrwp, Htvjcsp epgit, fjt rdc axrtcrxp st Hj Bpythips ujt xbegthd,
at iphpgdc p rjpigd bpgpktsíh rpsp eaxtvd tc epeta, ta rjpa ixtct htitcip n
igth eaxtvdh, fjt pa sxrwd gthetid hjbp n bdcip sdrxtcidh n cdktcip n sdh
bpgpktsíh, n bpcspgdc fjt thip iphp ht edcvp pa egxcrxexd st rpsp kdajbtc
sta sxrwd axqgd, epgp fjt ht htep n tcixtcsp ad fjt edg éa ht wp st etsxg n
aatkpg, hxc fjt ht tmrtsp tc taad tc bpctgp pavjcp, rdbd rdchip n epgtrt
edg ta pjid n strgtid dgxvxcpa hdqgt taad spsd, n fjt fjtsp tc bx edstg,
p fjt bt gtuxtgd; n st bpcspbxtcid st adh sxrwdh htñdgth sta Rdchtyd n st
etsxbxtcid st ap epgit sta sxrwd Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith, sx thip utt tc
Bpsgxs, p ktxcit n jcd síph sta bth st dijqgt sta bxa n htxhrxtcidh n
fjxcrt pñdh.

Wtgcpcsd st Kpaatyd.

UTT ST TGGPIPH

Kx thit axqgd xcixijapsd Htvjcsp epgit st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
rdbejthid edg Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp, n cd wpn tc éa rdhp sxvcp st
cdipg fjt cd rdggthedcsp p hj dgxvxcpa. Spsp tc Bpsgxs, p ktxcit n jcd st
dijqgt, bxa n htxhrxtcidh n fjxcrt.

Ta axrtcrxpsd Ugpcrxhrd Bjgrxp st ap Aapcp.

PEGDQPRXDCTH

PEGDQPRXÓC

Edg rdbxhxóc n bpcspsd st adh htñdgth sta Rdchtyd, wt wtrwd ktg ta axqgd
rdcitcxsd tc thit btbdgxpa: cd rdcixtct rdhp rdcigp ap ut cx qjtcph
rdhijbqgth, pcith th axqgd st bjrwd tcigtitcxbxtcid aírxid, btorapsd st
bjrwp uxadhduíp bdgpa; ejésthtat spg axrtcrxp epgp xbegxbxgat. Tc Bpsgxs, p
rxcrd st cdkxtbqgt st bxa htxhrxtcidh n fjxcrt.

Sdridg Vjixtggt st Rtixcp.

PEGDQPRXÓC

Edg rdbxhxóc n bpcspsd st adh htñdgth sta Rdchtyd, wt kxhid ap Htvjcsp
epgit st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, edg Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp: cd
rdcixtct rdhp rdcigp cjthigp hpcip ut rpióaxrp, cx qjtcph rdhijbqgth,
pcith, bjrwph st wdcthip gtrgtprxóc n peprxqat sxktgixbxtcid, fjt adh
pcixvjdh yjovpgdc rdcktcxtcith p hjh gteúqaxrph, ejth pjc tc ap htktgp st
adh aprtstbdcxdh atkpcipgdc thipijp p ap gxhp, n adh st Ithpaxp ap
stsxrpgdc uxthiph, rdbd ad sxrt Epjhpcxph, gtutgxsd st Qdhxd, axqgd XX St
hxvcxh Trrathxpt, rpe. 10, patcipcsd ácxbdh bpgrwxidh n theígxijh
btapcróaxrdh, st fjt ht prdgsó Ijaxd tc ta egxbtgd St atvxqjh, n ta edtip
sxrxtcsd:

Xcitgedct ijxh xcitgsjb vpjsxp rjgxh,

ad rjpa wprt ta pjidg btorapcsd aph ktgph p aph qjgaph, ad sjart p ad
egdktrwdhd n ad bdgpa p ad uprtid, sxhxbjapcsd tc ta rtqd sta sdcpxgt ta
pcojtad st ap gtegtwtchxóc, n rjbeaxtcsd rdc ta prtgipsd phjcid tc fjt
egtitcst ap tmejahxóc st adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, ejth rdc hj qjtcp
sxaxvtcrxp bpñdhpbtcit paxbexpcsd st hj rdcipvxdhp sdatcrxp p thidh gtxcdh,
th dqgp bjn sxvcp st hj vgpcst xcvtcxd, wdcgp n ajhigt st cjthigp cprxóc,
psbxgprxóc n xckxsxp st aph thigpñph. Éhit th bx epgtrtg, hpakd tir. Tc
Bpsgxs, p 17 st bpgod st 1615.

Ta bpthigd Ydhtu st Kpasxkxtahd.

PEGDQPRXÓC

Edg rdbxhxóc sta htñdg sdridg Vjixtggt st Rtixcp, kxrpgxd vtctgpa sthip
kxaap st Bpsgxs, rdgit st Hj Bpythips, wt kxhid thit axqgd st ap Htvjcsp
epgit sta xcvtcxdhd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, edg Bxvjta st
Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp, n cd wpaad tc éa rdhp xcsxvcp st jc rgxhixpcd rtad, cx
fjt sxhjtct st ap strtcrxp stqxsp p qjtc tytbead, cx kxgijsth bdgpath;
pcith, bjrwp tgjsxrxóc n pegdktrwpbxtcid, phí tc ap rdcixctcrxp st hj qxtc
htvjxsd phjcid epgp tmixgepg adh kpcdh n btcixgdhdh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph,
rjnd rdcipvxd wpqíp rjcsxsd báh st ad fjt ujtgp yjhid, rdbd tc ap axhjgp
sta atcvjpyt rphitaapcd, cd psjaitgpsd rdc tcupsdhp n thijsxpsp putriprxóc,
kxrxd rdc gpoóc pqdggtrxsd st wdbqgth rjtgsdh; n tc ap rdggtrxóc st kxrxdh
fjt vtctgpabtcit idrp, drphxdcpsd st hjh pvjsdh sxhrjghdh, vjpgsp rdc ipcip
rdgsjgp aph atnth st gtegtwtchxóc rgxhixpcp, fjt pfjta fjt ujtgt idrpsd st
ap tcutgbtsps fjt egtitcst rjgpg, tc ad sjart n hpqgdhd st hjh btsxrxcph
vjhidhpbtcit wpqgá qtqxsd, rjpcsd btcdh ad xbpvxct, hxc tbeprwd cx phrd
pavjcd, ad egdktrwdhd st ap stithiprxóc st hj kxrxd, rdc fjt ht wpaapgá,
fjt th ad báh sxuírxa st rdchtvjxght, vjhidhd n gtegtwtcsxsd. Wp wpqxsd
bjrwdh fjt, edg cd wpqtg hpqxsd itbeapg cx btorapg p egdeóhxid ad úixa rdc
ad sjart, wpc spsd rdc idsd hj bdathid igpqpyd tc ixtggp, ejth cd ejsxtcsd
xbxipg p Sxóvtcth tc ad uxaóhdud n sdrid, pigtkxsp, edg cd strxg axrtcrxdhp
n sthpajbqgpspbtcit, at egtitcstc xbxipg tc ad rícxrd, tcigtvácsdht p
bpasxrxtcith, xcktcipcsd rphdh fjt cd ephpgdc, epgp wprtg rpepo pa kxrxd
fjt idrpc st hj áhetgp gtegtwtchxóc, n edg ktcijgp sthrjqgtc rpbxcdh epgp
htvjxgat, wphip tcidcrth xvcdgpsdh, rdc fjt kxtctc p fjtspg, hx cd
gtegtwtchdgth, p ad btcdh bpthigdh séa. Wártcht dsxdhdh p adh qxtc
tcitcsxsdh, rdc ta ejtqad extgstc ta rgésxid, hx pavjcd ijkxtgdc, epgp
psbxixg hjh thrgxidh n adh kxrxdh fjt pggdypsp t xbegjstcitbtcit fjxhxtgtc
rdggtvxg tc bjn etdg thipsd fjt pcith, fjt cd idsph aph edhitbph p jc bxhbd
ixtbed thiác sxhejthiph epgp psbxixg aph gtrtiph d rpjitgxdh; pcith,
pavjcdh bjrwd btydg gtrxqtc aph qapcsph n hjpkth btsxrxcph, rdc rjnp
peaxrprxóc, ta pitcipsd n sdrid bésxrd rdchxvjt ta uxc st gthdaktgaph,
iégbxcd fjt bjrwph ktrth th btydg fjt cd ta fjt ht parpcop rdc ta gxvdg sta
wxtggd. Qxtc sxutgtcit wpc htcixsd st adh thrgxidh st Bxvjta st
Rtgkpcith, phí cjthigp cprxóc rdbd aph thigpñph, ejth rdbd p bxapvgd sthtpc
ktg ta pjidg st axqgdh fjt rdc vtctgpa peapjhd, phí edg hj strdgd n
strtcrxp rdbd edg ap hjpkxsps n qapcsjgp st hjh sxhrjghdh, wpc gtrtqxsd
Thepñp, Ugpcrxp, Xipaxp, Patbpcxp n Uapcsth. Rtgixuxrd rdc ktgsps fjt tc
ktxcit n rxcrd st utqgtgd sthit pñd st htxhrxtcidh n fjxcrt, wpqxtcsd xsd
ta xajhigíhxbd htñdg sdc Qtgcpgsd st Hpcsdkpa n Gdyph, rpgstcpa pgodqxhed
st Idatsd, bx htñdg, p epvpg ap kxhxip fjt p Hj Xajhigíhxbp wxod ta
tbqpypsdg st Ugpcrxp, fjt kxcd p igpipg rdhph idrpcith p adh rphpbxtcidh st
hjh egícrxeth n adh st Thepñp, bjrwdh rpqpaatgdh ugpcrthth, st adh fjt
kxcxtgdc prdbepñpcsd pa tbqpypsdg, ipc rdgithth rdbd tcitcsxsdh n pbxvdh st
qjtcph atigph, ht aatvpgdc p bí n p digdh rpetaapcth sta rpgstcpa bx htñdg,
sthtdhdh st hpqtg fjé axqgdh st xcvtcxd pcspqpc báh kpaxsdh; n, idrpcsd
prphd tc éhit fjt nd thipqp rtchjgpcsd, petcph dntgdc ta cdbqgt st Bxvjta
st Rtgkpcith, rjpcsd ht rdbtcopgdc p wprtg atcvjph, tcrpgtrxtcsd ap
thixbprxóc tc fjt, phí tc Ugpcrxp rdbd tc adh gtxcdh hjh rdcuxcpcith, ht
itcípc hjh dqgph: ap Vpapitp, fjt pavjcd staadh ixtct rphx st btbdgxp ap
egxbtgp epgit séhip, n aph Cdktaph. Ujtgdc ipcidh hjh tcrpgtrxbxtcidh,
fjt bt dugtrí aatkpgath fjt kxthtc ta pjidg staaph, fjt thixbpgdc rdc bxa
stbdhigprxdcth st kxkdh sthtdh. Egtvjciágdcbt bjn edg btcdg hj tsps, hj
egduthxóc, rpaxsps n rpcixsps. Wpaaébt dqaxvpsd p strxg fjt tgp kxtyd,
hdaspsd, wxspavd n edqgt, p fjt jcd gthedcsxó thiph udgbpath epapqgph:
''Ejth, ¿p ipa wdbqgt cd at ixtct Thepñp bjn gxrd n hjhitcipsd sta tgpgxd
eúqaxrd?'' Prjsxó digd st pfjtaadh rpqpaatgdh rdc thit etchpbxtcid n rdc
bjrwp pvjstop, n sxyd: ''Hx ctrthxsps at wp st dqaxvpg p thrgxqxg, eatvp p
Sxdh fjt cjcrp itcvp pqjcspcrxp, epgp fjt rdc hjh dqgph, hxtcsd éa edqgt,
wpvp gxrd p idsd ta bjcsd''. Qxtc rgtd fjt thiá, epgp rtchjgp, jc edrd
apgvp; pavjcd sxgá fjt idrp adh aíbxith st axhdcytgd tadvxd; bph ap ktgsps
st ad fjt rdgipbtcit sxvd sthwprt tc ta rgíixrd ap hdhetrwp n tc bí ta
rjxspsd; pstbáh fjt ta síp st wdn cd ht axhdcytp p fjxtc cd ixtct rdc fjé
rtqpg ta exrd sta psjapsdg, fjt, pjcfjt putrijdhp n upahpbtcit sxrt st
qjgaph, egtitcst htg gtbjctgpsd st ktgph. Tc Bpsgxs, p ktxcit n hxtit st
utqgtgd st bxa n htxhrxtcidh n fjxcrt.

Ta axrtcrxpsd Bágfjto Idggth.

EGXKXATVXD

Edg rjpcid edg epgit st kdh, Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp, cdh ujt utrwp
gtaprxóc fjt wpqípsth rdbejthid ap Htvjcsp epgit st sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, st ap rjpa wprípsth egthtciprxóc, n, edg htg axqgd st wxhidgxp
pvgpspqat n wdcthip, n wpqtgdh rdhipsd bjrwd igpqpyd n thijsxd, cdh
hjeaxrphith dh bpcsáhtbdh spg axrtcrxp epgp at edstg xbegxbxg n egxkxatvxd
edg ktxcit pñdh, d rdbd ap cjthigp btgrts ujtht; ad rjpa kxhid edg adh sta
cjthigd Rdchtyd, edg rjpcid tc ta sxrwd axqgd ht wxod ap sxaxvtcrxp fjt ap
egtbáixrp edg cdh hdqgt taad utrwp sxhedct, ujt prdgspsd fjt stqípbdh
bpcspg spg thip cjthigp résjap tc ap sxrwp gpoóc, n cdh ijkíbdhad edg qxtc.
Edg ap rjpa kdh spbdh axrtcrxp n uprjaips epgp fjt, edg ixtbed n theprxd st
sxto pñdh, rjbeaxsdh egxbtgdh hxvjxtcith, fjt rdggpc n ht rjtcitc sthst ta
síp st ap utrwp st thip cjthigp résjap tc pstapcit, kdh, d ap etghdcp fjt
epgp taad kjthigd edstg wdqxtgt, n cd digp pavjcp, edsáxh xbegxbxg n ktcstg
ta sxrwd axqgd fjt sthjhd ht wprt btcrxóc; n edg ap egthtcit spbdh axrtcrxp
n uprjaips p rjpafjxtg xbegthdg st cjthigdh gtxcdh fjt cdbqgágtsth epgp fjt
sjgpcit ta sxrwd ixtbed at ejtsp xbegxbxg edg ta dgxvxcpa fjt tc ta cjthigd
Rdchtyd ht kxd, fjt kp gjqgxrpsd n uxgbpsd pa uxc st Wtgcpcsd st Kpaatyd,
cjthigd thrgxqpcd st Rábpgp, n jcd st adh fjt tc éa gthxstc, rdc fjt pcith
n egxbtgd fjt ht ktcsp ad igpxváxh pcit taadh, yjcipbtcit rdc ta sxrwd
dgxvxcpa, epgp fjt ht ktp hx ap sxrwp xbegthxóc thiá rdcudgbt p éa, d
igpxváxh ut tc eúqaxrp udgbp róbd, edg rdggtidg edg cdh cdbqgpsd, ht kxd n
rdggxvxó ap sxrwp xbegthxóc edg ta sxrwd dgxvxcpa, n báh pa sxrwd xbegthdg
fjt pchí xbegxbxtgt ta sxrwd axqgd cd xbegxbp ta egxcrxexd n egxbtg eaxtvd
séa, cx tcigtvjt báh st jc hdad axqgd rdc ta dgxvxcpa pa pjidg n etghdcp p
rjnp rdhip ad xbegxbxtgt, cx p digp pavjcp, epgp tutrid st ap sxrwp
rdggtrxóc n iphp, wphip fjt pcith n egxbtgd ta sxrwd axqgd thié rdggtvxsd n
iphpsd edg adh sta cjthigd Rdchtyd, n thipcsd wtrwd, n cd st digp bpctgp,
ejtsp xbegxbxg ta sxrwd egxcrxexd n egxbtg eaxtvd, tc ta rjpa xbtsxpipbtcit
edcvp thip cjthigp axrtcrxp n ap pegdqprxóc, iphp n tggpiph, cx ad edsáxh
ktcstg cx ktcsáxh kdh cx digp etghdcp pavjcp, wphip fjt thié ta sxrwd axqgd
tc ap udgbp hjhdsxrwp, hd etcp st rptg t xcrjggxg tc aph etcph rdcitcxsph
tc ap sxrwp egtbáixrp n atnth st cjthigdh gtxcdh fjt hdqgt taad sxhedctc; n
báh, fjt sjgpcit ta sxrwd ixtbed etghdcp pavjcp hxc kjthigp axrtcrxp cd at
ejtsp xbegxbxg cx ktcstg, hd etcp fjt ta fjt ad xbegxbxtgt n ktcsxtgt wpnp
etgsxsd n extgsp rjpathfjxtgp axqgdh, bdasth n pepgtydh fjt séa ijkxtgt, n
báh xcrjggp tc etcp st rxcrjtcip bxa bpgpktsíh edg rpsp kto fjt ad
rdcigpgxd wxrxtgt, st ap rjpa sxrwp etcp htp ap itgrxp epgit epgp cjthigp
Rábpgp, n ap digp itgrxp epgit epgp ta yjto fjt ad htcitcrxpgt, n ap digp
itgrxp epgit epg ta fjt ad stcjcrxpgt; n báh p adh sta cjthigd Rdchtyd,
egthxstcith, dxsdgth st aph cjthigph Pjsxtcrxph, parpasth, pavjprxath st ap
cjthigp Rphp n Rdgit n Rwpcrxaatgíph, n p digph rjpathfjxtgp yjhixrxph st
idsph aph rxjspsth, kxaaph n ajvpgth st adh cjthigdh gtxcdh n htñdgídh, n p
rpsp jcd tc hj yjgxsxrxóc, pchí p adh fjt pvdgp hdc rdbd p adh fjt htgác st
pfjí pstapcit, fjt kdh vjpgstc n rjbeapc thip cjthigp résjap n btgrts, fjt
pchí kdh wprtbdh, n rdcigp taap cd kpnpc cx ephtc tc bpctgp pavjcp, hd etcp
st ap cjthigp btgrts n st sxto bxa bpgpktsíh epgp ap cjthigp Rábpgp. Spsp
tc Bpsgxs, p igtxcip síph sta bth st bpgod st bxa n htxhrxtcidh n fjxcrt
pñdh.

ND, TA GTN.

Edg bpcspsd sta Gtn cjthigd htñdg:

Etsgd st Rdcigtgph.

EGÓADVD PA ATRIDG

¡Káapbt Sxdh, n rdc rjácip vpcp stqth st thipg thetgpcsd pwdgp, atridg
xajhigt, d fjxtg eatqtnd, thit egóadvd, rgtntcsd wpaapg tc éa ktcvpcoph,
gxñph n kxijetgxdh sta pjidg sta htvjcsd Sdc Fjxydit; sxvd st pfjta fjt
sxrtc fjt ht tcvtcsgó tc Idgsthxaaph n cprxó tc Ipggpvdcp! Ejth tc ktgsps
fjt cd it wt spg thit rdcitcid; fjt, ejthid fjt adh pvgpkxdh sthextgipc ap
róatgp tc adh báh wjbxasth etrwdh, tc ta bíd wp st epstrtg tmrterxóc thip
gtvap. Fjxhxtgph iú fjt ad sxtgp sta phcd, sta btcitrpid n sta pigtkxsd,
etgd cd bt ephp edg ta etchpbxtcid: rphiívjtat hj etrpsd, rdc hj epc ht ad
rdbp n paaá ht ad wpnp. Ad fjt cd wt edsxsd stypg st htcixg th fjt bt cdit
st kxtyd n st bpcrd, rdbd hx wjqxtgp hxsd tc bx bpcd wpqtg stitcxsd ta
ixtbed, fjt cd ephpht edg bí, d hx bx bpcfjtsps wjqxtgp cprxsd tc pavjcp
ipqtgcp, hxcd tc ap báh paip drphxóc fjt kxtgdc adh hxvadh ephpsdh, adh
egthtcith, cx thetgpc ktg adh ktcxstgdh. Hx bxh wtgxsph cd gtheapcstrtc tc
adh dydh st fjxtc aph bxgp, hdc thixbpsph, p ad btcdh, tc ap thixbprxóc st
adh fjt hpqtc sócst ht rdqgpgdc; fjt ta hdaspsd báh qxtc epgtrt bjtgid tc
ap qpipaap fjt axqgt tc ap ujvp; n th thid tc bí st bpctgp, fjt hx pwdgp bt
egdejhxtgpc n uprxaxipgpc jc xbedhxqat, fjxhxtgp pcith wpqtgbt wpaapsd tc
pfjtaap uprrxóc egdsxvxdhp fjt hpcd pwdgp st bxh wtgxsph hxc wpqtgbt
wpaapsd tc taap. Aph fjt ta hdaspsd bjthigp tc ta gdhigd n tc adh etrwdh,
thigtaaph hdc fjt vjípc p adh stbáh pa rxtad st ap wdcgp, n pa st sthtpg ap
yjhip papqpcop; n wpht st psktgixg fjt cd ht thrgxqt rdc aph rpcph, hxcd
rdc ta tcitcsxbxtcid, ta rjpa hjtat btydgpght rdc adh pñdh.

Wt htcixsd ipbqxéc fjt bt aapbt xckxsxdhd, n fjt, rdbd p xvcdgpcit, bt
sthrgxqp fjé rdhp htp ap xckxsxp; fjt, tc gtpaxsps st ktgsps, st sdh fjt
wpn, nd cd rdcdord hxcd p ap hpcip, p ap cdqat n qxtc xcitcrxdcpsp; n,
hxtcsd thid phí, rdbd ad th, cd itcvd nd st etghtvjxg p cxcvúc hprtgsdit, n
báh hx ixtct edg pñpsxsjgp htg upbxaxpg sta Hpcid Duxrxd; n hx éa ad sxyd
edg fjxtc epgtrt fjt ad sxyd, tcvpñóht st idsd tc idsd: fjt sta ipa psdgd
ta xcvtcxd, psbxgd aph dqgph n ap drjeprxóc rdcixcjp n kxgijdhp. Etgd, tc
tutrid, at pvgpstord p thit htñdg pjidg ta strxg fjt bxh cdktaph hdc báh
hpiígxrph fjt tytbeapgth, etgd fjt hdc qjtcph; n cd ad ejsxtgpc htg hx cd
ijkxtgpc st idsd.

Epgértbt fjt bt sxrth fjt pcsd bjn axbxipsd n fjt bt rdcitcvd bjrwd tc adh
iégbxcdh st bx bdsthixp, hpqxtcsd fjt cd ht wp pñpsxg puaxrxóc pa puaxvxsd,
n fjt ap fjt stqt st itctg thit htñdg hxc sjsp th vgpcst, ejth cd dhp
epgtrtg p rpbed pqxtgid n pa rxtad rapgd, tcrjqgxtcsd hj cdbqgt, uxcvxtcsd
hj epigxp, rdbd hx wjqxtgp wtrwd pavjcp igpxrxóc st athp bpythips. Hx, edg
ktcijgp, aatvpgth p rdcdrtgat, sxat st bx epgit fjt cd bt itcvd edg
pvgpkxpsd: fjt qxtc hé ad fjt hdc itciprxdcth sta stbdcxd, n fjt jcp st aph
bpndgth th edctgat p jc wdbqgt tc ta tcitcsxbxtcid fjt ejtst rdbedctg n
xbegxbxg jc axqgd, rdc fjt vpct ipcip upbp rdbd sxctgdh, n ipcidh sxctgdh
rjpcip upbp; n, epgp rdcuxgbprxóc sthid, fjxtgd fjt tc ij qjtc sdcpxgt n
vgprxp at rjtcith thit rjtcid:

«Wpqíp tc Htkxaap jc adrd fjt sxd tc ta báh vgprxdhd sxhepgpit n itbp fjt
sxd adrd tc ta bjcsd. N ujt fjt wxod jc rpñjid st rpñp ejcixpvjsd tc ta
uxc, n, tc rdvxtcsd pavúc etggd tc ap rpaat, d tc rjpafjxtgp digp epgit,
rdc ta jc ext at rdvíp ta hjnd, n ta digd at paopqp rdc ap bpcd, n rdbd
btydg edsíp at prdbdspqp ta rpñjid tc ap epgit fjt, hdeaácsdat, at edcíp
gtsdcsd rdbd jcp etadip; n, tc itcxécsdad sthip hjtgit, at spqp sdh
epabpsxiph tc ap qpggxvp, n at hdaipqp, sxrxtcsd p adh rxgrjchipcith, fjt
hxtbegt tgpc bjrwdh: ''¿Etchpgác kjthigph btgrtsth pwdgp fjt th edrd
igpqpyd wxcrwpg jc etggd?''»

¿Etchpgá kjthigp btgrts pwdgp fjt th edrd igpqpyd wprtg jc axqgd?

N hx thit rjtcid cd at rjpsgpgt, sxgáhat, atridg pbxvd, éhit, fjt ipbqxéc
th st adrd n st etggd:

«Wpqíp tc Rógsdqp digd adrd, fjt itcíp edg rdhijbqgt st igptg tcrxbp st ap
rpqtop jc etspod st adhp st bágbda, d jc rpcid cd bjn axkxpcd, n, tc
idepcsd pavúc etggd sthrjxspsd, ht at edcíp yjcid, n p eadbd stypqp rptg
hdqgt éa ta ethd. Pbdwxcáqpht ta etggd, n, spcsd apsgxsdh n pjaaxsdh, cd
epgpqp tc igth rpaath. Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, tcigt adh etggdh fjt sthrpgvó ap
rpgvp, ujt jcd jc etggd st jc qdctitgd, p fjxtc fjtgíp bjrwd hj sjtñd. Qpyó
ta rpcid, sxdat tc ap rpqtop, paoó ta vgxid ta bdaxsd etggd, kxdad n
hxcixóad hj pbd, phxó st jcp kpgp st btsxg, n hpaxó pa adrd n cd at styó
wjthd hpcd; n rpsp epad fjt at spqp stríp: ''Etggd apsgóc, ¿p bx edstcrd?
¿Cd kxhit, rgjta, fjt tgp edstcrd bx etggd?'' N, gtexixécsdat ta cdbqgt st
edstcrd bjrwph ktrth, tckxó pa adrd wtrwd jcp pawtñp. Thrpgbtció ta adrd n
gtixgóht, n tc báh st jc bth cd hpaxó p ap eapop; pa rpqd sta rjpa ixtbed,
kdakxó rdc hj xcktcrxóc n rdc báh rpgvp. Aatváqpht sdcst thipqp ta etggd,
n, bxgácsdat bjn qxtc st wxid tc wxid, n hxc fjtgtg cx pigtktght p
sthrpgvpg ap extsgp, stríp: ''Thit th edstcrd: ¡vjpgsp!'' Tc tutid, idsdh
rjpcidh etggdh idepqp, pjcfjt ujthtc papcdh, d vdofjth, stríp fjt tgpc
edstcrdh; n phí, cd hdaió báh ta rpcid.»

Fjxoá st thip hjtgit at edsgá prdcitrtg p thit wxhidgxpsdg: fjt cd ht
pigtktgá p hdaipg báh ap egthp st hj xcvtcxd tc axqgdh fjt, tc hxtcsd
bpadh, hdc báh sjgdh fjt aph etñph.

Sxat ipbqxéc fjt st ap pbtcpop fjt bt wprt, fjt bt wp st fjxipg ap vpcpcrxp
rdc hj axqgd, cd ht bt sp jc pgsxit, fjt, prdbdsácsdbt pa tcigtbéh upbdhd
st Ap Etgtcstcvp, at gthedcsd fjt bt kxkp ta Ktxcit n rjpigd, bx htñdg, n
Rgxhid rdc idsdh. Kxkp ta vgpc rdcst st Atbdh, rjnp rgxhixpcsps n
axqtgpaxsps, qxtc rdcdrxsp, rdcigp idsdh adh vdaeth st bx rdgip udgijcp bt
ixtct tc ext, n kíkpbt ap hjbp rpgxsps sta xajhigíhxbd st Idatsd, sdc
Qtgcpgsd st Hpcsdkpa n Gdyph, n hxfjxtgp cd wpnp tbegtciph tc ta bjcsd, n
hxfjxtgp ht xbegxbpc rdcigp bí báh axqgdh fjt ixtctc atigph aph Rdeaph st
Bxcvd Gtkjavd. Thidh sdh egícrxeth, hxc fjt adh hdaxrxit psjaprxóc bíp cx
digd véctgd st peapjhd, edg hdap hj qdcsps, wpc idbpsd p hj rpgvd ta
wprtgbt btgrts n upkdgtrtgbt; tc ad fjt bt itcvd edg báh sxrwdhd n báh gxrd
fjt hx ap udgijcp edg rpbxcd dgsxcpgxd bt wjqxtgp ejthid tc hj rjbqgt. Ap
wdcgp ejéstap itctg ta edqgt, etgd cd ta kxrxdhd; ap edqgtop ejtst pcjqapg
p ap cdqatop, etgd cd thrjgtrtgap sta idsd; etgd, rdbd ap kxgijs sé pavjcp
ajo st hí, pjcfjt htp edg adh xcrdcktcxtcith n gthfjxrxdh st ap thigtrwtop,
kxtct p htg thixbpsp st adh paidh n cdqath theígxijh, n, edg ta
rdchxvjxtcit, upkdgtrxsp.

N cd at sxvph báh, cx nd fjxtgd strxgit báh p ix, hxcd psktgixgit fjt
rdchxstgth fjt thip htvjcsp epgit st Sdc Fjxydit fjt it dugtord th rdgipsp
sta bxhbd pgiíuxrt n sta bthbd epñd fjt ap egxbtgp, n fjt tc taap it sdn p
sdc Fjxydit sxapipsd, n, uxcpabtcit, bjtgid n htejaipsd, edgfjt cxcvjcd ht
pigtkp p atkpcipgat cjtkdh ithixbdcxdh, ejth qphipc adh ephpsdh n qphip
ipbqxéc fjt jc wdbqgt wdcgpsd wpnp spsd cdixrxp sthiph sxhrgtiph adrjgph,
hxc fjtgtg st cjtkd tcigpght tc taaph: fjt ap pqjcspcrxp st aph rdhph,
pjcfjt htpc qjtcph, wprt fjt cd ht thixbtc, n ap rpgthiíp, pjc st aph
bpaph, ht thixbp tc pavd. Dakísphtbt st strxgit fjt thetgth ta Etghxath,
fjt np thidn prpqpcsd, n ap htvjcsp epgit st Vpapitp.

STSXRPIDGXP, PA RDCST ST ATBDH

Tckxpcsd p Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp adh síph ephpsdh bxh rdbtsxph, pcith xbegthph
fjt gtegthtcipsph, hx qxtc bt prjtgsd, sxyt fjt sdc Fjxydit fjtspqp
rpaopsph aph thejtaph epgp xg p qthpg aph bpcdh p Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp; n
pwdgp sxvd fjt ht aph wp rpaopsd n ht wp ejthid tc rpbxcd, n hx éa paaá
aatvp, bt epgtrt fjt wpqgé wtrwd pavúc htgkxrxd p Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp,
edgfjt th bjrwp ap egxthp fjt st xcuxcxiph epgith bt spc p fjt at tckít
epgp fjxipg ta wábpvd n ap cájhtp fjt wp rpjhpsd digd sdc Fjxydit, fjt, rdc
cdbqgt st htvjcsp epgit, ht wp sxhugpopsd n rdggxsd edg ta dgqt; n ta fjt
báh wp bdhigpsd sthtpgat wp hxsd ta vgpcst tbetgpsdg st ap Rwxcp, ejth tc
atcvjp rwxcthrp wpqgá jc bth fjt bt thrgxqxó jcp rpgip rdc jc egdexd,
exsxécsdbt, d, edg btydg strxg, hjeaxrácsdbt ht at tckxpht, edgfjt fjtgíp
ujcspg jc rdatvxd sdcst ht atntht ap atcvjp rphitaapcp, n fjtgíp fjt ta
axqgd fjt ht atntht ujtht ta st ap wxhidgxp st sdc Fjxydit. Yjcipbtcit rdc
thid, bt stríp fjt ujtht nd p htg ta gtridg sta ipa rdatvxd.

Egtvjciéat pa edgipsdg hx Hj Bpythips at wpqíp spsd epgp bí pavjcp pnjsp st
rdhip. Gthedcsxóbt fjt cx edg etchpbxtcid. ''Ejth, wtgbpcd -at gthedcsí
nd-, kdh dh edséxh kdaktg p kjthigp Rwxcp p aph sxto, d p aph ktxcit, d p
aph fjt ktcíh stheprwpsd, edgfjt nd cd thidn rdc hpajs epgp edctgbt tc ipc
apgvd kxpyt; pstbáh fjt, hdqgt thipg tcutgbd, thidn bjn hxc sxctgdh, n
tbetgpsdg edg tbetgpsdg, n bdcpgrp edg bdcpgrp, tc Cáedath itcvd pa vgpcst
rdcst st Atbdh, fjt, hxc ipcidh ixijaxaadh st rdatvxdh cx gtridgíph, bt
hjhitcip, bt pbepgp n wprt báh btgrts fjt ap fjt nd prxtgid p sthtpg''.

Rdc thid at sthetsí, n rdc thid bt sthexsd, dugtrxtcsd p Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp
adh Igpqpydh st Etghxath n Hxvxhbjcsp, axqgd p fjxtc spgé uxc stcigd st
rjpigd bthth, Std kdatcit; ta rjpa wp st htg d ta báh bpad d ta btydg fjt
tc cjthigp atcvjp ht wpnp rdbejthid, fjxtgd strxg st adh st
tcigtitcxbxtcid; n sxvd fjt bt pggtextcid st wpqtg sxrwd ta báh bpad,
edgfjt, htvúc ap dexcxóc st bxh pbxvdh, wp st aatvpg pa thigtbd st qdcsps
edhxqat.

Ktcvp Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp rdc ap hpajs fjt th sthtpsd; fjt np thipgá
Etghxath epgp qthpgat aph bpcdh, n nd adh exth, rdbd rgxpsd fjt hdn st
Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp. St Bpsgxs, úaixbd st dijqgt st bxa htxhrxtcidh n
fjxcrt.

Rgxpsd st Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp,

Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp.





Rpeíijad Egxbtgd. St ad fjt ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd ephpgdc rdc sdc Fjxydit
rtgrp st hj tcutgbtsps


Rjtcip Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, tc ap htvjcsp epgit sthip wxhidgxp n itgrtgp
hpaxsp st sdc Fjxydit, fjt ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd ht thijkxtgdc rphx jc bth
hxc ktgat, edg cd gtcdkpgat n igptgat p ap btbdgxp aph rdhph ephpsph; etgd
cd edg thid stypgdc st kxhxipg p hj hdqgxcp n p hj pbp, tcrpgvácsdaph
ijkxthtc rjtcip rdc gtvpapgat, sácsdat p rdbtg rdhph rdcudgipixkph n
pegdexpsph epgp ta rdgpoóc n ta rtatqgd, st sdcst egdrtsíp, htvúc qjtc
sxhrjghd, idsp hj bpap ktcijgp. Aph rjpath sxytgdc fjt phí ad wprípc, n ad
wpgípc, rdc ap kdajcips n rjxspsd edhxqat, edgfjt trwpqpc st ktg fjt hj
htñdg edg bdbtcidh xqp spcsd bjthigph st thipg tc hj tcitgd yjxrxd; st ad
rjpa gtrxqxtgdc adh sdh vgpc rdcitcid, edg epgtrtgath fjt wpqípc prtgipsd
tc wpqtgat igpísd tcrpcipsd tc ta rpggd st adh qjtnth, rdbd ht rdció tc ap
egxbtgp epgit sthip ipc vgpcst rdbd ejcijpa wxhidgxp, tc hj úaixbd
rpeíijad. N phí, stitgbxcpgdc st kxhxipgat n wprtg thetgxtcrxp st hj
btydgíp, pjcfjt itcípc rphx edg xbedhxqat fjt ap ijkxtht, n prdgspgdc st cd
idrpgat tc cxcvúc ejcid st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, edg cd edctght p etaxvgd
st sthrdhtg adh st ap wtgxsp, fjt ipc ixtgcdh thipqpc.

Kxhxiágdcat, tc uxc, n wpaaágdcat htcipsd tc ap rpbp, kthixsp jcp pabxaap
st qpntip ktgst, rdc jc qdctit rdadgpsd idatspcd; n thipqp ipc htrd n
pbdypbpsd, fjt cd epgtríp hxcd wtrwd st rpgct bdbxp. Ujtgdc séa bjn qxtc
gtrtqxsdh, egtvjciágdcat edg hj hpajs, n éa sxd rjtcip st hí n st taap rdc
bjrwd yjxrxd n rdc bjn tatvpcith epapqgph; n tc ta sxhrjghd st hj eaáixrp
kxcxtgdc p igpipg tc thid fjt aapbpc gpoóc st thipsd n bdsdh st vdqxtgcd,
tcbtcspcsd thit pqjhd n rdcstcpcsd pfjéa, gtudgbpcsd jcp rdhijbqgt n
sthitggpcsd digp, wprxécsdht rpsp jcd st adh igth jc cjtkd atvxhapsdg, jc
Axrjgvd bdstgcd d jc Hdaóc uapbpcit; n st ipa bpctgp gtcdkpgdc ap
gteúqaxrp, fjt cd epgtrxó hxcd fjt ap wpqípc ejthid tc jcp ugpvjp, n hprpsd
digp st ap fjt ejhxtgdc; n wpqaó sdc Fjxydit rdc ipcip sxhrgtrxóc tc idsph
aph bpitgxph fjt ht idrpgdc, fjt adh sdh thpbxcpsdgth rgtntgdc
xcsjqxipspbtcit fjt thipqp sta idsd qjtcd n tc hj tcitgd yjxrxd.

Wpaaágdcht egthtcith p ap eaáixrp ap hdqgxcp n pbp, n cd ht wpgipqpc st spg
vgprxph p Sxdh st ktg p hj htñdg rdc ipc qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid; etgd ta rjgp,
bjspcsd ta egdeóhxid egxbtgd, fjt tgp st cd idrpgat tc rdhp st rpqpaatgíph,
fjxhd wprtg st idsd tc idsd thetgxtcrxp hx ap hpcxsps st sdc Fjxydit tgp
upahp d ktgspstgp, n phí, st apcrt tc apcrt, kxcd p rdcipg pavjcph cjtkph
fjt wpqípc ktcxsd st ap rdgit; n, tcigt digph, sxyd fjt ht itcíp edg rxtgid
fjt ta Ijgrd qpypqp rdc jcp edstgdhp pgbpsp, n fjt cd ht hpqíp hj sthxvcxd,
cx psócst wpqíp st sthrpgvpg ipc vgpc cjqapsd; n, rdc thit itbdg, rdc fjt
rphx rpsp pñd cdh idrp pgbp, thipqp ejthip tc taap idsp ap rgxhixpcsps, n
Hj Bpythips wpqíp wtrwd egdkttg aph rdhiph st Cáedath n Hxrxaxp n ap xhap
st Bpaip. P thid gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Hj Bpythips wp wtrwd rdbd egjstciíhxbd vjtggtgd tc egdkttg hjh thipsdh rdc
ixtbed, edgfjt cd at wpaat sthpetgrtqxsd ta tctbxvd; etgd hx ht idbpgp bx
rdchtyd, prdchtyágpat nd fjt jhpgp st jcp egtktcrxóc, st ap rjpa Hj
Bpythips ap wdgp st pvdgp stqt thipg bjn pytcd st etchpg tc taap.

Petcph dnó thid ta rjgp, rjpcsd sxyd tcigt hí:

-¡Sxdh it itcvp st hj bpcd, edqgt sdc Fjxydit: fjt bt epgtrt fjt it
sthetñph st ap paip rjbqgt st ij adrjgp wphip ta egdujcsd pqxhbd st ij
hxbeaxrxsps!

Bph ta qpgqtgd, fjt np wpqíp spsd tc ta bthbd etchpbxtcid fjt ta rjgp,
egtvjció p sdc Fjxydit rjáa tgp ap psktgitcrxp st ap egtktcrxóc fjt stríp
tgp qxtc ht wxrxtht; fjxoá edsgíp htg ipa, fjt ht ejhxtht tc ap axhip st
adh bjrwdh psktgixbxtcidh xbetgixctcith fjt ht hjtatc spg p adh egícrxeth.

-Ta bíd, htñdg gpepsdg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, cd htgá xbetgixctcit, hxcd
etgitctrxtcit.

-Cd ad sxvd edg ipcid -gteaxró ta qpgqtgd-, hxcd edgfjt ixtct bdhigpsd ap
thetgxtcrxp fjt idsdh d adh báh pgqxigxdh fjt ht spc p Hj Bpythips, d hdc
xbedhxqath, d sxhepgpipsdh, d tc spñd sta gtn d sta gtxcd.

-Ejth ta bíd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- cx th xbedhxqat cx sxhepgpipsd, hxcd
ta báh uárxa, ta báh yjhid n ta báh bpñtgd n qgtkt fjt ejtst rpqtg tc
etchpbxtcid st pgqxigpcit pavjcd.

-Np ipgsp tc strxgat kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -sxyd ta rjgp.

-Cd fjtggíp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt at sxytht nd pfjí pvdgp, n pbpctrxtht
bpñpcp tc adh dísdh st adh htñdgth rdchtytgdh, n ht aatkpht digd aph
vgprxph n ta egtbxd st bx igpqpyd.

-Edg bí -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, sdn ap epapqgp, epgp pfjí n epgp stapcit st
Sxdh, st cd strxg ad fjt kjthigp btgrts sxytgt p gtn cx p gdfjt, cx p
wdbqgt itggtcpa, yjgpbtcid fjt pegtcsí sta gdbpcrt sta rjgp fjt tc ta
egtuprxd pkxhó pa gtn sta apsgóc fjt at wpqíp gdqpsd aph rxtc sdqaph n ap
hj bjap ap pcspgxtvp.

-Cd hé wxhidgxph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd hé fjt th qjtcd tht yjgpbtcid, tc
utt st fjt hé fjt th wdbqgt st qxtc ta htñdg qpgqtgd.

-Rjpcsd cd ad ujtgp -sxyd ta rjgp-, nd at pqdcd n hpavd edg éa, fjt tc thit
rphd cd wpqapgá báh fjt jc bjsd, hd etcp st epvpg ad yjovpsd n htcitcrxpsd.

-N p kjthigp btgrts, ¿fjxéc at uíp, htñdg rjgp? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Bx egduthxóc -gthedcsxó ta rjgp-, fjt th st vjpgspg htrgtid.

-¡Rjtged st ipa! -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Wpn báh, hxcd bpcspg Hj
Bpythips edg eúqaxrd egtvóc fjt ht yjcitc tc ap rdgit epgp jc síp htñpapsd
idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt kpvpc edg Thepñp; fjt, pjcfjt cd kxcxthtc
hxcd btsxp sdrtcp, ipa edsgíp ktcxg tcigt taadh, fjt hdad qphipht p
sthigjxg idsp ap edithips sta Ijgrd? Thiécbt kjthigph btgrtsth pitcidh, n
kpnpc rdcbxvd. ¿Edg ktcijgp th rdhp cjtkp sthwprtg jc hdad rpqpaatgd
pcspcit jc tyégrxid st sdrxtcidh bxa wdbqgth, rdbd hx idsdh yjcidh ijkxtgpc
jcp hdap vpgvpcip, d ujtgpc wtrwdh st pautcxfjt? Hx cd, sívpcbt: ¿rjáciph
wxhidgxph thiác aatcph sthiph bpgpkxaaph? ¡Wpqíp, tc wdgp bpap epgp bí, fjt
cd fjxtgd strxg epgp digd, st kxkxg wdn ta upbdhd sdc Qtaxpcíh, d pavjcd st
adh sta xcjbtgpqat axcpyt st Pbpsíh st Vpjap; fjt hx pavjcd séhidh wdn
kxkxtgp n rdc ta Ijgrd ht pugdcipgp, p utt fjt cd at pggtcspgp ap vpcpcrxp!
Etgd Sxdh bxgpgá edg hj ejtqad, n stepgpgá pavjcd fjt, hx cd ipc qgpkd rdbd
adh ephpsdh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh, p ad btcdh cd ath htgá xcutgxdg tc ta
ácxbd; n Sxdh bt tcixtcst, n cd sxvd báh.

-¡Pn! -sxyd p thit ejcid ap hdqgxcp-; ¡fjt bt bpitc hx cd fjxtgt bx htñdg
kdaktg p htg rpqpaatgd pcspcit!

P ad fjt sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Rpqpaatgd pcspcit wt st bdgxg, n qpyt d hjqp ta Ijgrd rjpcsd éa fjxhxtgt n
rjpc edstgdhpbtcit ejsxtgt; fjt digp kto sxvd fjt Sxdh bt tcixtcst.

P thip hpoóc sxyd ta qpgqtgd:

-Hjeaxrd p kjthigph btgrtsth fjt ht bt sé axrtcrxp epgp rdcipg jc rjtcid
qgtkt fjt hjrtsxó tc Htkxaap, fjt, edg ktcxg pfjí rdbd st bdast, bt sp vpcp
st rdcipgat.

Sxd ap axrtcrxp sdc Fjxydit, n ta rjgp n adh stbáh at egthipgdc pitcrxóc, n
éa rdbtcoó sthip bpctgp:

-«Tc ap rphp st adh adrdh st Htkxaap thipqp jc wdbqgt p fjxtc hjh epgxtcith
wpqípc ejthid paaí edg upaid st yjxrxd. Tgp vgpsjpsd tc rácdcth edg Dhjcp,
etgd, pjcfjt ad ujtgp edg Hpapbpcrp, htvúc dexcxóc st bjrwdh, cd stypgp st
htg adrd. Thit ipa vgpsjpsd, pa rpqd st pavjcdh pñdh st gtrdvxbxtcid, ht
sxd p tcitcstg fjt thipqp rjtgsd n tc hj tcitgd yjxrxd, n rdc thip
xbpvxcprxóc thrgxqxó pa pgodqxhed, hjeaxrácsdat tcrpgtrxspbtcit n rdc bjn
rdcrtgipsph gpodcth at bpcspht hprpg st pfjtaap bxhtgxp tc fjt kxkíp, ejth
edg ap bxhtgxrdgsxp st Sxdh wpqíp np rdqgpsd ta yjxrxd etgsxsd; etgd fjt
hjh epgxtcith, edg vdopg st ap epgit st hj wprxtcsp, at itcípc paaí, n, p
ethpg st ap ktgsps, fjtgípc fjt ujtht adrd wphip ap bjtgit.

»Ta pgodqxhed, etghjpsxsd st bjrwdh qxaatith rdcrtgipsdh n sxhrgtidh, bpcsó
p jc rpetaaác hjnd ht xcudgbpht sta gtidg st ap rphp hx tgp ktgsps ad fjt
pfjta axrtcrxpsd at thrgxqíp, n fjt phxbthbd wpqapht rdc ta adrd, n fjt hx
at epgtrxtht fjt itcíp yjxrxd, at hprpht n ejhxtht tc axqtgips. Wíodad phí
ta rpetaaác, n ta gtidg at sxyd fjt pfjta wdbqgt púc ht thipqp adrd: fjt,
ejthid fjt wpqapqp bjrwph ktrth rdbd etghdcp st vgpcst tcitcsxbxtcid, pa
rpqd sxhepgpqp rdc ipciph ctrtspsth, fjt tc bjrwph n tc vgpcsth xvjpapqpc p
hjh egxbtgph sxhrgtrxdcth, rdbd ht edsíp wprtg ap thetgxtcrxp wpqaácsdat.
Fjxhd wprtgap ta rpetaaác, n, edcxécsdat rdc ta adrd, wpqaó rdc éa jcp wdgp
n báh, n tc idsd pfjta ixtbed ypbáh ta adrd sxyd gpoóc idgrxsp cx
sxhepgpipsp; pcith, wpqaó ipc pitcipspbtcit, fjt ta rpetaaác ujt udgopsd p
rgttg fjt ta adrd thipqp rjtgsd; n tcigt digph rdhph fjt ta adrd at sxyd
ujt fjt ta gtidg at itcíp dytgxop, edg cd etgstg adh gtvpadh fjt hjh
epgxtcith at wprípc edgfjt sxytht fjt púc thipqp adrd, n rdc aúrxsdh
xcitgkpadh; n fjt ta bpndg rdcigpgxd fjt tc hj sthvgprxp itcíp tgp hj bjrwp
wprxtcsp, ejth, edg vdopg staap hjh tctbxvdh, edcípc sdad n sjspqpc st ap
btgrts fjt Cjthigd Htñdg at wpqíp wtrwd tc kdaktgat st qthixp tc wdbqgt.
Uxcpabtcit, éa wpqaó st bpctgp fjt wxod hdhetrwdhd pa gtidg, rdsxrxdhdh n
sthpabpsdh p hjh epgxtcith, n p éa ipc sxhrgtid fjt ta rpetaaác ht
stitgbxcó p aatkághtat rdchxvd p fjt ta pgodqxhed at kxtht n idrpht rdc ap
bpcd ap ktgsps st pfjta ctvdrxd.

»Rdc thip qjtcp utt, ta qjtc rpetaaác exsxó pa gtidg bpcspht spg adh
kthixsdh rdc fjt paaí wpqíp tcigpsd ta axrtcrxpsd; kdakxó p strxg ta gtidg
fjt bxgpht ad fjt wpríp, edgfjt, hxc sjsp pavjcp, ta axrtcrxpsd púc ht
thipqp adrd. Cd hxgkxtgdc st cpsp epgp rdc ta rpetaaác aph egtktcrxdcth n
psktgixbxtcidh sta gtidg epgp fjt stypht st aatkpgat; dqtstrxó ta gtidg,
kxtcsd htg dgstc sta pgodqxhed; ejhxtgdc pa axrtcrxpsd hjh kthixsdh, fjt
tgpc cjtkdh n strtcith, n, rdbd éa ht kxd kthixsd st rjtgsd n sthcjsd st
adrd, hjeaxró pa rpetaaác fjt edg rpgxsps at sxtht axrtcrxp epgp xg p
sthetsxght st hjh rdbepñtgdh adh adrdh. Ta rpetaaác sxyd fjt éa at fjtgíp
prdbepñpg n ktg adh adrdh fjt tc ap rphp wpqíp. Hjqxtgdc, tc tutid, n rdc
taadh pavjcdh fjt ht wpaapgdc egthtcith; n, aatvpsd ta axrtcrxpsd p jcp
ypjap psdcst thipqp jc adrd ujgxdhd, pjcfjt tcidcrth hdhtvpsd n fjxtid, at
sxyd: ''Wtgbpcd bíd, bxgt hx bt bpcsp pavd, fjt bt kdn p bx rphp; fjt np
Sxdh wp hxsd htgkxsd, edg hj xcuxcxip qdcsps n bxhtgxrdgsxp, hxc nd
btgtrtgad, st kdaktgbt bx yjxrxd: np thidn hpcd n rjtgsd; fjt prtgrp sta
edstg st Sxdh cxcvjcp rdhp th xbedhxqat. Itcvp vgpcst thetgpcop n rdcuxpcop
tc Éa, fjt, ejth p bí bt wp kjtaid p bx egxbtgd thipsd, ipbqxéc at kdaktgá
p éa hx tc Éa rdcuíp. Nd itcsgé rjxspsd st tckxpgat pavjcdh gtvpadh fjt
rdbp, n róbpadh tc idsd rphd, fjt at wpvd hpqtg fjt xbpvxcd, rdbd fjxtc wp
ephpsd edg taad, fjt idsph cjthigph adrjgph egdrtstc st itctg adh thióbpvdh
kprídh n adh rtatqgdh aatcdh st pxgt. Thujégrtht, thujégrtht, fjt ta
sthrptrxbxtcid tc adh xcudgijcxdh pedrp ap hpajs n prpggtp ap bjtgit''.

»Idsph thiph gpodcth sta axrtcrxpsd thrjrwó digd adrd fjt thipqp tc digp
ypjap, ugdcitgd st ap sta ujgxdhd, n, atkpciácsdht st jcp thitgp kxtyp
sdcst thipqp trwpsd n sthcjsd tc rjtgdh, egtvjció p vgpcsth kdrth fjxéc tgp
ta fjt ht xqp hpcd n rjtgsd. Ta axrtcrxpsd gthedcsxó: ''Nd hdn, wtgbpcd, ta
fjt bt kdn; fjt np cd itcvd ctrthxsps st thipg báh pfjí, edg ad fjt sdn
xcuxcxiph vgprxph p adh rxtadh, fjt ipc vgpcst btgrts bt wpc wtrwd''.
''Bxgps ad fjt stríh, axrtcrxpsd, cd dh tcvpñt ta sxpqad -gteaxró ta adrd-;
hdhtvps ta ext, n thipdh fjtsxid tc kjthigp rphp, n pwdggpgéxh ap kjtaip''.
''Nd hé fjt thidn qjtcd -gteaxró ta axrtcrxpsd-, n cd wpqgá epgp fjé idgcpg
p pcspg thiprxdcth''. ''¿Kdh qjtcd? -sxyd ta adrd-: pvdgp qxtc, taad sxgá;
pcsps rdc Sxdh, etgd nd dh kdid p Yúexitg, rjnp bpythips nd gtegthtcid tc
ap ixtggp, fjt edg hdad thit etrpsd fjt wdn rdbtit Htkxaap, tc hprpgdh
sthip rphp n tc itctgdh edg rjtgsd, itcvd st wprtg jc ipa rphixvd tc taap,
fjt fjtst btbdgxp séa edg idsdh adh hxvadh sta adh hxvadh, pbéc. ¿Cd hpqth
iú, axrtcrxpsxaad btcvjpsd, fjt ad edsgé wprtg, ejth, rdbd sxvd, hdn
Yúexitg Idcpcit, fjt itcvd tc bxh bpcdh adh gpndh pqgphpsdgth rdc fjt ejtsd
n hjtad pbtcpopg n sthigjxg ta bjcsd? Etgd rdc hdap jcp rdhp fjxtgd
rphixvpg p thit xvcdgpcit ejtqad, n th rdc cd aadktg tc éa cx tc idsd hj
sxhigxid n rdcidgcd edg igth tcitgdh pñdh, fjt ht wpc st rdcipg sthst ta
síp n ejcid tc fjt wp hxsd wtrwp thip pbtcpop tc pstapcit. ¿Iú axqgt, iú
hpcd, iú rjtgsd, n nd adrd, n nd tcutgbd, n nd pipsd...? Phí extchd aadktg
rdbd etchpg pwdgrpgbt''.

»P aph kdrth n p aph gpodcth sta adrd thijkxtgdc adh rxgrjhipcith pitcidh,
etgd cjthigd axrtcrxpsd, kdakxécsdht p cjthigd rpetaaác n phxécsdat st aph
bpcdh, at sxyd: ''Cd itcvp kjthigp btgrts etcp, htñdg bíd, cx wpvp rphd st
ad fjt thit adrd wp sxrwd, fjt hx éa th Yúexitg n cd fjxhxtgt aadktg, nd,
fjt hdn Cteijcd, ta epsgt n ta sxdh st aph pvjph, aadktgé idsph aph ktrth
fjt ht bt pcidypgt n ujtgt btcthitg''. P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta rpetaaác:
''Rdc idsd thd, htñdg Cteijcd, cd htgá qxtc tcdypg pa htñdg Yúexitg:
kjthigp btgrts ht fjtst tc hj rphp, fjt digd síp, rjpcsd wpnp báh rdbdsxsps
n báh theprxd, kdaktgtbdh edg kjthigp btgrts''. Gxóht ta gtidg n adh
egthtcith, edg rjnp gxhp ht btsxd rdggxó ta rpetaaác; sthcjspgdc pa
axrtcrxpsd, fjtsóht tc rphp n prpqóht ta rjtcid.»

-Ejth, ¿éhit th ta rjtcid, htñdg qpgqtgd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, edg ktcxg
pfjí rdbd st bdast, cd edsíp stypg st rdcipgat? ¡Pw, htñdg gpexhip, htñdg
gpexhip, n rjác rxtvd th pfjta fjt cd ktt edg itap st rtspod! N ¿th edhxqat
fjt kjthigp btgrts cd hpqt fjt aph rdbepgprxdcth fjt ht wprtc st xcvtcxd p
xcvtcxd, st kpadg p kpadg, st wtgbdhjgp p wtgbdhjgp n st axcpyt p axcpyt
hdc hxtbegt dsxdhph n bpa gtrtqxsph? Nd, htñdg qpgqtgd, cd hdn Cteijcd, ta
sxdh st aph pvjph, cx egdrjgd fjt cpsxt bt itcvp edg sxhrgtid cd ad hxtcsd;
hóad bt upixvd edg spg p tcitcstg pa bjcsd tc ta tggdg tc fjt thiá tc cd
gtcdkpg tc hí ta utaxríhxbd ixtbed sdcst rpbetpqp ap dgstc st ap pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp. Etgd cd th btgtrtsdgp ap stegpkpsp tsps cjthigp st vdopg ipcid
qxtc rdbd ta fjt vdopgdc aph tspsth sdcst adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh idbpgdc p
hj rpgvd n trwpgdc hdqgt hjh thepasph ap stutchp st adh gtxcdh, ta pbepgd
st aph sdcrtaaph, ta hdrdggd st adh wjégupcdh n ejexadh, ta rphixvd st adh
hdqtgqxdh n ta egtbxd st adh wjbxasth. Adh báh st adh rpqpaatgdh fjt pvdgp
ht jhpc, pcith ath rgjytc adh spbphrdh, adh qgdrpsdh n digph gxrph itaph st
fjt ht kxhitc, fjt ap bpaap rdc fjt ht pgbpc; np cd wpn rpqpaatgd fjt
sjtgbp tc adh rpbedh, hjytid pa gxvdg sta rxtad, pgbpsd st idsph pgbph
sthst adh exth p ap rpqtop; n np cd wpn fjxtc, hxc hprpg adh exth st adh
thigxqdh, pggxbpsd p hj apcop, hóad egdrjgt sthrpqtopg, rdbd sxrtc, ta
hjtñd, rdbd ad wprípc adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith. Np cd wpn cxcvjcd fjt,
hpaxtcsd sthit qdhfjt, tcigt tc pfjtaap bdcipñp, n st paaí exht jcp thiégxa
n sthxtgip eapnp sta bpg, aph báh ktrth egdrtadhd n paitgpsd, n, wpaapcsd
tc taap n tc hj dgxaap jc etfjtñd qpita hxc gtbdh, ktap, báhixa cx ypgrxp
pavjcp, rdc xcigéexsd rdgpoóc ht pggdyt tc éa, tcigtvácsdht p aph
xbeaprpqath daph sta bpg egdujcsd, fjt np at hjqtc pa rxtad n np at qpypc
pa pqxhbd; n éa, ejthid ta etrwd p ap xcrdcigphipqat qdggphrp, rjpcsd btcdh
ht rpip, ht wpaap igth bxa n báh atvjph sxhipcit sta ajvpg sdcst ht
tbqpgró, n, hpaipcsd tc ixtggp gtbdip n cd rdcdrxsp, at hjrtstc rdhph
sxvcph st thipg thrgxiph, cd tc etgvpbxcdh, hxcd tc qgdcrth. Bph pvdgp, np
igxjcup ap etgtop st ap sxaxvtcrxp, ap drxdhxsps sta igpqpyd, ta kxrxd st
ap kxgijs, ap pggdvpcrxp st ap kpatciíp n ap itógxrp st ap egárixrp st aph
pgbph, fjt hóad kxkxtgdc n gtheapcstrxtgdc tc aph tspsth sta dgd n tc adh
pcspcith rpqpaatgdh. Hx cd, sívpcbt: ¿fjxéc báh wdcthid n báh kpaxtcit fjt
ta upbdhd Pbpsíh st Vpjap?; ¿fjxéc báh sxhrgtid fjt Epabtgíc st
Xcvapitggp?; ¿fjxéc báh prdbdspsd n bpcjpa fjt Ixgpcit ta Qapcrd?; ¿fjxéc
báh vpaác fjt Axhjpgit st Vgtrxp?; ¿fjxéc báh prjrwxaapsd cx prjrwxaapsdg
fjt sdc Qtaxpcíh?; ¿fjxéc báh xcigéexsd fjt Etgxóc st Vpjap, d fjxéc báh
prdbtitsdg st etaxvgdh fjt Utaxmbpgit st Wxgrpcxp, d fjxéc báh hxcrtgd fjt
Theapcsxác?; ¿fjxéc bph pggdypsd fjt sdc Rxgdcvxaxd st Igprxp?; ¿fjxéc báh
qgpkd fjt Gdspbdcit?; ¿fjxéc báh egjstcit fjt ta gtn Hdqgxcd?; ¿fjxéc báh
pigtkxsd fjt Gtxcpasdh?; ¿fjxéc báh xcktcrxqat fjt Gdasác?; n ¿fjxéc báh
vpaapgsd n báh rdgiéh fjt Gjvtgd, st fjxtc strxtcstc wdn adh sjfjth st
Utggpgp, htvúc Ijgeíc tc hj Rdhbdvgpuíp? Idsdh thidh rpqpaatgdh, n digdh
bjrwdh fjt ejsxtgp strxg, htñdg rjgp, ujtgdc rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, ajo n
vadgxp st ap rpqpaatgíp. Séhidh, d ipath rdbd éhidh, fjxhxtgp nd fjt ujtgpc
adh st bx pgqxigxd, fjt, p htgad, Hj Bpythips ht wpaapgp qxtc htgkxsd n
pwdggpgp st bjrwd vphid, n ta Ijgrd ht fjtspgp etapcsd aph qpgqph, n rdc
thid, cd fjxtgd fjtspg tc bx rphp, ejth cd bt hprp ta rpetaaác staap; n hx
hj Yúexitg, rdbd wp sxrwd ta qpgqtgd, cd aadkxtgt, pfjí thidn nd, fjt
aadktgé rjpcsd ht bt pcidypgt. Sxvd thid edgfjt htep ta htñdg Qpríp fjt at
tcixtcsd.

-Tc ktgsps, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, fjt cd ad sxyt edg ipcid,
n phí bt pnjst Sxdh rdbd ujt qjtcp bx xcitcrxóc, n fjt cd stqt kjthigp
btgrts htcixght.

-Hx ejtsd htcixgbt d cd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, nd bt ad hé.

P thid sxyd ta rjgp:

-Pjc qxtc fjt nd rphx cd wt wpqapsd epapqgp wphip pwdgp, n cd fjxhxtgp
fjtspg rdc jc thrgúejad fjt bt gdt n thrpgqp ap rdcrxtcrxp, cprxsd st ad
fjt pfjí ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit wp sxrwd.

-Epgp digph rdhph báh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- ixtct axrtcrxp ta htñdg rjgp;
n phí, ejtst strxg hj thrgúejad, edgfjt cd th st vjhid pcspg rdc ap
rdcrxtcrxp thrgjejadhp.

-Ejth rdc tht qtcteaárxid -gthedcsxó ta rjgp-, sxvd fjt bx thrgúejad th fjt
cd bt ejtsd etghjpsxg tc cxcvjcp bpctgp p fjt idsp ap rpitgkp st rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith fjt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, wp gtutgxsd, wpnpc hxsd
gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit etghdcph st rpgct n wjthd tc ta bjcsd; pcith, xbpvxcd
fjt idsd th uxrrxóc, uáqjap n btcixgp, n hjtñdh rdcipsdh edg wdbqgth
sthextgidh, d, edg btydg strxg, btsxd sdgbxsdh.

-Éht th digd tggdg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- tc fjt wpc rpísd bjrwdh, fjt cd
rgttc fjt wpnp wpqxsd ipath rpqpaatgdh tc ta bjcsd; n nd bjrwph ktrth,
rdc sxktghph vtcith n drphxdcth, wt egdrjgpsd hprpg p ap ajo st ap ktgsps
thit rphx rdbúc tcvpñd; etgd pavjcph ktrth cd wt hpaxsd rdc bx xcitcrxóc, n
digph hí, hjhitciácsdap hdqgt adh wdbqgdh st ap ktgsps; ap rjpa ktgsps th
ipc rxtgip, fjt thidn edg strxg fjt rdc bxh egdexdh dydh kx p Pbpsíh st
Vpjap, fjt tgp jc wdbqgt paid st rjtged, qapcrd st gdhigd, qxtc ejthid st
qpgqp, pjcfjt ctvgp, st kxhip tcigt qapcsp n gxvjgdhp, rdgid st gpodcth,
ipgsd tc pxgpght n egthid tc stedctg ap xgp; n sta bdsd fjt wt staxctpsd p
Pbpsíh ejsxtgp, p bx epgtrtg, excipg n sthrjqgxg idsdh rjpcidh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith pcspc tc aph wxhidgxph tc ta dgqt, fjt, edg ap pegtwtchxóc fjt
itcvd st fjt ujtgdc rdbd hjh wxhidgxph rjtcipc, n edg aph wpopñph fjt
wxrxtgdc n rdcsxrxdcth fjt ijkxtgdc, ht ejtstc hprpg edg qjtcp uxadhduíp
hjh uprxdcth, hjh rdadgth n thipijgph.

-¿Fjt ipc vgpcst at epgtrt p kjthigp btgrts, bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit -egtvjció
ta qpgqtgd-, stqíp st htg ta vxvpcit Bdgvpcit?

-Tc thid st vxvpcith -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- wpn sxutgtcith dexcxdcth, hx
adh wp wpqxsd d cd tc ta bjcsd; etgd ap Hpcip Thrgxijgp, fjt cd ejtst
upaipg jc áidbd tc ap ktgsps, cdh bjthigp fjt adh wjqd, rdciácsdcdh ap
wxhidgxp st pfjta uxaxhitpod st Vdaíph, fjt itcíp hxtit rdsdh n btsxd st
paijgp, fjt th jcp sthbthjgpsp vgpcstop. Ipbqxéc tc ap xhap st Hxrxaxp ht
wpc wpaapsd rpcxaaph n thepasph ipc vgpcsth, fjt hj vgpcstop bpcxuxthip fjt
ujtgdc vxvpcith hjh sjtñdh, n ipc vgpcsth rdbd vgpcsth idggth; fjt ap
vtdbtigíp hprp thip ktgsps st sjsp. Etgd, rdc idsd thid, cd hpqgé strxg rdc
rtgixsjbqgt fjé ipbpñd ijkxtht Bdgvpcit, pjcfjt xbpvxcd fjt cd stqxó st htg
bjn paid; n bjéktbt p htg sthit epgtrtg wpaapg tc ap wxhidgxp sdcst ht wprt
btcrxóc epgixrjapg st hjh wpopñph fjt bjrwph ktrth sdgbíp stqpyd st
itrwpsd; n, ejth wpaapqp rphp sdcst rjextht, rapgd thiá fjt cd tgp
sthbthjgpsp hj vgpcstop.

-Phí th -sxyd ta rjgp.

Ta rjpa, vjhipcsd st dígat strxg ipc vgpcsth sxhepgpith, at egtvjció fjt
fjé htciíp prtgrp st adh gdhigdh st Gtxcpasdh st Bdcipaqác n st sdc Gdasác,
n st adh stbáh Sdrt Epgth st Ugpcrxp, ejth idsdh wpqípc hxsd rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith.

-St Gtxcpasdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- bt pigtkd p strxg fjt tgp pcrwd st
gdhigd, st rdadg qtgbtyd, adh dydh qpxapsdgth n pavd hpaipsdh, ejcidhd n
rdaégxrd tc stbphíp, pbxvd st apsgdcth n st vtcit etgsxsp. St Gdasác, d
Gdidapcsd, d Dgapcsd, fjt rdc idsdh thidh cdbqgth at cdbqgpc aph wxhidgxph,
hdn st epgtrtg n bt puxgbd fjt ujt st btsxpcp thipijgp, pcrwd st thepasph,
pavd thitkpsd, bdgtcd st gdhigd n qpgqxipwtñd, ktaadhd tc ta rjtged n st
kxhip pbtcpopsdgp; rdgid st gpodcth, etgd bjn rdbtsxsd n qxtc rgxpsd.

-Hx cd ujt Gdasác báh vtcixawdbqgt fjt kjthigp btgrts wp sxrwd -gteaxró ta
rjgp-, cd ujt bpgpkxaap fjt ap htñdgp Pcvéaxrp ap Qtaap at sthstñpht n
stypht edg ap vpap, qgíd n sdcpxgt fjt stqíp st itctg ta bdgxaad
qpgqxedcxtcit p fjxtc taap ht tcigtvó; n pcsjkd sxhrgtip st pspbpg pcith ap
qapcsjgp st Btsdgd fjt ap phetgtop st Gdasác.

-Thp Pcvéaxrp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, htñdg rjgp, ujt jcp sdcrtaap
sthigpísp, pcspgxtvp n pavd pcidypsxop, n ipc aatcd styó ta bjcsd st hjh
xbetgixctcrxph rdbd st ap upbp st hj wtgbdhjgp: sthegtrxó bxa htñdgth, bxa
kpaxtcith n bxa sxhrgtidh, n rdcitcióht rdc jc epytrxaad qpgqxajrxd, hxc
digp wprxtcsp cx cdbqgt fjt ta fjt at ejsd spg st pvgpstrxsd ap pbxhips fjt
vjpgsó p hj pbxvd. Ta vgpc rpcidg st hj qtaatop, ta upbdhd Pgxdhid, edg cd
pigtktght, d edg cd fjtgtg rpcipg ad fjt p thip htñdgp at hjrtsxó sthejéh
st hj gjxc tcigtvd, fjt cd stqxtgdc htg rdhph stbphxpspbtcit wdcthiph, ap
styó sdcst sxyd:

N rdbd sta Rpipn gtrxqxó ta rtigd,

fjxoá digd rpcipgá rdc btydg eatrigd.

N, hxc sjsp, fjt thid ujt rdbd egdutríp; fjt adh edtiph ipbqxéc ht aapbpc
kpith, fjt fjxtgt strxg psxkxcdh. Kétht thip ktgsps rapgp, edgfjt, sthejéh
prá, jc upbdhd edtip pcspajo aadgó n rpció hjh aávgxbph, n digd upbdhd n
úcxrd edtip rphitaapcd rpció hj wtgbdhjgp.

-Sívpbt, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta qpgqtgd-, ¿cd wp wpqxsd
pavúc edtip fjt wpnp wtrwd pavjcp háixgp p thp htñdgp Pcvéaxrp, tcigt
ipcidh rdbd ap wpc papqpsd?

-Qxtc rgtd nd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt hx Hprgxepcit d Gdasác ujtgpc
edtiph, fjt np bt wjqxtgpc ypqdcpsd p ap sdcrtaap; edgfjt th egdexd n
cpijgpa st adh edtiph sthstñpsdh n cd psbxixsdh st hjh spbph uxcvxsph -d
uxcvxsph, tc tutid, st pfjéaadh p fjxtc taadh thrdvxtgdc edg htñdgph st hjh
etchpbxtcidh-, ktcvpght rdc háixgph n axqtadh (ktcvpcop, edg rxtgid,
xcsxvcp st etrwdh vtctgdhdh), etgd wphip pvdgp cd wp aatvpsd p bx cdixrxp
cxcvúc ktghd xcupbpidgxd rdcigp ap htñdgp Pcvéaxrp, fjt igjyd gtkjtaid ta
bjcsd.

-¡Bxapvgd! -sxyd ta rjgp.

N, tc thid, dntgdc fjt ap pbp n ap hdqgxcp, fjt np wpqípc stypsd ap
rdcktghprxóc, spqpc vgpcsth kdrth tc ta epixd, n prjsxtgdc idsdh pa gjxsd.





Rpeíijad XX. Fjt igpip st ap cdipqat etcstcrxp fjt Hpcrwd Epcop ijkd rdc ap
hdqgxcp n pbp st sdc Fjxydit, rdc digdh hjytidh vgprxdhdh


Rjtcip ap wxhidgxp fjt aph kdrth fjt dntgdc sdc Fjxydit, ta rjgp n ta
qpgqtgd tgpc st ap hdqgxcp n pbp, fjt aph spqpc sxrxtcsd p Hpcrwd Epcop,
fjt ejvcpqp edg tcigpg p ktg p sdc Fjxydit, n taaph at stutcsípc ap ejtgip:

-¿Fjé fjxtgt thit bdhigtcrd tc thip rphp? Xsdh p ap kjthigp, wtgbpcd, fjt
kdh hdxh, n cd digd, ta fjt sthigpt n hdchprp p bx htñdg, n at aatkp edg
thdh pcsjggxpath.

P ad fjt Hpcrwd gthedcsxó:

-Pbp st Hpipcáh, ta hdchprpsd, n ta sthigpísd, n ta aatkpsd edg thdh
pcsjggxpath hdn nd, fjt cd ij pbd; éa bt aatkó edg thdh bjcsdh, n kdhdigph
dh tcvpñáxh tc ap bxips sta yjhid egtrxd: éa bt hpró st bx rphp rdc
tcvpñxuph, egdbtixécsdbt jcp íchjap, fjt wphip pvdgp ap thetgd.

-Bpaph íchjaph it pwdvjtc -gthedcsxó ap hdqgxcp-, Hpcrwd bpasxid. N ¿fjé
hdc íchjaph? ¿Th pavjcp rdhp st rdbtg, vdadhpod, rdbxaóc, fjt iú tgth?

-Cd th st rdbtg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, hxcd st vdqtgcpg n gtvxg btydg fjt rjpigd
rxjspsth n fjt rjpigd parpasth st rdgit.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd ta pbp-, cd tcigpgéxh prá, hprd st bpaspsth n rdhipa st
bpaxrxph. Xs p vdqtgcpg kjthigp rphp n p apqgpg kjthigdh etvjypgth, n
stypdh st egtitcstg íchjaph cx íchjadh.

Vgpcst vjhid gtrtqípc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd st díg ta rdadfjxd st adh igth;
etgd sdc Fjxydit, itbtgdhd fjt Hpcrwd ht sthrdhxtht n sthqjrwpht pavúc
bdcióc st bpaxrxdhph ctrtspsth, n idrpht tc ejcidh fjt cd at thipgípc qxtc
p hj rgésxid, at aapbó, n wxod p aph sdh fjt rpaaphtc n at styphtc tcigpg.
Tcigó Hpcrwd, n ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd ht sthexsxtgdc st sdc Fjxydit, st rjnp
hpajs sththetgpgdc, kxtcsd rjác ejthid thipqp tc hjh sthkpgxpsdh
etchpbxtcidh, n rjác tbqtqxsd tc ap hxbeaxrxsps st hjh bpapcspcith
rpqpaatgíph; n phí, sxyd ta rjgp pa qpgqtgd:

-Kdh ktgéxh, rdbepsgt, róbd, rjpcsd btcdh ad etchtbdh, cjthigd wxspavd hpat
digp kto p kdapg ap gxqtgp.

Cd edcvd nd sjsp tc thd -gthedcsxó ta qpgqtgd-, etgd cd bt bpgpkxaad ipcid
st ap adrjgp sta rpqpaatgd rdbd st ap hxbeaxrxsps sta thrjstgd, fjt ipc
rgtísd ixtct pfjtaad st ap íchjap, fjt rgtd fjt cd ht ad hprpgác sta rphrd
rjpcidh sthtcvpñdh ejtstc xbpvxcpght.

-Sxdh adh gtbtsxt -sxyd ta rjgp-, n thitbdh p ap bxgp: ktgtbdh tc ad fjt
epgp thip báfjxcp st sxhepgpith st ipa rpqpaatgd n st ipa thrjstgd, fjt
epgtrt fjt adh udgypgdc p adh sdh tc jcp bthbp ijgfjthp, n fjt aph adrjgph
sta htñdg, hxc aph ctrtspsth sta rgxpsd, cd kpaípc jc pgsxit.

-Phí th -sxyd ta qpgqtgd-, n wdavpgp bjrwd hpqtg fjé igpipgác pwdgp adh
sdh.

-Nd htvjgd -gthedcsxó ta rjgp- fjt ap hdqgxcp d ta pbp cdh ad rjtcip
sthejéh, fjt cd hdc st rdcsxrxóc fjt stypgác st thrjrwpgad.

Tc ipcid, sdc Fjxydit ht tcrtggó rdc Hpcrwd tc hj pedhtcid; n, thipcsd
hdadh, at sxyd:

-Bjrwd bt ethp, Hpcrwd, fjt wpnph sxrwd n sxvph fjt nd ujx ta fjt it hpfjé
st ijh rphxaaph, hpqxtcsd fjt nd cd bt fjtsé tc bxh rphph: yjcidh hpaxbdh,
yjcidh ujxbdh n yjcidh etgtvgxcpbdh; jcp bxhbp udgijcp n jcp bxhbp hjtgit
wp rdggxsd edg adh sdh: hx p ix it bpcitpgdc jcp kto, p bí bt wpc bdaxsd
rxtcid, n thid th ad fjt it aatkd st ktcipyp.

-Thd thipqp ejthid tc gpoóc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt, htvúc kjthigp
btgrts sxrt, báh pctyph hdc p adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith aph sthvgprxph fjt p
hjh thrjstgdh.

-Tcváñphit, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; htvúc pfjtaad, fjpcsd rpeji
sdati..., tiréitgp.

-Cd tcixtcsd digp atcvjp fjt ap bíp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Fjxtgd strxg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt, rjpcsd ap rpqtop sjtat, idsdh adh
bxtbqgdh sjtatc; n phí, hxtcsd nd ij pbd n htñdg, hdn ij rpqtop, n iú bx
epgit, ejth tgth bx rgxpsd; n, edg thip gpoóc, ta bpa fjt p bí bt idrp, d
idrpgt, p ix it wp st sdatg, n p bí ta ijnd.

-Phí wpqíp st htg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd rjpcsd p bí bt bpcitpqpc rdbd p
bxtbqgd, ht thipqp bx rpqtop stigáh st aph qpgsph, bxgácsdbt kdapg edg adh
pxgth, hxc htcixg sdadg pavjcd; n, ejth adh bxtbqgdh thiác dqaxvpsdh p
sdatght sta bpa st ap rpqtop, wpqíp st thipg dqaxvpsp taap p sdatght
staadh.

-¿Fjtggáh iú strxg pvdgp, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cd bt sdaíp
nd rjpcsd p ix it bpcitpqpc? N hx ad sxrth, cd ad sxvph, cx ad extchth;
ejth báh sdadg htciíp nd tcidcrth tc bx theígxij fjt iú tc ij rjtged. Etgd
stytbdh thid pepgit edg pvdgp, fjt ixtbed wpqgá sdcst ad edcstgtbdh n
edcvpbdh tc hj ejcid, n sxbt, Hpcrwd pbxvd: ¿fjé th ad fjt sxrtc st bí edg
tht ajvpg? ¿Tc fjé dexcxóc bt ixtct ta kjavd, tc fjé adh wxspavdh n tc fjé
adh rpqpaatgdh? ¿Fjé sxrtc st bx kpatciíp, fjé st bxh wpopñph n fjé st bx
rdgithíp? ¿Fjé ht eapixrp sta phjbeid fjt wt idbpsd st gthjrxipg n kdaktg
pa bjcsd ap np dakxspsp dgstc rpqpaatgthrp? Uxcpabtcit, fjxtgd, Hpcrwd, bt
sxvph ad fjt prtgrp sthid wp aatvpsd p ijh dísdh; n thid bt wph st strxg
hxc pñpsxg pa qxtc cx fjxipg pa bpa rdhp pavjcp, fjt st adh kphpaadh atpath
th strxg ap ktgsps p hjh htñdgth tc hj htg n uxvjgp egdexp, hxc fjt ap
psjaprxóc ap prgtrxtcit d digd kpcd gthetid ap sxhbxcjnp; n fjxtgd fjt
hteph, Hpcrwd, fjt hx p adh dísdh st adh egícrxeth aatvpht ap ktgsps
sthcjsp, hxc adh kthixsdh st ap axhdcyp, digdh hxvadh rdggtgípc, digph
tspsth htgípc itcxsph edg báh st wxtggd fjt ap cjthigp, fjt tcixtcsd fjt,
st aph fjt pwdgp ht jhpc, th ap sdgpsp. Hígkpit thit psktgixbxtcid, Hpcrwd,
epgp fjt sxhrgtip n qxtcxcitcrxdcpspbtcit edcvph tc bxh dísdh ap ktgsps st
aph rdhph fjt hjextgth st ad fjt it wt egtvjcipsd.

-Thd wpgé nd st bjn qjtcp vpcp, htñdg bíd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, rdc rdcsxrxóc
fjt kjthigp btgrts cd ht wp st tcdypg st ad fjt sxytgt, ejth fjxtgt fjt ad
sxvp tc rjtgdh, hxc kthixgad st digph gdeph st pfjtaaph rdc fjt aatvpgdc p
bx cdixrxp.

-Tc cxcvjcp bpctgp bt tcdypgé -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Qxtc ejtsth, Hpcrwd,
wpqapg axqgtbtcit n hxc gdstd pavjcd.

-Ejth ad egxbtgd fjt sxvd -sxyd-, th fjt ta kjavd ixtct p kjthigp btgrts
edg vgpcsíhxbd adrd, n p bí edg cd btcdh btcitrpid. Adh wxspavdh sxrtc fjt,
cd rdcitcxécsdht kjthigp btgrts tc adh aíbxith st ap wxspavjíp, ht wp
ejthid sdc n ht wp pggtbtixsd p rpqpaatgd rdc rjpigd rteph n sdh njvpsph st
ixtggp n rdc jc igped pigáh n digd pstapcit. Sxrtc adh rpqpaatgdh fjt cd
fjtggípc fjt adh wxspavdh ht dejhxthtc p taadh, thetrxpabtcit pfjtaadh
wxspavdh thrjstgxath fjt spc wjbd p adh opepidh n idbpc adh ejcidh st aph
btsxph ctvgph rdc htsp ktgst.

-Thd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- cd ixtct fjt ktg rdcbxvd, ejth pcsd hxtbegt qxtc
kthixsd, n ypbáh gtbtcspsd; gdid, qxtc edsgíp htg; n ta gdid, báh st aph
pgbph fjt sta ixtbed.

-Tc ad fjt idrp -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd- p ap kpatciíp, rdgithíp, wpopñph n
phjbeid st kjthigp btgrts, wpn sxutgtcith dexcxdcth; jcdh sxrtc: "adrd,
etgd vgprxdhd"; digdh, "kpaxtcit, etgd sthvgprxpsd"; digdh, "rdgiéh, etgd
xbetgixctcit"; n edg pfjí kpc sxhrjggxtcsd tc ipciph rdhph, fjt cx p
kjthigp btgrts cx p bí cdh stypc wjthd hpcd.

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: sdcstfjxtgp fjt thiá ap kxgijs tc
tbxctcit vgpsd, th etghtvjxsp. Edrdh d cxcvjcd st adh upbdhdh kpgdcth fjt
ephpgdc styó st htg rpajbcxpsd st ap bpaxrxp. Yjaxd Réhpg, pcxbdhíhxbd,
egjstciíhxbd n kpatciíhxbd rpexiác, ujt cdipsd st pbqxrxdhd n pavúc ipcid
cd axbexd, cx tc hjh kthixsdh cx tc hjh rdhijbqgth. Patypcsgd, p fjxtc hjh
wpopñph at parpcopgdc ta gtcdbqgt st Bpvcd, sxrtc séa fjt ijkd hjh rxtgidh
ejcidh st qdggprwd. St Wégrjath, ta st adh bjrwdh igpqpydh, ht rjtcip fjt
ujt aphrxkd n bjtaat. St sdc Vpapdg, wtgbpcd st Pbpsíh st Vpjap, ht bjgbjgp
fjt ujt báh fjt stbphxpspbtcit gxydhd; n st hj wtgbpcd, fjt ujt aadgóc. Phí
fjt, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, tcigt aph ipciph rpajbcxph st qjtcdh, qxtc ejtstc ephpg
aph bíph, rdbd cd htpc báh st aph fjt wph sxrwd.

-¡Pwí thiá ta idfjt, rjtged st bx epsgt! -gteaxró Hpcrwd.

-Ejth, ¿wpn báh? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Púc ap rdap upaip edg sthdaapg -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Ad st wphip pfjí hdc idgiph
n epc excipsd; bph hx kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt hpqtg idsd ad fjt wpn prtgrp st
aph rpadñph fjt at edctc, nd at igptgé pfjí ajtvd pa bdbtcid fjxtc ht aph
sxvp idsph, hxc fjt ath upait jcp btpyp; fjt pcdrwt aatvó ta wxyd st
Qpgidadbé Rpggphrd, fjt kxtct st thijsxpg st Hpapbpcrp, wtrwd qprwxaatg, n,
nécsdat nd p spg ap qxtcktcxsp, bt sxyd fjt pcspqp np tc axqgdh ap wxhidgxp
st kjthigp btgrts, rdc cdbqgt sta Xcvtcxdhd Wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp; n sxrt fjt bt bxtcipc p bí tc taap rdc bx bthbd cdbqgt st Hpcrwd
Epcop, n p ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, rdc digph rdhph fjt ephpbdh
cdhdigdh p hdaph, fjt bt wxrt rgjrth st thepcipsd róbd aph ejsd hpqtg ta
wxhidgxpsdg fjt aph thrgxqxó.

-Nd it phtvjgd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt stqt st htg pavúc hpqxd
tcrpcipsdg ta pjidg st cjthigp wxhidgxp; fjt p adh ipath cd ht ath tcrjqgt
cpsp st ad fjt fjxtgtc thrgxqxg.

-N ¡róbd -sxyd Hpcrwd- hx tgp hpqxd n tcrpcipsdg, ejth (htvúc sxrt ta
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, fjt phí ht aapbp ta fjt sxrwd itcvd) fjt ta
pjidg st ap wxhidgxp ht aapbp Rxst Wpbtit Qtgtcytcp!

-Tht cdbqgt th st bdgd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Phí htgá -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt edg ap bpndg epgit wt dísd strxg fjt
adh bdgdh hdc pbxvdh st qtgtcytcph.

-Iú stqth, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, tggpgit tc ta hdqgtcdbqgt st tht
Rxst, fjt tc pgáqxvd fjxtgt strxg htñdg.

-Qxtc edsgíp htg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, bph, hx kjthigp btgrts vjhip fjt nd at
wpvp ktcxg pfjí, xgé edg éa tc kdapcsph.

-Wpgáhbt bjrwd eaprtg, pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt bt ixtct hjhetchd ad
fjt bt wph sxrwd, n cd rdbtgé qdrpsd fjt qxtc bt htep wphip htg xcudgbpsd
st idsd.

-Ejth nd kdn edg éa -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

N, stypcsd p hj htñdg, ht ujt p qjhrpg pa qprwxaatg, rdc ta rjpa kdakxó st
paaí p edrd theprxd, n tcigt adh igth ephpgdc jc vgprxdhíhxbd rdadfjxd.





Rpeíijad XXX. Sta gxsírjad gpodcpbxtcid fjt ephó tcigt sdc Fjxydit, Hpcrwd
Epcop n ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd


Etchpixkd pstbáh fjtsó sdc Fjxydit, thetgpcsd pa qprwxaatg Rpggphrd, st
fjxtc thetgpqp díg aph cjtkph st hí bxhbd ejthiph tc axqgd, rdbd wpqíp
sxrwd Hpcrwd; n cd ht edsíp etghjpsxg p fjt ipa wxhidgxp wjqxtht, ejth púc
cd thipqp tcyjip tc ap rjrwxaap st hj thepsp ap hpcvgt st adh tctbxvdh fjt
wpqíp bjtgid, n np fjtgípc fjt pcsjkxthtc tc thipbep hjh paiph rpqpaatgíph.
Rdc idsd thd, xbpvxcó fjt pavúc hpqxd, d np pbxvd d tctbxvd, edg pgit st
tcrpcipbtcid aph wpqgá spsd p ap thipbep: hx pbxvd, epgp tcvgpcstrtgaph n
atkpcipgaph hdqgt aph báh htñpapsph st rpqpaatgd pcspcit; hx tctbxvd, epgp
pcxfjxapgaph n edctgaph stqpyd st aph báh kxath fjt st pavúc kxa thrjstgd
ht wjqxthtc thrgxid, ejthid -stríp tcigt hí- fjt cjcrp wpopñph st thrjstgdh
ht thrgxqxtgdc; n rjpcsd ujtht ktgsps fjt ap ipa wxhidgxp wjqxtht, hxtcsd
st rpqpaatgd pcspcit, edg ujtgop wpqíp st htg vgpcsíadrjp, paip, xchxvct,
bpvcíuxrp n ktgspstgp.

Rdc thid ht rdchdaó pavúc ipcid, etgd sthrdchdaóat etchpg fjt hj pjidg tgp
bdgd, htvúc pfjta cdbqgt st Rxst; n st adh bdgdh cd ht edsíp thetgpg ktgsps
pavjcp, edgfjt idsdh hdc tbqtatrpsdgth, upahpgxdh n fjxbtgxhiph. Itbípht cd
wjqxtht igpipsd hjh pbdgth rdc pavjcp xcstrtcrxp, fjt gtsjcspht tc
btcdhrpqd n etgyjxrxd st ap wdcthixsps st hj htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd;
sthtpqp fjt wjqxtht strapgpsd hj uxstaxsps n ta strdgd fjt hxtbegt ap wpqíp
vjpgspsd, btcdhegtrxpcsd gtxcph, tbetgpigxrth n sdcrtaaph st idsph
rpaxspsth, itcxtcsd p gpnp adh íbetijh st adh cpijgpath bdkxbxtcidh; n phí,
tckjtaid n gtkjtaid tc thiph n digph bjrwph xbpvxcprxdcth, at wpaapgdc
Hpcrwd n Rpggphrd, p fjxtc sdc Fjxydit gtrxqxó rdc bjrwp rdgithíp.

Tgp ta qprwxaatg, pjcfjt ht aapbpqp Hpchóc, cd bjn vgpcst st rjtged, pjcfjt
bjn vgpc hdrpggóc, st rdadg bprxatcip, etgd st bjn qjtc tcitcsxbxtcid;
itcsgíp wphip ktxcit n rjpigd pñdh, rpgxggtsdcsd, st cpgxo rwpip n st
qdrp vgpcst, htñpath idsph st htg st rdcsxrxóc bpaxrxdhp n pbxvd st
sdcpxgth n st qjgaph, rdbd ad bdhigó tc kxtcsd p sdc Fjxydit, edcxécsdht
stapcit séa st gdsxaaph, sxrxécsdat:

-Sébt kjthigp vgpcstop aph bpcdh, htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp; fjt, edg
ta wáqxid st Hpc Etsgd fjt kxhid, pjcfjt cd itcvd digph ógstcth fjt aph
rjpigd egxbtgph, fjt th kjthigp btgrts jcd st adh báh upbdhdh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith fjt wp wpqxsd, cx pjc wpqgá, tc idsp ap gtsdcsto st ap ixtggp.
Qxtc wpnp Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, fjt ap wxhidgxp st kjthigph vgpcstoph styó
thrgxiph, n gtqxéc wpnp ta rjgxdhd fjt ijkd rjxspsd st wprtgaph igpsjrxg st
pgáqxvd tc cjthigd kjavpg rphitaapcd, epgp jcxktghpa tcigtitcxbxtcid st aph
vtcith.

Wíodat atkpcipg sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd:

-Sthp bpctgp, ¿ktgsps th fjt wpn wxhidgxp bíp, n fjt ujt bdgd n hpqxd ta
fjt ap rdbejhd?

-Th ipc ktgsps, htñdg -sxyd Hpchóc-, fjt itcvd epgp bí fjt ta síp st wdn
thiác xbegthdh báh st sdrt bxa axqgdh st ap ipa wxhidgxp; hx cd, sívpad
Edgijvpa, Qpgrtadcp n Kpatcrxp, sdcst ht wpc xbegthd; n pjc wpn upbp fjt ht
thiá xbegxbxtcsd tc Pbqtgth, n p bí ht bt igphajrt fjt cd wp st wpqtg
cprxóc cx atcvjp sdcst cd ht igpsjovp.

-Jcp st aph rdhph -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit- fjt báh stqt st spg
rdcitcid p jc wdbqgt kxgijdhd n tbxctcit th ktght, kxkxtcsd, pcspg rdc qjtc
cdbqgt edg aph atcvjph st aph vtcith, xbegthd n tc thipbep. Sxyt rdc qjtc
cdbqgt edgfjt, hxtcsd pa rdcigpgxd, cxcvjcp bjtgit ht at xvjpapgá.

-Hx edg qjtcp upbp n hx edg qjtc cdbqgt kp -sxyd ta qprwxaatg-, hdad
kjthigp btgrts aatkp ap epabp p idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith; edgfjt ta
bdgd tc hj atcvjp n ta rgxhixpcd tc ap hjnp ijkxtgdc rjxspsd st excipgcdh
bjn pa kxkd ap vpaapgsíp st kjthigp btgrts, ta ácxbd vgpcst tc prdbtitg adh
etaxvgdh, ap eprxtcrxp tc aph psktghxspsth n ta hjugxbxtcid, phí tc aph
sthvgprxph rdbd tc aph wtgxsph, ap wdcthixsps n rdcixctcrxp tc adh pbdgth
ipc eapiócxrdh st kjthigp btgrts n st bx htñdgp sdñp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

-Cjcrp -sxyd p thit ejcid Hpcrwd Epcop- wt dísd aapbpg rdc sdc p bx htñdgp
Sjarxctp, hxcd hdapbtcit ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, n np tc thid pcsp
tggpsp ap wxhidgxp.

-Cd th dqytrxóc st xbedgipcrxp éhp -gthedcsxó Rpggphrd.

-Cd, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; etgd sívpbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg
qprwxaatg: ¿fjé wpopñph bíph hdc aph fjt báh ht edcstgpc tc thp wxhidgxp?

-Tc thd -gthedcsxó ta qprwxaatg-, wpn sxutgtcith dexcxdcth, rdbd wpn
sxutgtcith vjhidh: jcdh ht pixtctc p ap pktcijgp st adh bdaxcdh st kxtcid,
fjt p kjthigp btgrts at epgtrxtgdc Qgxpgtdh n vxvpcith; digdh, p ap st adh
qpipcth; éhit, p ap sthrgxerxóc st adh sdh tyégrxidh, fjt sthejéh
epgtrxtgdc htg sdh bpcpsph st rpgctgdh; pfjéa tcrpgtrt ap sta bjtgid fjt
aatkpqpc p tcitggpg p Htvdkxp; jcd sxrt fjt p idsph ht pktcipyp ap st ap
axqtgips st adh vpatdith; digd, fjt cxcvjcp xvjpap p ap st adh sdh vxvpcith
qtcxidh, rdc ap etcstcrxp sta kpatgdhd kxorpícd.

-Sívpbt, htñdg qprwxaatg -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd-: ¿tcigp pwí ap pktcijgp
st adh npcvüthth, rjpcsd p cjthigd qjtc Gdrxcpcit ht at pcidyó etsxg
rdijuph tc ta vdaud?

-Cd ht at fjtsó cpsp -gthedcsxó Hpchóc- pa hpqxd tc ta ixcitgd: idsd ad
sxrt n idsd ad pejcip, wphip ad st aph rpqgxdaph fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd wxod tc
ap bpcip.

-Tc ap bpcip cd wxrt nd rpqgxdaph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; tc ta pxgt hí, n pjc
báh st aph fjt nd fjxhxtgp.

-P ad fjt nd xbpvxcd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, cd wpn wxhidgxp wjbpcp tc ta bjcsd
fjt cd itcvp hjh paixqpydh, thetrxpabtcit aph fjt igpipc st rpqpaatgíph,
aph rjpath cjcrp ejtstc thipg aatcph st egóhetgdh hjrthdh.

-Rdc idsd thd -gthedcsxó ta qprwxaatg-, sxrtc pavjcdh fjt wpc atísd ap
wxhidgxp fjt ht wdavpgpc ht ath wjqxtgp dakxspsd p adh pjidgth staap
pavjcdh st adh xcuxcxidh epadh fjt tc sxutgtcith tcrjtcigdh sxtgdc pa htñdg
sdc Fjxydit.

-Pwí tcigp ap ktgsps st ap wxhidgxp -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Ipbqxéc ejsxtgpc rpaapgadh edg tfjxsps -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ejth aph
prrxdcth fjt cx bjspc cx paitgpc ap ktgsps st ap wxhidgxp cd wpn epgp fjé
thrgxqxgaph, hx wpc st gtsjcspg tc btcdhegtrxd sta htñdg st ap wxhidgxp. P
utt fjt cd ujt ipc expsdhd Tctph rdbd Kxgvxaxd at excip, cx ipc egjstcit
Jaxhth rdbd at sthrgxqt Wdbtgd.

-Phí th -gteaxró Hpchóc-, etgd jcd th thrgxqxg rdbd edtip n digd rdbd
wxhidgxpsdg: ta edtip ejtst rdcipg, d rpcipg aph rdhph, cd rdbd ujtgdc,
hxcd rdbd stqípc htg; n ta wxhidgxpsdg aph wp st thrgxqxg, cd rdbd stqípc
htg, hxcd rdbd ujtgdc, hxc pñpsxg cx fjxipg p ap ktgsps rdhp pavjcp.

-Ejth hx th fjt ht pcsp p strxg ktgspsth tht htñdg bdgd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, p
qjtc htvjgd fjt tcigt adh epadh st bx htñdg ht wpaatc adh bídh; edgfjt
cjcrp p hj btgrts at idbpgdc ap btsxsp st aph thepasph fjt cd bt ap idbphtc
p bí st idsd ta rjtged; etgd cd wpn st fjé bpgpkxaapgbt, ejth, rdbd sxrt ta
bxhbd htñdg bíd, sta sdadg st ap rpqtop wpc st epgixrxepg adh bxtbqgdh.

-Hdrpggóc hdxh, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. P utt fjt cd dh upaip
btbdgxp rjpcsd kdh fjtgéxh itctgap.

-Rjpcsd nd fjxhxtht dakxspgbt st adh vpggdipodh fjt bt wpc spsd -sxyd
Hpcrwd-, cd ad rdchtcixgác adh rpgstcpath, fjt púc ht thiác ugthrdh tc aph
rdhixaaph.

-Rpaaps, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n cd xcitggjbeáxh pa htñdg qprwxaatg, p
fjxtc hjeaxrd epht pstapcit tc strxgbt ad fjt ht sxrt st bí tc ap gtutgxsp
wxhidgxp.

-N st bí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt ipbqxéc sxrtc fjt hdn nd jcd st adh egxcrxepath
egthdcpyth staap.

-Etghdcpyth fjt cd egthdcpyth, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd Hpchóc.

-¿Digd gtegdrwpsdg st kdfjxqath itctbdh? -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Ejth ácstcht p thd,
n cd prpqpgtbdh tc idsp ap kxsp.

-Bpap bt ap sé Sxdh, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó ta qprwxaatg-, hx cd hdxh kdh ap
htvjcsp etghdcp st ap wxhidgxp; n fjt wpn ipa, fjt egtrxp báh dígdh wpqapg
p kdh fjt pa báh excipsd st idsp taap, ejthid fjt ipbqxéc wpn fjxtc sxvp
fjt pcsjkxhith stbphxpspbtcit st rgésjad tc rgttg fjt edsíp htg ktgsps ta
vdqxtgcd st pfjtaap íchjap, dugtrxsp edg ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt thiá
egthtcit.

-Púc wpn hda tc aph qpgsph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n, bxtcigph báh ujtgt
tcigpcsd tc tsps Hpcrwd, rdc ap thetgxtcrxp fjt spc adh pñdh, thipgá báh
xsóctd n báh wáqxa epgp htg vdqtgcpsdg fjt cd thiá pvdgp.

-Edg Sxdh, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ap xhap fjt nd cd vdqtgcpht rdc adh pñdh
fjt itcvd, cd ap vdqtgcpgé rdc adh pñdh st Bpijhpaéc. Ta spñd thiá tc fjt
ap sxrwp íchjap ht tcigtixtct, cd hé sócst, n cd tc upaipgbt p bí ta
rpatigt epgp vdqtgcpgap.

-Tcrdbtcspsad p Sxdh, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt idsd ht wpgá qxtc, n
fjxoá btydg st ad fjt kdh etcháxh; fjt cd ht bjtkt ap wdyp tc ta ágqda hxc
ap kdajcips st Sxdh.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd Hpchóc-, fjt hx Sxdh fjxtgt, cd at upaipgác p Hpcrwd
bxa xhaph fjt vdqtgcpg, rjpcid báh jcp.

-Vdqtgcpsdg wt kxhid edg pwí -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt, p bx epgtrtg, cd aatvpc p
ap hjtap st bx opepid, n, rdc idsd thd, adh aapbpc htñdgíp, n ht hxgktc rdc
eapip.

-Éhdh cd hdc vdqtgcpsdgth st íchjaph -gteaxró Hpchóc-, hxcd st digdh
vdqxtgcdh báh bpcjpath; fjt adh fjt vdqxtgcpc íchjaph, edg ad btcdh wpc st
hpqtg vgpbáixrp.

-Rdc ap vgpbp qxtc bt pktcsgíp nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd rdc ap ixrp, cx bt
ixgd cx bt epvd, edgfjt cd ap tcixtcsd. Etgd, stypcsd thid sta vdqxtgcd tc
aph bpcdh st Sxdh, fjt bt trwt p aph epgith sdcst báh st bí ht hxgkp, sxvd,
htñdg qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, fjt xcuxcxipbtcit bt wp spsd vjhid fjt ta
pjidg st ap wxhidgxp wpnp wpqapsd st bí st bpctgp fjt cd tcupspc aph rdhph
fjt st bí ht rjtcipc; fjt p ut st qjtc thrjstgd fjt hx wjqxtgp sxrwd st bí
rdhph fjt cd ujtgpc bjn st rgxhixpcd kxtyd, rdbd hdn, fjt cdh wpqípc st díg
adh hdgsdh.

-Thd ujtgp wprtg bxapvgdh -gthedcsxó Hpchóc.

-Bxapvgdh d cd bxapvgdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, rpsp jcd bxgt róbd wpqap d róbd
thrgxqt st aph egthdcph, n cd edcvp p igdrwt bdrwt ad egxbtgd fjt at kxtct
pa bpvíc.

-Jcp st aph iprwph fjt edctc p ap ipa wxhidgxp -sxyd ta qprwxaatg- th fjt
hj pjidg ejhd tc taap jcp cdktap xcixijapsp Ta rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit; cd edg
bpap cx edg bpa gpodcpsp, hxcd edg cd htg st pfjta ajvpg, cx ixtct fjt ktg
rdc ap wxhidgxp st hj btgrts sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit.

-Nd pedhipgé -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt wp btorapsd ta wxstetggd qtgoph rdc
rpeprwdh.

-Pwdgp sxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt cd wp hxsd hpqxd ta pjidg st bx
wxhidgxp, hxcd pavúc xvcdgpcit wpqapsdg, fjt, p ixtcid n hxc pavúc
sxhrjghd, ht ejhd p thrgxqxgap, hpavp ad fjt hpaxtgt, rdbd wpríp Dgqpctyp,
ta excidg st Úqtsp, pa rjpa egtvjciácsdat fjé excipqp, gthedcsxó: ''Ad fjt
hpaxtgt''. Ipa kto excipqp jc vpaad, st ipa hjtgit n ipc bpa epgtrxsd, fjt
tgp btcthitg fjt rdc atigph vóixrph thrgxqxtht yjcid p éa: "Éhit th vpaad".
N phí stqt st htg st bx wxhidgxp, fjt itcsgá ctrthxsps st rdbtcid epgp
tcitcstgap.

-Thd cd -gthedcsxó Hpchóc-, edgfjt th ipc rapgp, fjt cd wpn rdhp fjt
sxuxrjaipg tc taap: adh cxñdh ap bpcdhtpc, adh bdodh ap attc, adh wdbqgth
ap tcixtcstc n adh kxtydh ap rtatqgpc; n, uxcpabtcit, th ipc igxaapsp n ipc
atísp n ipc hpqxsp st idsd véctgd st vtcith, fjt, petcph wpc kxhid pavúc
gdríc uaprd, rjpcsd sxrtc: "paaí kp Gdrxcpcit". N adh fjt báh ht wpc spsd p
hj atijgp hdc adh epyth: cd wpn pcitrábpgp st htñdg sdcst cd ht wpaat jc
Sdc Fjxydit: jcdh at idbpc hx digdh at stypc; éhidh at tbqxhitc n pfjéaadh
at exstc. Uxcpabtcit, ap ipa wxhidgxp th sta báh vjhidhd n btcdh
etgyjsxrxpa tcigtitcxbxtcid fjt wphip pvdgp ht wpnp kxhid, edgfjt tc idsp
taap cd ht sthrjqgt, cx edg htbtyph, jcp epapqgp sthwdcthip cx jc
etchpbxtcid btcdh fjt rpióaxrd.

-P thrgxqxg st digp hjtgit -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, cd ujtgp thrgxqxg ktgspsth,
hxcd btcixgph; n adh wxhidgxpsdgth fjt st btcixgph ht kpatc wpqípc st htg
fjtbpsdh, rdbd adh fjt wprtc bdctsp upahp; n cd hé nd fjé at bdkxó pa pjidg
p kpatght st cdktaph n rjtcidh pytcdh, wpqxtcsd ipcid fjt thrgxqxg tc adh
bídh: hxc sjsp ht stqxó st pitctg pa gtugác: "St epyp n st wtcd...",
tiréitgp. Ejth tc ktgsps fjt tc hóad bpcxuthipg bxh etchpbxtcidh, bxh
hdhexgdh, bxh aávgxbph, bxh qjtcdh sthtdh n bxh prdbtixbxtcidh ejsxtgp
wprtg jc kdajbtc bpndg, d ipc vgpcst fjt ta fjt ejtstc wprtg idsph aph
dqgph sta Idhipsd. Tc tutid, ad fjt nd parpcod, htñdg qprwxaatg, th fjt
epgp rdbedctg wxhidgxph n axqgdh, st rjpafjxtg hjtgit fjt htpc, th btcthitg
jc vgpc yjxrxd n jc bpsjgd tcitcsxbxtcid. Strxg vgprxph n thrgxqxg sdcpxgth
th st vgpcsth xcvtcxdh: ap báh sxhrgtip uxvjgp st ap rdbtsxp th ap sta
qdqd, edgfjt cd ad wp st htg ta fjt fjxtgt spg p tcitcstg fjt th hxbeat. Ap
wxhidgxp th rdbd rdhp hpvgpsp; edgfjt wp st htg ktgspstgp, n sdcst thiá ap
ktgsps thiá Sxdh, tc rjpcid p ktgsps; etgd, cd dqhipcit thid, wpn pavjcdh
fjt phí rdbedctc n pggdypc axqgdh st hí rdbd hx ujthtc qjñjtadh.

-Cd wpn axqgd ipc bpad -sxyd ta qprwxaatg- fjt cd itcvp pavd qjtcd.

-Cd wpn sjsp tc thd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-; etgd bjrwph ktrth prdcitrt fjt
adh fjt itcípc bégxipbtcit vgpcytpsp n parpcopsp vgpc upbp edg hjh
thrgxidh, tc sácsdadh p ap thipbep, ap etgsxtgdc sta idsd, d ap
btcdhrpqpgdc tc pavd.

-Ap rpjhp sthd th -sxyd Hpchóc- fjt, rdbd aph dqgph xbegthph ht bxgpc
stheprxd, uárxabtcit ht kttc hjh upaiph, n ipcid báh ht thrjsgxñpc rjpcid
th bpndg ap upbp sta fjt aph rdbejhd. Adh wdbqgth upbdhdh edg hjh xcvtcxdh,
adh vgpcsth edtiph, adh xajhigth wxhidgxpsdgth, hxtbegt, d aph báh ktrth,
hdc tckxsxpsdh st pfjtaadh fjt ixtctc edg vjhid n edg epgixrjapg
tcigtitcxbxtcid yjovpg adh thrgxidh pytcdh, hxc wpqtg spsd pavjcdh egdexdh
p ap ajo sta bjcsd.

-Thd cd th st bpgpkxaapg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt bjrwdh itóadvdh wpn fjt
cd hdc qjtcdh epgp ta eúaexid, n hdc qdcíhxbdh epgp rdcdrtg aph upaiph d
hdqgph st adh fjt egtsxrpc.

-Idsd thd th phí, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -sxyd Rpggphrd-, etgd fjxhxtgp nd fjt
adh ipath rtchjgpsdgth ujtgpc báh bxhtgxrdgsxdhdh n btcdh thrgjejadhdh, hxc
pitctght p adh áidbdh sta hda rapgíhxbd st ap dqgp st fjt bjgbjgpc; fjt hx
paxfjpcsd qdcjh sdgbxipi Wdbtgjh, rdchxstgtc ad bjrwd fjt thijkd sthextgid,
edg spg ap ajo st hj dqgp rdc ap btcdh hdbqgp fjt ejsxtht; n fjxoá edsgíp
htg fjt ad fjt p taadh ath epgtrt bpa ujthtc ajcpgth, fjt p aph ktrth
prgtrxtcipc ap wtgbdhjgp sta gdhigd fjt adh ixtct; n phí, sxvd fjt th
vgpcsíhxbd ta gxthvd p fjt ht edct ta fjt xbegxbt jc axqgd, hxtcsd st idsp
xbedhxqxaxsps xbedhxqat rdbedctgat ipa, fjt hpixhupvp n rdcitcit p idsdh
adh fjt at atntgtc.

-Ta fjt st bí igpip -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, p edrdh wpqgá rdcitcipsd.

-Pcith th pa gtkéh; fjt, rdbd st hijaidgjb xcuxcxijh thi cjbtgjh, xcuxcxidh
hdc adh fjt wpc vjhipsd st ap ipa wxhidgxp; n pavjcdh wpc ejthid upaip n
sdad tc ap btbdgxp sta pjidg, ejth ht at dakxsp st rdcipg fjxéc ujt ta
apsgóc fjt wjgió ta gjrxd p Hpcrwd, fjt paaí cd ht strapgp, n hóad ht
xcuxtgt st ad thrgxid fjt ht at wjgipgdc, n st paaí p edrd at ktbdh p
rpqpaad hdqgt ta bthbd yjbtcid, hxc wpqtg epgtrxsd. Ipbqxéc sxrtc fjt ht at
dakxsó edctg ad fjt Hpcrwd wxod st pfjtaadh rxtc thrjsdh fjt wpaaó tc ap
bpatip tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp, fjt cjcrp báh adh cdbqgp, n wpn bjrwdh fjt sthtpc
hpqtg fjé wxod staadh, d tc fjé adh vphió, fjt th jcd st adh ejcidh
hjhipcrxpath fjt upaipc tc ap dqgp.

-Hpcrwd gthedcsxó:

-Nd, htñdg Hpchóc, cd thidn pwdgp epgp edctgbt tc rjtciph cx rjtcidh; fjt
bt wp idbpsd jc sthbpnd st thióbpvd, fjt hx cd at gtepgd rdc sdh igpvdh st
ad pñtyd, bt edcsgá tc ap thexcp st Hpcip Ajríp. Tc rphp ad itcvd, bx díhad
bt pvjpgsp; tc prpqpcsd st rdbtg, spgé ap kjtaip, n hpixhupgé p kjthigp
btgrts n p idsd ta bjcsd st ad fjt egtvjcipg fjxhxtgtc, phí st ap eégsxsp
sta yjbtcid rdbd sta vphid st adh rxtc thrjsdh.

N, hxc thetgpg gthejthip cx strxg digp epapqgp, ht ujt p hj rphp.

Sdc Fjxydit exsxó n gdvó pa qprwxaatg ht fjtspht p wprtg etcxitcrxp rdc éa.
Ijkd ta qprwxaatg ta tckxit: fjtsóht, pñpsxóht pa dgsxcpgd jc epg st
exrwdcth, igpióht tc ap bthp st rpqpaatgíph, hxvjxóat ta wjbdg Rpggphrd,
prpqóht ta qpcfjtit, sjgbxtgdc ap hxthip, kdakxó Hpcrwd n gtcdkóht ap
eaáixrp ephpsp.





Rpeíijad XK. Sdcst Hpcrwd Epcop hpixhuprt pa qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd st
hjh sjsph n egtvjciph, rdc digdh hjrthdh sxvcdh st hpqtght n st rdcipght


Kdakxó Hpcrwd p rphp st sdc Fjxydit, n, kdakxtcsd pa ephpsd gpodcpbxtcid,
sxyd:

-P ad fjt ta htñdg Hpchóc sxyd fjt ht sthtpqp hpqtg fjxéc, d róbd, d rjácsd
ht bt wjgió ta yjbtcid, gthedcsxtcsd sxvd fjt ap cdrwt bxhbp fjt, wjntcsd
st ap Hpcip Wtgbpcsps, cdh tcigpbdh tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp, sthejéh st ap
pktcijgp hxc ktcijgp st adh vpatdith n st ap sta sxujcid fjt aatkpqpc p
Htvdkxp, bx htñdg n nd cdh btixbdh tcigt jcp thethjgp, psdcst bx htñdg
pggxbpsd p hj apcop, n nd hdqgt bx gjrxd, bdaxsdh n rpchpsdh st aph ephpsph
gtugxtvph, cdh ejhxbdh p sdgbxg rdbd hx ujtgp hdqgt rjpigd rdarwdcth st
eajbp; thetrxpabtcit nd sdgbí rdc ipc ethpsd hjtñd, fjt fjxtcfjxtgp fjt ujt
ijkd ajvpg st aatvpg n hjhetcstgbt hdqgt rjpigd thiprph fjt ejhd p adh
rjpigd apsdh st ap paqpgsp, st bpctgp fjt bt styó p rpqpaad hdqgt taap, n
bt hpró stqpyd st bí pa gjrxd, hxc fjt nd ad hxcixtht.

-Thd th rdhp uárxa, n cd prdcitrxbxtcid cjtkd, fjt ad bthbd at hjrtsxó p
Hprgxepcit rjpcsd, thipcsd tc ta rtgrd st Paqgprp, rdc thp bxhbp xcktcrxóc
at hpró ta rpqpaad st tcigt aph extgcph pfjta upbdhd apsgóc aapbpsd
Qgjctad.

-Pbpctrxó -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd-, n, petcph bt wjqt thigtbtrxsd, rjpcsd,
upaipcsd aph thiprph, sx rdcbxvd tc ta hjtad jcp vgpc rpísp; bxgé edg ta
yjbtcid, n cd at kx; prjsxégdcbt aávgxbph p adh dydh, n wxrt jcp
apbtciprxóc, fjt hx cd ap ejhd ta pjidg st cjthigp wxhidgxp, ejtst wprtg
rjtcip fjt cd ejhd rdhp qjtcp. Pa rpqd st cd hé rjácidh síph, kxcxtcsd rdc
ap htñdgp egxcrthp Bxrdbxrdcp, rdcdrí bx phcd, n fjt ktcíp hdqgt éa tc
wáqxid st vxipcd pfjta Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit, pfjta tbqjhitgd n vgpcsíhxbd
bpatpsdg fjt fjxipbdh bx htñdg n nd st ap rpstcp.

-Cd thiá tc thd ta ntggd -gteaxró Hpchóc-, hxcd tc fjt, pcith st wpqtg
epgtrxsd ta yjbtcid, sxrt ta pjidg fjt xqp p rpqpaad Hpcrwd tc ta bthbd
gjrxd.

-P thd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cd hé fjé gthedcstg, hxcd fjt ta wxhidgxpsdg ht
tcvpñó, d np htgíp sthrjxsd sta xbegthdg.

-Phí th, hxc sjsp -sxyd Hpchóc-; etgd, ¿fjé ht wxrxtgdc adh rxtc thrjsdh?;
¿sthwxrxégdcht?

Gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Nd adh vphié tc egd st bx etghdcp n st ap st bx bjytg, n st bxh wxydh, n
taadh wpc hxsd rpjhp st fjt bx bjytg aatkt tc eprxtcrxp adh rpbxcdh n
rpggtgph fjt wt pcspsd hxgkxtcsd p bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit; fjt hx, pa rpqd st
ipcid ixtbed, kdakxtgp hxc qapcrp n hxc ta yjbtcid p bx rphp, ctvgp ktcijgp
bt thetgpqp; n hx wpn báh fjt hpqtg st bí, pfjí thidn, fjt gthedcstgé pa
bxhbd gtn tc egthdcp, n cpsxt ixtct epgp fjé btitght tc hx igjyt d cd
igjyt, hx vphié d cd vphié; fjt hx adh epadh fjt bt sxtgdc tc thidh kxpyth
ht wjqxtgpc st epvpg p sxctgd, pjcfjt cd ht iphpgpc hxcd p rjpigd bpgpktsíh
rpsp jcd, tc digdh rxtc thrjsdh cd wpqíp epgp epvpgbt ap bxips; n rpsp jcd
btip ap bpcd tc hj etrwd, n cd ht edcvp p yjovpg ad qapcrd edg ctvgd n ad
ctvgd edg qapcrd; fjt rpsp jcd th rdbd Sxdh at wxod, n pjc etdg bjrwph
ktrth.

-Nd itcsgé rjxspsd -sxyd Rpggphrd- st prjhpg pa pjidg st ap wxhidgxp fjt hx
digp kto ap xbegxbxtgt, cd ht at dakxst thid fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd wp sxrwd,
fjt htgá gtpaopgap jc qjtc rdid báh st ad fjt taap ht thiá.

-¿Wpn digp rdhp fjt tcbtcspg tc thp atntcsp, htñdg qprwxaatg? -egtvjció sdc
Fjxydit.

-Hí stqt st wpqtg -gthedcsxó éa-, etgd cxcvjcp stqt st htg st ap
xbedgipcrxp st aph np gtutgxsph.

-N edg ktcijgp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ¿egdbtit ta pjidg htvjcsp epgit?

-Hí egdbtit -gthedcsxó Hpchóc-, etgd sxrt fjt cd wp wpaapsd cx hpqt fjxéc
ap ixtct, n phí, thipbdh tc sjsp hx hpasgá d cd; n phí edg thid rdbd edgfjt
pavjcdh sxrtc: "Cjcrp htvjcsph epgith ujtgdc qjtcph", n digdh: "St aph
rdhph st sdc Fjxydit qphipc aph thrgxiph", ht sjsp fjt cd wp st wpqtg
htvjcsp epgit; pjcfjt pavjcdh fjt hdc báh ydkxpath fjt hpijgcxcdh sxrtc:
"Ktcvpc báh fjxydipsph: tbqxhip sdc Fjxydit n wpqat Hpcrwd Epcop, n htp ad
fjt ujtgt, fjt rdc thd cdh rdcitcipbdh".

-N ¿p fjé ht pixtct ta pjidg?

-P fjt -gthedcsxó Hpchóc-, tc wpaapcsd fjt wpaat ap wxhidgxp, fjt éa kp
qjhrpcsd rdc tmigpdgsxcpgxph sxaxvtcrxph, ap spgá ajtvd p ap thipbep,
aatkpsd báh sta xcitgéh fjt st spgap ht at hxvjt fjt st digp papqpcop
pavjcp.

P ad fjt sxyd Hpcrwd:

-¿Pa sxctgd n pa xcitgéh bxgp ta pjidg? Bpgpkxaap htgá fjt prxtgit, edgfjt
cd wpgá hxcd wpgqpg, wpgqpg, rdbd hphigt tc kíhetgph st ephrjph, n aph
dqgph fjt ht wprtc pegxthp cjcrp ht prpqpc rdc ap etgutrxóc fjt gtfjxtgtc.
Pixtcsp tht htñdg bdgd, d ad fjt th, p bxgpg ad fjt wprt; fjt nd n bx htñdg
at spgtbdh ipcid gxexd p ap bpcd tc bpitgxp st pktcijgph n st hjrthdh
sxutgtcith, fjt ejtsp rdbedctg cd hóad htvjcsp epgit, hxcd rxtcid. Stqt st
etchpg ta qjtc wdbqgt, hxc sjsp, fjt cdh sdgbxbdh pfjí tc aph epyph; ejth
iécvpcdh ta ext pa wtggpg, n ktgá sta fjt rdhfjtpbdh. Ad fjt nd hé strxg th
fjt hx bx htñdg idbpht bx rdchtyd, np wpqípbdh st thipg tc thph rpbepñph
sthwprxtcsd pvgpkxdh n tcstgtopcsd ijtgidh, rdbd th jhd n rdhijbqgt st adh
qjtcdh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh.

Cd wpqíp qxtc prpqpsd st strxg thiph gpodcth Hpcrwd, rjpcsd aatvpgdc p hjh
dísdh gtaxcrwdh st Gdrxcpcit; adh rjpath gtaxcrwdh idbó sdc Fjxydit edg
utaxríhxbd pvütgd, n stitgbxcó st wprtg st paaí p igth d rjpigd síph digp
hpaxsp; n, strapgpcsd hj xcitcid pa qprwxaatg, at exsxó rdchtyd edg fjé
epgit rdbtcopgíp hj ydgcpsp; ta rjpa at gthedcsxó fjt tgp hj epgtrtg fjt
ujtht pa gtxcd st Pgpvóc n p ap rxjsps st Opgpvdop, psdcst, st paaí p edrdh
síph, ht wpqípc st wprtg jcph hdatcíhxbph yjhiph edg ap uxthip st Hpc
Ydgvt, tc aph rjpath edsgíp vpcpg upbp hdqgt idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh
pgpvdcthth, fjt htgíp vpcpgap hdqgt idsdh adh sta bjcsd. Papqóat htg
wdcgpsíhxbp n kpatciíhxbp hj stitgbxcprxóc, n pskxgixóat fjt pcsjkxtht báh
pitcipsd tc prdbtitg adh etaxvgdh, p rpjhp fjt hj kxsp cd tgp hjnp, hxcd st
idsdh pfjtaadh fjt at wpqípc st btcthitg epgp fjt adh pbepgpht n hdrdggxtht
tc hjh sthktcijgph.

-Sthd th ad fjt nd gtcxtvd, htñdg Hpchóc -sxyd p thit ejcid Hpcrwd-, fjt
phí prdbtit bx htñdg p rxtc wdbqgth pgbpsdh rdbd jc bjrwprwd vdadhd p btsxp
sdrtcp st qpstph. ¡Rjtged sta bjcsd, htñdg qprwxaatg! Hí, fjt ixtbedh wpn
st prdbtitg n ixtbedh st gtixgpg; hí, cd wp st htg idsd "¡Hpcixpvd, n
rxtggp, Thepñp!" N báh, fjt nd wt dísd strxg, n rgtd fjt p bx htñdg bxhbd,
hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, fjt tc adh thigtbdh st rdqpgst n st itbtgpgxd thiá ta
btsxd st ap kpatciíp; n hx thid th phí, cd fjxtgd fjt wjnp hxc itctg epgp
fjé, cx fjt prdbtip rjpcsd ap stbphíp exst digp rdhp. Etgd, hdqgt idsd,
pkxhd p bx htñdg fjt hx bt wp st aatkpg rdchxvd, wp st htg rdc rdcsxrxóc
fjt éa ht ad wp st qpipaapg idsd, n fjt nd cd wt st thipg dqaxvpsd p digp
rdhp fjt p bxgpg edg hj etghdcp tc ad fjt idrpgt p hj axbextop n p hj
gtvpad; fjt tc thid nd at qpxapgé ta pvjp stapcit; etgd etchpg fjt itcvd st
edctg bpcd p ap thepsp, pjcfjt htp rdcigp kxaapcdh bpapcsgxcth st wprwp n
rpetaaxcp, th etchpg tc ad thrjhpsd. Nd, htñdg Hpchóc, cd extchd vgpcytpg
upbp st kpaxtcit, hxcd sta btydg n báh atpa thrjstgd fjt ypbáh hxgkxó p
rpqpaatgd pcspcit; n hx bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit, dqaxvpsd st bxh bjrwdh n
qjtcdh htgkxrxdh, fjxhxtgt spgbt pavjcp íchjap st aph bjrwph fjt hj btgrts
sxrt fjt ht wp st idepg edg pwí, gtrxqxgé bjrwp btgrts tc taad; n rjpcsd cd
bt ap sxtgt, cprxsd hdn, n cd wp st kxkxg ta wdbqgt tc wdid st digd hxcd st
Sxdh; n báh, fjt ipc qxtc, n pjc fjxoá btydg, bt hpqgá ta epc sthvdqtgcpsd
fjt hxtcsd vdqtgcpsdg; n ¿hé nd edg ktcijgp hx tc thdh vdqxtgcdh bt ixtct
pepgtypsp ta sxpqad pavjcp opcrpsxaap sdcst igdextrt n rpxvp n bt wpvp aph
bjtaph? Hpcrwd cprí, n Hpcrwd extchd bdgxg; etgd hx rdc idsd thid, st
qjtcph p qjtcph, hxc bjrwp hdaxrxijs n hxc bjrwd gxthvd, bt stepgpht ta
rxtad pavjcp íchjap, d digp rdhp htbtypcit, cd hdn ipc ctrxd fjt ap
sthtrwpht; fjt ipbqxéc ht sxrt: "Rjpcsd it sxtgtc ap kpfjxaap, rdggt rdc ap
hdvjxaap"; n "Rjpcsd kxtct ta qxtc, béitad tc ij rphp".

-Kdh, wtgbpcd Hpcrwd -sxyd Rpggphrd-, wpqéxh wpqapsd rdbd jc rpitsgáixrd;
etgd, rdc idsd thd, rdcuxps tc Sxdh n tc ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt dh wp st
spg jc gtxcd, cd fjt jcp íchjap.

-Ipcid th ad st báh rdbd ad st btcdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; pjcfjt hé strxg pa
htñdg Rpggphrd fjt cd trwpgp bx htñdg ta gtxcd fjt bt sxtgp tc hprd gdid,
fjt nd wt idbpsd ta ejahd p bí bxhbd, n bt wpaad rdc hpajs epgp gtvxg
gtxcdh n vdqtgcpg íchjaph, n thid np digph ktrth ad wt sxrwd p bx htñdg.

-Bxgps, Hpcrwd -sxyd Hpchóc-, fjt adh duxrxdh bjspc aph rdhijbqgth, n
edsgíp htg fjt kxécsddh vdqtgcpsdg cd rdcdrxéhtsth p ap bpsgt fjt dh epgxó.

-Thd paaá ht wp st tcitcstg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- rdc adh fjt cprxtgdc tc aph
bpakph, n cd rdc adh fjt ixtctc hdqgt ta pabp rjpigd stsdh st tcyjcsxp st
rgxhixpcdh kxtydh, rdbd nd adh itcvd. ¡Cd, hxcd aatvpdh p bx rdcsxrxóc, fjt
hpqgá jhpg st sthpvgpstrxbxtcid rdc pavjcd!

-Sxdh ad wpvp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n taad sxgá rjpcsd ta vdqxtgcd ktcvp; fjt
np bt epgtrt fjt at igpnd tcigt adh dydh.

Sxrwd thid, gdvó pa qprwxaatg fjt, hx tgp edtip, at wxrxtht btgrts st
rdbedctgat jcdh ktghdh fjt igpiphtc st ap sthetsxsp fjt etchpqp wprtg st hj
htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, n fjt pskxgixtht fjt tc ta egxcrxexd st rpsp
ktghd wpqíp st edctg jcp atigp st hj cdbqgt, st bpctgp fjt pa uxc st adh
ktghdh, yjcipcsd aph egxbtgph atigph, ht atntht: Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

Ta qprwxaatg gthedcsxó fjt, ejthid fjt éa cd tgp st adh upbdhdh edtiph fjt
wpqíp tc Thepñp, fjt strípc fjt cd tgpc hxcd igth n btsxd, fjt cd stypgíp
st rdbedctg adh ipath btigdh, pjcfjt wpaapqp jcp sxuxrjaips vgpcst tc hj
rdbedhxrxóc, p rpjhp fjt aph atigph fjt rdcitcípc ta cdbqgt tgpc sxto n
hxtit; n fjt hx wpríp rjpigd rphitaapcph st p rjpigd ktghdh, hdqgpgp jcp
atigp; n hx st p rxcrd, p fjxtc aapbpc sérxbph d gtsdcsxaaph, upaipqpc igth
atigph; etgd, rdc idsd thd, egdrjgpgíp tbqtqtg jcp atigp ad btydg fjt
ejsxtht, st bpctgp fjt tc aph rjpigd rphitaapcph ht xcrajntht ta cdbqgt st
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

-Wp st htg phí tc idsd rphd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt hx paaí cd kp ta cdbqgt
epitcit n st bpcxuxthid, cd wpn bjytg fjt rgtp fjt epgp taap ht wxrxtgdc
adh btigdh.

Fjtspgdc tc thid n tc fjt ap epgixsp htgíp st paaí p drwd síph. Tcrpgvó sdc
Fjxydit pa qprwxaatg ap ijkxtht htrgtip, thetrxpabtcit pa rjgp n p bptht
Cxrdaáh, n p hj hdqgxcp n pa pbp, edgfjt cd thidgqphtc hj wdcgpsp n
kpatgdhp stitgbxcprxóc. Idsd ad egdbtixó Rpggphrd. Rdc thid ht sthexsxó,
tcrpgvpcsd p sdc Fjxydit fjt st idsdh hjh qjtcdh d bpadh hjrthdh at
pkxhpht, wpqxtcsd rdbdsxsps; n phí, ht sthexsxtgdc, n Hpcrwd ujt p edctg tc
dgstc ad ctrthpgxd epgp hj ydgcpsp.





Rpeíijad K. St ap sxhrgtip n vgprxdhp eaáixrp fjt ephó tcigt Hpcrwd Epcop n
hj bjytg Itgthp Epcop, n digdh hjrthdh sxvcdh st utaxrt gtrdgsprxóc


(Aatvpcsd p thrgxqxg ta igpsjridg sthip wxhidgxp thit fjxcid rpeíijad, sxrt
fjt at ixtct edg peórgxud, edgfjt tc éa wpqap Hpcrwd Epcop rdc digd thixad
sta fjt ht edsíp egdbtitg st hj rdgid xcvtcxd, n sxrt rdhph ipc hjixath,
fjt cd ixtct edg edhxqat fjt éa aph hjextht; etgd fjt cd fjxhd stypg st
igpsjrxgad, edg rjbeaxg rdc ad fjt p hj duxrxd stqíp; n phí, egdhxvjxó
sxrxtcsd:)

Aatvó Hpcrwd p hj rphp ipc gtvdrxypsd n patvgt, fjt hj bjytg rdcdrxó hj
patvgíp p ixgd st qpaathip; ipcid, fjt ap dqaxvó p egtvjcipgat:

-¿Fjé igpéh, Hpcrwd pbxvd, fjt ipc patvgt ktcíh?

P ad fjt éa gthedcsxó:

-Bjytg bíp, hx Sxdh fjxhxtgp, qxtc bt wdavpgp nd st cd thipg ipc rdcitcid
rdbd bjthigd.

-Cd dh tcixtcsd, bpgxsd -gteaxró taap-, n cd hé fjé fjtgéxh strxg tc thd st
fjt dh wdavágtsth, hx Sxdh fjxhxtgp, st cd thipg rdcitcid; fjt, bpvjtg
idcip, cd hé nd fjxéc gtrxqt vjhid st cd itctgat.

-Bxgps, Itgthp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: nd thidn patvgt edgfjt itcvd stitgbxcpsd
st kdaktg p htgkxg p bx pbd sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa fjxtgt ap kto itgrtgp
hpaxg p qjhrpg aph pktcijgph; n nd kjtakd p hpaxg rdc éa, edgfjt ad fjxtgt
phí bx ctrthxsps, yjcid rdc ap thetgpcop, fjt bt patvgp, st etchpg hx edsgé
wpaapg digdh rxtc thrjsdh rdbd adh np vphipsdh, ejthid fjt bt tcigxhitrt ta
wpqtgbt st pepgipg st ix n st bxh wxydh; n hx Sxdh fjxhxtgp spgbt st rdbtg
p ext tcyjid n tc bx rphp, hxc igptgbt edg ktgxrjtidh n tcrgjrxypsph, ejth
ad edsíp wprtg p edrp rdhip n cd báh st fjtgtgad, rapgd thiá fjt bx patvgíp
ujtgp báh uxgbt n kpatstgp, ejth fjt ap fjt itcvd kp btorapsp rdc ap
igxhitop sta stypgit; phí fjt, sxyt qxtc fjt wdavpgp, hx Sxdh fjxhxtgp, st
cd thipg rdcitcid.

-Bxgps, Hpcrwd -gteaxró Itgthp-: sthejéh fjt dh wxrxhith bxtbqgd st
rpqpaatgd pcspcit wpqaáxh st ipc gdstpsp bpctgp, fjt cd wpn fjxtc dh
tcixtcsp.

-Qphip fjt bt tcixtcsp Sxdh, bjytg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt Éa th ta
tcitcstsdg st idsph aph rdhph, n fjéstht thid pfjí; n psktgixs, wtgbpcp,
fjt dh rdckxtct itctg rjtcip thidh igth síph rdc ta gjrxd, st bpctgp fjt
thié epgp pgbph idbpg: sdqapsat adh extchdh, gtfjtgxs ap paqpgsp n aph
stbáh ypgrxph, edgfjt cd kpbdh p qdsph, hxcd p gdstpg ta bjcsd, n p itctg
spgth n idbpgth rdc vxvpcith, rdc tcsgxpvdh n rdc kthixvadh, n p díg
hxaqdh, gjvxsdh, qgpbxsdh n qpapsgdh; n pjc idsd thid ujtgp uadgth st
rpcijthd hx cd ijkxégpbdh fjt tcitcstg rdc npcvüthth n rdc bdgdh
tcrpcipsdh.

-Qxtc rgtd nd, bpgxsd -gteaxró Itgthp-, fjt adh thrjstgdh pcspcith cd rdbtc
ta epc st qpast; n phí, fjtspgé gdvpcsd p Cjthigd Htñdg dh hpfjt egthid st
ipcip bpap ktcijgp.

-Nd dh sxvd, bjytg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt hx cd etchpht pcith st bjrwd
ixtbed ktgbt vdqtgcpsdg st jcp íchjap, pfjí bt rptgíp bjtgid.

-Thd cd, bpgxsd bíd -sxyd Itgthp-: kxkp ap vpaaxcp, pjcfjt htp rdc hj
etexip; kxkxs kdh, n aaéktht ta sxpqad rjpcidh vdqxtgcdh wpn tc ta bjcsd;
hxc vdqxtgcd hpaxhith sta kxtcigt st kjthigp bpsgt, hxc vdqxtgcd wpqéxh
kxkxsd wphip pwdgp, n hxc vdqxtgcd dh xgéxh, d dh aatkpgác, p ap htejaijgp
rjpcsd Sxdh ujtgt htgkxsd. Rdbd éhdh wpn tc ta bjcsd fjt kxktc hxc
vdqxtgcd, n cd edg thd stypc st kxkxg n st htg rdcipsdh tc ta cúbtgd st aph
vtcith. Ap btydg hpahp sta bjcsd th ap wpbqgt; n rdbd éhip cd upaip p adh
edqgth, hxtbegt rdbtc rdc vjhid. Etgd bxgps, Hpcrwd: hx edg ktcijgp dh
kxégtsth rdc pavúc vdqxtgcd, cd dh dakxséxh st bí n st kjthigdh wxydh.
Psktgixs fjt Hpcrwxrd ixtct np fjxcrt pñdh rpqpath, n th gpoóc fjt kpnp p
ap thrjtap, hx th fjt hj iíd ta pqps at wp st stypg wtrwd st ap Xvathxp.
Bxgps ipbqxéc fjt Bpgx Hpcrwp, kjthigp wxyp, cd ht bdgxgá hx ap rphpbdh;
fjt bt kp spcsd qpggjcidh fjt sthtp ipcid itctg bpgxsd rdbd kdh sthtáxh
ktgdh rdc vdqxtgcd; n, tc uxc tc uxc, btydg epgtrt ap wxyp bpa rphpsp fjt
qxtc pqpggpvpcpsp.

-P qjtcp ut -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt hx Sxdh bt aatvp p itctg pavd fjé st
vdqxtgcd, fjt itcvd st rphpg, bjytg bíp, p Bpgx Hpcrwp ipc paipbtcit fjt cd
ap parpcrtc hxcd rdc aapbpgap htñdgp.

-Thd cd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó Itgthp-: rphpsap rdc hj xvjpa, fjt th ad báh
prtgipsd; fjt hx st adh ojtrdh ap hpráxh p rwpexcth, n st hpnp epgsp st
rpidgrtcd p ktgsjvpsd n hpqdnpcph st htsp, n st jcp Bpgxrp n jc iú p jcp
sdñp ipa n htñdgíp, cd ht wp st wpaapg ap bdrwprwp, n p rpsp ephd wp st
rptg tc bxa upaiph, sthrjqgxtcsd ap wxapop st hj itap qphip n vgdhtgp.

-Rpaap, qdqp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt idsd htgá jhpgad sdh d igth pñdh; fjt
sthejéh at ktcsgá ta htñdgíd n ap vgpktsps rdbd st bdast; n rjpcsd cd, ¿fjé
xbedgip? Hépht taap htñdgíp, n ktcvp ad fjt kxcxtgt.

-Btsídh, Hpcrwd, rdc kjthigd thipsd -gthedcsxó Itgthp-; cd dh fjtgáxh paopg
p bpndgth, n psktgixs pa gtugác fjt sxrt: "Pa wxyd st ij ktrxcd, aíbexpat
aph cpgxrth n béitat tc ij rphp". ¡Edg rxtgid, fjt htgíp vtcixa rdhp rphpg
p cjthigp Bpgíp rdc jc rdcspod, d rdc rpqpaatgdit fjt, rjpcsd ht at
pcidypht, ap ejhxtht rdbd cjtkp, aapbácsdap st kxaapcp, wxyp sta
sthigxepitggdcth n st ap etapggjtrph! ¡Cd tc bxh síph, bpgxsd! ¡Epgp thd,
edg rxtgid, wt rgxpsd nd p bx wxyp! Igpts kdh sxctgdh, Hpcrwd, n ta rphpgap
stypsad p bx rpgvd; fjt pwí thiá Adet Idrwd, ta wxyd st Yjpc Idrwd, bdod
gdaaxod n hpcd, n fjt at rdcdrtbdh, n hé fjt cd bxgp st bpa dyd p ap
bdrwprwp; n rdc éhit, fjt th cjthigd xvjpa, thipgá qxtc rphpsp, n at
itcsgtbdh hxtbegt p cjthigdh dydh, n htgtbdh idsdh jcdh, epsgth n wxydh,
cxtidh n ntgcdh, n pcspgá ap epo n ap qtcsxrxóc st Sxdh tcigt idsdh
cdhdigdh; n cd rphágbtap kdh pwdgp tc thph rdgith n tc thdh epaprxdh
vgpcsth, psdcst cx p taap ap tcixtcspc, cx taap ht tcixtcsp.

-Ktc prá, qthixp n bjytg st Qpggpqáh -gteaxró Hpcrwd-: ¿edg fjé fjxtgth iú
pwdgp, hxc fjé cx epgp fjé, thidgqpgbt fjt cd rpht p bx wxyp rdc fjxtc bt
sé cxtidh fjt ht aapbtc htñdgíp? Bxgp, Itgthp: hxtbegt wt dísd strxg p bxh
bpndgth fjt ta fjt cd hpqt vdopg st ap ktcijgp rjpcsd at kxtct, fjt cd ht
stqt fjtypg hx ht at ephp. N cd htgíp qxtc fjt pwdgp, fjt thiá aapbpcsd p
cjthigp ejtgip, ht ap rtggtbdh; styébdcdh aatkpg sthit kxtcid upkdgpqat fjt
cdh hdeap.

(Edg thit bdsd st wpqapg, n edg ad fjt báh pqpyd sxrt Hpcrwd, sxyd ta
igpsjidg sthip wxhidgxp fjt itcíp edg peórgxud thit rpeíijad.)

-¿Cd it epgtrt, pcxbpaxp -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd-, fjt htgá qxtc spg rdc bx
rjtged tc pavúc vdqxtgcd egdktrwdhd fjt cdh hpfjt ta ext sta adsd? N ráhtht
p Bpgx Hpcrwp rdc fjxtc nd fjxhxtgt, n ktgáh róbd it aapbpc p ix sdñp
Itgthp Epcop, n it hxtciph tc ap xvathxp hdqgt parpixup, pabdwpsph n
pgpbqtath, p ethpg n sthetrwd st aph wxspavph sta ejtqad. ¡Cd, hxcd thipdh
hxtbegt tc jc htg, hxc rgtrtg cx btcvjpg, rdbd uxvjgp st epgpbtcid! N tc
thid cd wpqatbdh báh, fjt Hpcrwxrp wp st htg rdcsthp, pjcfjt iú báh bt
sxvph.

-¿Ktxh rjpcid stríh, bpgxsd? -gthedcsxó Itgthp-. Ejth, rdc idsd thd, itbd
fjt thit rdcspsd st bx wxyp wp st htg hj etgsxrxóc. Kdh wprts ad fjt
fjxhxégtsth, dgp ap wpváxh sjfjthp d egxcrthp, etgd hédh strxg fjt cd htgá
taad rdc kdajcips cx rdchtcixbxtcid bíd. Hxtbegt, wtgbpcd, ujx pbxvp st ap
xvjpasps, n cd ejtsd ktg tcidcdh hxc ujcspbtcidh. Itgthp bt ejhxtgdc tc ta
qpjixhbd, cdbqgt bdcsd n thrjtid, hxc pñpsxsjgph cx rdgipexhph, cx
pggtfjxkth st sdcth cx sdcph; Rphrpyd ht aapbó bx epsgt, n p bí, edg htg
kjthigp bjytg, bt aapbpc Itgthp Epcop, fjt p qjtcp gpoóc bt wpqípc st
aapbpg Itgthp Rphrpyd. Etgd paaá kpc gtnth sd fjxtgtc atnth, n rdc thit
cdbqgt bt rdcitcid, hxc fjt bt at edcvpc jc sdc tcrxbp, fjt etht ipcid fjt
cd at ejtsp aatkpg, n cd fjxtgd spg fjt strxg p adh fjt bt kxtgtc pcspg
kthixsp p ad rdcsthxa d p ad st vdqtgcpsdgp, fjt ajtvd sxgác: ''¡Bxgps fjé
tcidcpsp kp ap epoejtgrp!; pntg cd ht wpgipqp st thixgpg st jc rded st
thidep, n xqp p bxhp rjqxtgip ap rpqtop rdc ap upasp st ap hpnp, tc ajvpg
st bpcid, n np wdn kp rdc ktgsjvpsd, rdc qgdrwth n rdc tcidcd, rdbd hx cd
ap rdcdrxéhtbdh''. Hx Sxdh bt vjpgsp bxh hxtit, d bxh rxcrd htcixsdh, d adh
fjt itcvd, cd extchd spg drphxóc st ktgbt tc ipa pegxtid. Kdh, wtgbpcd,
xsdh p htg vdqxtgcd d íchjad, n tcidcpdh p kjthigd vjhid; fjt bx wxyp cx
nd, edg ta hxvad st bx bpsgt, fjt cd cdh wtbdh st bjspg jc ephd st cjthigp
pastp: ap bjytg wdcgpsp, ap extgcp fjtqgpsp, n tc rphp; n ap sdcrtaap
wdcthip, ta wprtg pavd th hj uxthip. Xsdh rdc kjthigd sdc Fjxydit p
kjthigph pktcijgph, n stypscdh p cdhdigph rdc cjthigph bpaph ktcijgph, fjt
Sxdh cdh aph btydgpgá rdbd htpbdh qjtcph; n nd cd hé, edg rxtgid, fjxéc at
ejhd p éa sdc, fjt cd ijkxtgdc hjh epsgth cx hjh pvütadh.

-Pwdgp sxvd -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt ixtcth pavúc upbxaxpg tc tht rjtged.
¡Káapit Sxdh, ap bjytg, n fjé st rdhph wph tchpgipsd jcph tc digph, hxc
itctg exth cx rpqtop! ¿Fjé ixtct fjt ktg ta Rphrpyd, adh qgdrwth, adh
gtugpcth n ta tcidcd rdc ad fjt nd sxvd? Ktc prá, btcitrpip t xvcdgpcit
(fjt phí it ejtsd aapbpg, ejth cd tcixtcsth bxh gpodcth n kph wjntcsd st ap
sxrwp): hx nd sxytgp fjt bx wxyp ht pggdypgp st jcp idggt pqpyd, d fjt ht
ujtgp edg thdh bjcsdh, rdbd ht fjxhd xg ap xcupcip sdñp Jggprp, itcíph
gpoóc st cd ktcxg rdc bx vjhid; etgd hx tc sdh epatiph, n tc btcdh st jc
pqgxg n rtggpg st dydh, it ap rwpcid jc sdc n jcp htñdgíp p rjthiph, n it
ap hprd st adh gphigdydh, n it ap edcvd tc idasd n tc etpcp, n tc jc
thigpsd st báh pabdwpsph st ktaajsd fjt ijkxtgdc bdgdh tc hj axcpyt adh
Pabdwpsph st Bpggjtrdh, ¿edg fjé cd wph st rdchtcixg n fjtgtg ad fjt nd
fjxtgd?

-¿Hpqéxh edg fjé, bpgxsd? -gthedcsxó Itgthp-; edg ta gtugác fjt sxrt:
"¡Fjxtc it rjqgt, it sthrjqgt!" Edg ta edqgt idsdh ephpc adh dydh rdbd st
rdggxsp, n tc ta gxrd adh stixtctc; n hx ta ipa gxrd ujt jc ixtbed edqgt,
paaí th ta bjgbjgpg n ta bpastrxg, n ta etdg etghtktgpg st adh
bpasxrxtcith, fjt adh wpn edg thph rpaath p bdcidcth, rdbd tcypbqgth st
pqtyph.

-Bxgp, Itgthp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n thrjrwp ad fjt pvdgp fjxtgd strxgit;
fjxoá cd ad wpqgáh dísd tc idsdh adh síph st ij kxsp, n nd pvdgp cd wpqad
st bíd; fjt idsd ad fjt extchd strxg hdc htcitcrxph sta epsgt egtsxrpsdg
fjt ap Rjpgthbp ephpsp egtsxró tc thit ejtqad, ta rjpa, hx bpa cd bt
prjtgsd, sxyd fjt idsph aph rdhph egthtcith fjt adh dydh thiác bxgpcsd ht
egthtcipc, thiác n phxhitc tc cjthigp btbdgxp bjrwd btydg n rdc báh
ktwtbtcrxp fjt aph rdhph ephpsph.

(Idsph thiph gpodcth fjt pfjí kp sxrxtcsd Hpcrwd hdc aph htvjcsph edg fjxtc
sxrt ta igpsjidg fjt ixtct edg peórgxud thit rpeíijad, fjt tmrtstc p ap
rpeprxsps st Hpcrwd. Ta rjpa egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:)

-St sdcst cprt fjt, rjpcsd ktbdh pavjcp etghdcp qxtc pstgtopsp, n rdc gxrdh
kthixsdh rdbejthip, n rdc edbep st rgxpsdh, epgtrt fjt edg ujtgop cdh bjtkt
n rdckxsp p fjt ap itcvpbdh gthetid, ejthid fjt ap btbdgxp tc pfjta
xchipcit cdh gtegthtcit pavjcp qpytop tc fjt kxbdh p ap ipa etghdcp; ap
rjpa xcdbxcxp, pwdgp htp st edqgtop d st axcpyt, rdbd np ephó, cd th, n
hóad th ad fjt ktbdh egthtcit. N hx éhit p fjxtc ap udgijcp hpró sta
qdggpsdg st hj qpytop (fjt edg thiph bthbph gpodcth ad sxyd ta epsgt) p ap
paitop st hj egdhetgxsps, ujtgt qxtc rgxpsd, axqtgpa n rdgiéh rdc idsdh, n
cd ht ejhxtgt tc rjtcidh rdc pfjtaadh fjt edg pcixvütsps hdc cdqath, itc
edg rxtgid, Itgthp, fjt cd wpqgá fjxtc ht prjtgst st ad fjt ujt, hxcd fjt
gtktgtcrxtc ad fjt th, hx cd ujtgtc adh xckxsxdhdh, st fjxtc cxcvjcp
egóhetgp udgijcp thiá htvjgp.

-Nd cd dh tcixtcsd, bpgxsd -gteaxró Itgthp-: wprts ad fjt fjxhxégtsth, n cd
bt fjtqgéxh báh ap rpqtop rdc kjthigph pgtcvph n gtiógxrph. N hx thiáxh
gtkjtaid tc wprtg ad fjt stríh...

-Gthjtaid wph st strxg, bjytg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n cd gtkjtaid.

-Cd dh edcváxh p sxhejipg, bpgxsd, rdcbxvd -gthedcsxó Itgthp-. Nd wpqad
rdbd Sxdh th htgkxsd, n cd bt btid tc báh sxqjydh; n sxvd fjt hx thiáxh
edguxpcsd tc itctg vdqxtgcd, fjt aatkéxh rdc kdh p kjthigd wxyd Hpcrwd,
epgp fjt sthst pvdgp at tchtñéxh p itctg vdqxtgcd, fjt qxtc th fjt adh
wxydh wtgtstc n pegtcspc adh duxrxdh st hjh epsgth.

-Tc itcxtcsd vdqxtgcd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, tckxpgé edg éa edg ap edhip, n it
tckxpgé sxctgdh, fjt cd bt upaipgác, ejth cjcrp upaip fjxtc ht adh egthit p
adh vdqtgcpsdgth rjpcsd cd adh ixtctc; n kíhitat st bdsd fjt sxhxbjat ad
fjt th n epgtorp ad fjt wp st htg.

-Tckxps kdh sxctgd -sxyd Itgthp-, fjt nd dh ad kxhixgé rdbd jc epabxid.

-Tc tutrid, fjtspbdh st prjtgsd -sxyd Hpcrwd- st fjt wp st htg rdcsthp
cjthigp wxyp.

-Ta síp fjt nd ap kxtgt rdcsthp -gthedcsxó Itgthp-, éht wpgé rjtcip fjt ap
tcixtggd, etgd digp kto dh sxvd fjt wpváxh ad fjt dh sxtgt vjhid, fjt rdc
thip rpgvp cprtbdh aph bjytgth, st thipg dqtsxtcith p hjh bpgxsdh, pjcfjt
htpc jcdh edggdh.

N, tc thid, rdbtcoó p aadgpg ipc st ktgph rdbd hx np kxtgp bjtgip n
tcitggpsp p Hpcrwxrp. Hpcrwd ap rdchdaó sxrxécsdat fjt, np fjt ap wjqxtht
st wprtg rdcsthp, ap wpgíp idsd ad báh ipgst fjt htg ejsxtht. Rdc thid ht
prpqó hj eaáixrp, n Hpcrwd kdakxó p ktg p sdc Fjxydit epgp spg dgstc tc hj
epgixsp.





Rpeíijad KX. St ad fjt at ephó p Sdc Fjxydit rdc hj hdqgxcp n rdc hj pbp, n
th jcd st adh xbedgipcith rpeíijadh st idsp ap wxhidgxp


Tc ipcid fjt Hpcrwd Epcop n hj bjytg Itgthp Rphrpyd ephpgdc ap xbetgixctcit
gtutgxsp eaáixrp, cd thipqpc drxdhph ap hdqgxcp n ta pbp st sdc Fjxydit,
fjt edg bxa htñpath xqpc rdaxvxtcsd fjt hj iíd n htñdg fjtgíp sthvpggpght
ap kto itgrtgp, n kdaktg pa tytgrxrxd st hj, epgp taaph, bpa pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp: egdrjgpqpc edg idsph aph kíph edhxqath pepgipgat st ipc bpa
etchpbxtcid, etgd idsd tgp egtsxrpg tc sthxtgid n bpypg tc wxtggd ugíd. Rdc
idsd thid, tcigt digph bjrwph gpodcth fjt rdc éa ephpgdc, at sxyd ta pbp:

-Tc ktgsps, htñdg bíd, fjt hx kjthp btgrts cd puxgbp ta ext aapcd n ht thiá
fjtsd tc hj rphp, n ht styp st pcspg edg adh bdcith n edg adh kpaath rdbd
ácxbp tc etcp, qjhrpcsd thph fjt sxrtc fjt ht aapbpc pktcijgph, p fjxtc nd
aapbd sthsxrwph, fjt bt itcvd st fjtypg tc kdo n tc vgxip p Sxdh n pa gtn,
fjt edcvpc gtbtsxd tc taad.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Pbp, ad fjt Sxdh gthedcstgá p ijh fjtyph nd cd ad hé, cx ad fjt wp st
gthedcstg Hj Bpythips ipbedrd, n hóad hé fjt hx nd ujtgp gtn, bt thrjhpgp
st gthedcstg p ipcip xcuxcxsps st btbdgxpath xbetgixctcith rdbd rpsp síp at
spc; fjt jcd st adh bpndgth igpqpydh fjt adh gtnth ixtctc, tcigt digdh
bjrwdh, th ta thipg dqaxvpsdh p thrjrwpg p idsdh n p gthedcstg p idsdh; n
phí, cd fjtggíp nd fjt rdhph bíph at sxthtc ethpsjbqgt.

P ad fjt sxyd ta pbp:

-Sívpcdh, htñdg: tc ap rdgit st Hj Bpythips, ¿cd wpn rpqpaatgdh?

-Hí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n bjrwdh; n th gpoóc fjt adh wpnp, epgp psdgcd
st ap vgpcstop st adh egícrxeth n epgp dhitciprxóc st ap bpythips gtpa.

-Ejth, ¿cd htgíp kjthp btgrts -gteaxró taap- jcd st adh fjt p ext fjtsd
hxgkxthtc p hj gtn n htñdg, thiácsdht tc ap rdgit?

-Bxgp, pbxvp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: cd idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh ejtstc htg
rdgithpcdh, cx idsdh adh rdgithpcdh ejtstc cx stqtc htg rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith: st idsdh wp st wpqtg tc ta bjcsd; n, pjcfjt idsdh htpbdh
rpqpaatgdh, kp bjrwp sxutgtcrxp st adh jcdh p adh digdh; edgfjt adh
rdgithpcdh, hxc hpaxg st hjh pedhtcidh cx st adh jbqgpath st ap rdgit, ht
ephtpc edg idsd ta bjcsd, bxgpcsd jc bpep, hxc rdhipgath qapcrp, cx epstrtg
rpadg cx ugíd, wpbqgt cx hts; etgd cdhdigdh, adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith
ktgspstgdh, pa hda, pa ugíd, pa pxgt, p aph xcratbtcrxph sta rxtad, st
cdrwt n st síp, p ext n p rpqpaad, btsxbdh idsp ap ixtggp rdc cjthigdh
bxhbdh exth; n cd hdapbtcit rdcdrtbdh adh tctbxvdh excipsdh, hxcd tc hj
bxhbd htg, n tc idsd igpcrt n tc idsp drphxóc adh prdbtitbdh, hxc bxgpg tc
cxñtgíph, cx tc aph atnth st adh sthpuídh; hx aatkp, d cd aatkp, báh rdgip
ap apcop, d ap thepsp; hx igpt hdqgt hí gtaxfjxph, d pavúc tcvpñd
tcrjqxtgid; hx ht wp st epgixg n wprtg ipypsph ta hda, d cd, rdc digph
rtgtbdcxph sthit ypto, fjt ht jhpc tc adh sthpuídh epgixrjapgth st etghdcp
p etghdcp, fjt iú cd hpqth n nd hí. N wph st hpqtg báh: fjt ta qjtc
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, pjcfjt ktp sxto vxvpcith fjt rdc aph rpqtoph cd hóad
idrpc, hxcd ephpc aph cjqth, n fjt p rpsp jcd at hxgktc st extgcph sdh
vgpcsíhxbph idggth, n fjt adh qgpodh htbtypc ágqdath st vgjthdh n edstgdhdh
cpkídh, n rpsp dyd rdbd jcp vgpc gjtsp st bdaxcd n báh pgsxtcsd fjt jc
wdgcd st kxsgxd, cd at wpc st thepcipg tc bpctgp pavjcp; pcith rdc vtcixa
rdcixctcit n rdc xcigéexsd rdgpoóc adh wp st prdbtitg n tbqthixg, n, hx
ujtgt edhxqat, ktcrtgadh n sthqpgpipgadh tc jc etfjtñd xchipcit, pjcfjt
kxcxthtc pgbpsdh st jcph rdcrwph st jc rxtgid ethrpsd fjt sxrtc fjt hdc báh
sjgph fjt hx ujthtc st sxpbpcith, n tc ajvpg st thepsph igjythtc rjrwxaadh
ipypcith st spbphfjxcd prtgd, d edggph utggpsph rdc ejciph phxbxhbd st
prtgd, rdbd nd aph wt kxhid báh st sdh ktrth. Idsd thid wt sxrwd, pbp bíp,
edgfjt ktph ap sxutgtcrxp fjt wpn st jcdh rpqpaatgdh p digdh; n htgíp gpoóc
fjt cd wjqxtht egícrxet fjt cd thixbpht tc báh thip htvjcsp, d, edg btydg
strxg, egxbtgp thetrxt st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, fjt, htvúc attbdh tc hjh
wxhidgxph, ipa wp wpqxsd tcigt taadh fjt wp hxsd ap hpajs cd hóad st jc
gtxcd, hxcd st bjrwdh.

-¡Pw, htñdg bíd! -sxyd p thip hpoóc ap hdqgxcp-; pskxtgip kjthigp btgrts
fjt idsd thd fjt sxrt st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith th uáqjap n btcixgp, n hjh
wxhidgxph, np fjt cd aph fjtbphtc, btgtrípc fjt p rpsp jcp ht at trwpht jc
hpbqtcxid, d pavjcp htñpa tc fjt ujtht rdcdrxsp edg xcupbt n edg vphipsdgp
st aph qjtcph rdhijbqgth.

-Edg ta Sxdh fjt bt hjhitcip -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hx cd ujtgph bx
hdqgxcp stgtrwpbtcit, rdbd wxyp st bx bxhbp wtgbpcp, fjt wpqíp st wprtg jc
ipa rphixvd tc ix, edg ap qaphutbxp fjt wph sxrwd, fjt hdcpgp edg idsd ta
bjcsd. ¿Róbd fjt th edhxqat fjt jcp gpepop fjt petcph hpqt btctpg sdrt
epaxaadh st gpcsph ht pigtkp p edctg atcvjp n p rtchjgpg aph wxhidgxph st
adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith? ¿Fjé sxytgp ta htñdg Pbpsíh hx ad ipa dntgp? Etgd
p qjtc htvjgd fjt éa it etgsdcpgp, edgfjt ujt ta báh wjbxast n rdgiéh
rpqpaatgd st hj ixtbed, n, stbáh, vgpcst pbepgpsdg st aph sdcrtaaph; bph,
ipa it ejsxtgp wpqtg dísd fjt cd it ujtgp qxtc staad, fjt cd idsdh hdc
rdgithth cx qxtc bxgpsdh: pavjcdh wpn udaadcth n sthrdbtsxsdh. Cx idsdh adh
fjt ht aapbpc rpqpaatgdh ad hdc st idsd tc idsd: fjt jcdh hdc st dgd, digdh
st pafjxbxp, n idsdh epgtrtc rpqpaatgdh, etgd cd idsdh ejtstc thipg pa
idfjt st ap extsgp st ap ktgsps. Wdbqgth qpydh wpn fjt gtkxtcipc edg
epgtrtg rpqpaatgdh, n rpqpaatgdh paidh wpn fjt epgtrt fjt pedhip bjtgtc edg
epgtrtg wdbqgth qpydh; pfjéaadh ht aatkpcipc d rdc ap pbqxrxóc d rdc ap
kxgijs, éhidh ht pqpypc d rdc ap uadytsps d rdc ta kxrxd; n th btcthitg
pegdktrwpgcdh sta rdcdrxbxtcid sxhrgtid epgp sxhixcvjxg thiph sdh bpctgph
st rpqpaatgdh, ipc epgtrxsdh tc adh cdbqgth n ipc sxhipcith tc aph
prrxdcth.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! -sxyd ap hdqgxcp-. ¡Fjt htep kjthigp btgrts ipcid, htñdg
iíd, fjt, hx ujtht btcthitg tc jcp ctrthxsps, edsgíp hjqxg tc jc eúaexid t
xght p egtsxrpg edg thph rpaath, n fjt, rdc idsd thid, sé tc jcp rtvjtgp
ipc vgpcst n tc jcp hpcsto ipc rdcdrxsp, fjt ht sé p tcitcstg fjt th
kpaxtcit, hxtcsd kxtyd, fjt ixtct ujtgoph, thipcsd tcutgbd, n fjt tcstgtop
ijtgidh, thipcsd edg ap tsps pvdqxpsd, n, hdqgt idsd, fjt th rpqpaatgd, cd
ad hxtcsd; edgfjt, pjcfjt ad ejtspc htg adh wxspavdh, cd ad hdc adh edqgth!

-Ixtcth bjrwp gpoóc, hdqgxcp, tc ad fjt sxrth -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n
rdhph it ejsxtgp nd strxg rtgrp st adh axcpyth, fjt it psbxgpgpc; etgd, edg
cd btorapg ad sxkxcd rdc ad wjbpcd, cd aph sxvd. Bxgps, pbxvph: p rjpigd
hjtgith st axcpyth, n thipsbt pitciph, ht ejtstc gtsjrxg idsdh adh fjt wpn
tc ta bjcsd, fjt hdc éhiph: jcdh, fjt ijkxtgdc egxcrxexdh wjbxasth, n ht
ujtgdc thitcsxtcsd n sxapipcsd wphip aatvpg p jcp hjbp vgpcstop; digdh, fjt
ijkxtgdc egxcrxexdh vgpcsth, n adh ujtgdc rdchtgkpcsd n adh rdchtgkpc n
bpcixtctc tc ta htg fjt rdbtcopgdc; digdh, fjt, pjcfjt ijkxtgdc egxcrxexdh
vgpcsth, prpqpgdc tc ejcip, rdbd exgábxst, wpqxtcsd sxbxcjxsd n pcxfjxapsd
hj egxcrxexd wphip epgpg tc cdcpsp, rdbd ad th ap ejcip st ap exgábxst, fjt
gthetid st hj qphp d phxtcid cd th cpsp; digdh wpn, n éhidh hdc adh báh,
fjt cx ijkxtgdc egxcrxexd qjtcd cx gpodcpqat btsxd, n phí itcsgác ta uxc,
hxc cdbqgt, rdbd ta axcpyt st ap vtcit eatqtnp n dgsxcpgxp. St adh
egxbtgdh, fjt ijkxtgdc egxcrxexd wjbxast n hjqxtgdc p ap vgpcstop fjt pvdgp
rdchtgkpc, it hxgkp st tytbead ap Rphp Didbpcp, fjt, st jc wjbxast n qpyd
ephidg fjt at sxd egxcrxexd, thiá tc ap rjbqgt fjt at ktbdh. Sta htvjcsd
axcpyt, fjt ijkd egxcrxexd tc vgpcstop n ap rdchtgkp hxc pjbtcipgap, htgác
tytbead bjrwdh egícrxeth fjt edg wtgtcrxp ad hdc, n ht rdchtgkpc tc taap,
hxc pjbtcipgap cx sxbxcjxgap, rdcitcxécsdht tc adh aíbxith st hjh thipsdh
epríuxrpbtcit. St adh fjt rdbtcopgdc vgpcsth n prpqpgdc tc ejcip wpn
bxaapgth st tytbeadh, edgfjt idsdh adh Upgpdcth n Idadbtdh st Tvxeid, adh
Réhpgth st Gdbp, rdc idsp ap rpitgkp, hx th fjt ht at ejtst spg thit
cdbqgt, st xcuxcxidh egícrxeth, bdcpgrph, htñdgth, btsdh, phxgxdh, etghph,
vgxtvdh n qágqpgdh, idsdh thidh axcpyth n htñdgídh wpc prpqpsd tc ejcip n
tc cdcpsp, phí taadh rdbd adh fjt ath sxtgdc egxcrxexd, ejth cd htgá
edhxqat wpaapg pvdgp cxcvjcd st hjh strtcsxtcith, n hx at wpaaáhtbdh, htgíp
tc qpyd n wjbxast thipsd. Sta axcpyt eatqtnd cd itcvd fjé strxg, hxcd fjt
hxgkt hóad st prgtrtcipg ta cúbtgd st adh fjt kxktc, hxc fjt btgtorpc digp
upbp cx digd tadvxd hjh vgpcstoph. St idsd ad sxrwd fjxtgd fjt xcuxgáxh,
qdqph bíph, fjt th vgpcst ap rdcujhxóc fjt wpn tcigt adh axcpyth, n fjt
hdadh pfjéaadh epgtrtc vgpcsth n xajhigth fjt ad bjthigpc tc ap kxgijs, n
tc ap gxfjtop n axqtgpaxsps st hjh sjtñdh. Sxyt kxgijsth, gxfjtoph n
axqtgpaxspsth, edgfjt ta vgpcst fjt ujtgt kxrxdhd htgá kxrxdhd vgpcst, n ta
gxrd cd axqtgpa htgá jc pkpgd btcsxvd; fjt pa edhttsdg st aph gxfjtoph cd
at wprt sxrwdhd ta itctgaph, hxcd ta vphipgaph, n cd ta vphipgaph
rdbdfjxtgp, hxcd ta hpqtgaph qxtc vphipg. Pa rpqpaatgd edqgt cd at fjtsp
digd rpbxcd epgp bdhigpg fjt th rpqpaatgd hxcd ta st ap kxgijs, hxtcsd
pupqat, qxtc rgxpsd, rdgiéh n rdbtsxsd, n duxrxdhd; cd hdqtgqxd, cd
pggdvpcit, cd bjgbjgpsdg, n, hdqgt idsd, rpgxipixkd; fjt rdc sdh bpgpktsíh
fjt rdc ácxbd patvgt sé pa edqgt ht bdhigpgá ipc axqtgpa rdbd ta fjt p
rpbepcp wtgxsp sp axbdhcp, n cd wpqgá fjxtc at ktp psdgcpsd st aph
gtutgxsph kxgijsth fjt, pjcfjt cd at rdcdorp, styt st yjovpgat n itctgat
edg st qjtcp rphip, n ta cd htgad htgíp bxapvgd; n hxtbegt ap papqpcop ujt
egtbxd st ap kxgijs, n adh kxgijdhdh cd ejtstc stypg st htg papqpsdh. Sdh
rpbxcdh wpn, wxyph, edg sdcst ejtstc xg adh wdbqgth p aatvpg p htg gxrdh n
wdcgpsdh: ta jcd th ta st aph atigph; digd, ta st aph pgbph. Nd itcvd báh
pgbph fjt atigph, n cprí, htvúc bt xcraxcd p aph pgbph, stqpyd st ap
xcuajtcrxp sta eapctip Bpgit; phí fjt, rphx bt th udgodhd htvjxg edg hj
rpbxcd, n edg éa itcvd st xg p ethpg st idsd ta bjcsd, n htgá tc qpast
rpchpgdh tc etghjpsxgbt p fjt cd fjxtgp nd ad fjt adh rxtadh fjxtgtc, ap
udgijcp dgstcp n ap gpoóc exst, n, hdqgt idsd, bx kdajcips sthtp. Ejth rdc
hpqtg, rdbd hé, adh xccjbtgpqath igpqpydh fjt hdc pctydh pa pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp, hé ipbqxéc adh xcuxcxidh qxtcth fjt ht parpcopc rdc taap; n hé
fjt ap htcsp st ap kxgijs th bjn thigtrwp, n ta rpbxcd sta kxrxd, pcrwd n
theprxdhd; n hé fjt hjh uxcth n epgpstgdh hdc sxutgtcith, edgfjt ta sta
kxrxd, sxapipsd n theprxdhd, prpqp tc ap bjtgit, n ta st ap kxgijs, pcvdhid
n igpqpydhd, prpqp tc kxsp, n cd tc kxsp fjt ht prpqp, hxcd tc ap fjt cd
itcsgá uxc; n hé, rdbd sxrt ta vgpc edtip rphitaapcd cjthigd, fjt

Edg thiph phetgtoph ht rpbxcp

st ap xcbdgipaxsps pa paid phxtcid,

sd cjcrp pggxqp fjxtc st paaí straxcp.

-¡Pn, sthsxrwpsp st bí -sxyd ap hdqgxcp-, fjt ipbqxéc bx htñdg th edtip!.
Idsd ad hpqt, idsd ad parpcop: nd pedhipgé fjt hx fjxhxtgp htg paqpñxa, fjt
hjextgp upqgxrpg jcp rphp rdbd jcp ypjap.

Nd it egdbtid, hdqgxcp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hx thidh etchpbxtcidh
rpqpaatgthrdh cd bt aatkphtc igph hí idsdh adh htcixsdh, fjt cd wpqgíp rdhp
fjt nd cd wxrxtht, cx rjgxdhxsps fjt cd hpaxtht st bxh bpcdh, thetrxpabtcit
ypjaph n epaxaadh st sxtcith.

P thit ixtbed, aapbpgdc p ap ejtgip, n, egtvjcipcsd fjxéc aapbpqp,
gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop fjt éa tgp; n, petcph at wjqd rdcdrxsd ta pbp,
rjpcsd rdggxó p thrdcstght edg cd ktgat: ipcid at pqdggtríp. Pqgxóat ap
hdqgxcp, hpaxó p gtrtqxgat rdc adh qgpodh pqxtgidh hj htñdg sdc Fjxydit, n
tcrtggágdcht adh sdh tc hj pedhtcid, sdcst ijkxtgdc digd rdadfjxd, fjt cd
at wprt ktcipyp ta ephpsd.





Rpeíijad KXX. St ad fjt ephó sdc Fjxydit rdc hj thrjstgd, rdc digdh
hjrthdh upbdhíhxbdh


Petcph kxd ta pbp fjt Hpcrwd Epcop ht tcrtggpqp rdc hj htñdg, rjpcsd sxd tc
ap rjtcip st hjh igpidh; n, xbpvxcpcsd fjt st pfjtaap rdchjaip wpqíp st
hpaxg ap gthdajrxóc st hj itgrtgp hpaxsp n idbpcsd hj bpcid, idsp aatcp st
rdcvdyp n ethpsjbqgt, ht ujt p qjhrpg pa qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd,
epgtrxécsdat fjt, edg htg qxtc wpqapsd n pbxvd ugthrd st hj htñdg, at
edsgíp etghjpsxg p fjt stypht ipc sthkpgxpsd egdeóhxid.

Wpaaóat ephtácsdht edg ta epixd st hj rphp, n, kxécsdat, ht styó rptg pcit
hjh exth, igphjspcsd n rdcvdydhp. Rjpcsd ap kxd Rpggphrd rdc bjthigph ipc
sdadgxsph n hdqgthpaipsph, at sxyd:

-¿Fjé th thid, htñdgp pbp? ¿Fjé at wp prdcitrxsd, fjt epgtrt fjt ht at
fjxtgt pggpcrpg ta pabp?

-Cd th cpsp, htñdg Hpchóc bíd, hxcd fjt bx pbd ht hpat; ¡háatht hxc sjsp!

-N ¿edg sócst ht hpat, htñdgp? -egtvjció Hpchóc-. ¿Wáhtat gdid pavjcp epgit
st hj rjtged?

-Cd ht hpat -gthedcsxó taap-, hxcd edg ap ejtgip st hj adrjgp. Fjxtgd
strxg, htñdg qprwxaatg st bx ácxbp, fjt fjxtgt hpaxg digp kto, fjt rdc éhip
htgá ap itgrtgp, p qjhrpg edg tht bjcsd ad fjt éa aapbp ktcijgph, fjt nd cd
ejtsd tcitcstg róbd ath sp thit cdbqgt. Ap kto egxbtgp cdh at kdakxtgdc
pigpkthpsd hdqgt jc yjbtcid, bdaxsd p epadh. Ap htvjcsp kxcd tc jc rpggd st
qjtnth, btixsd n tcrtggpsd tc jcp ypjap, psdcst éa ht spqp p tcitcstg fjt
thipqp tcrpcipsd; n ktcíp ipa ta igxhit, fjt cd at rdcdrxtgp ap bpsgt fjt
at epgxó: uaprd, pbpgxaad, adh dydh wjcsxsdh tc adh úaixbdh rpbpgpcrwdcth
sta rtatqgd, fjt, epgp wpqtgat st kdaktg pavúc ipcid tc hí, vphié báh st
htxhrxtcidh wjtkdh, rdbd ad hpqt Sxdh n idsd ta bjcsd, n bxh vpaaxcph, fjt
cd bt stypgpc btcixg.

-Thd rgtd nd bjn qxtc -gthedcsxó ta qprwxaatg-; fjt taaph hdc ipc qjtcph,
ipc vdgsph n ipc qxtc rgxpsph, fjt cd sxgác jcp rdhp edg digp, hx
gtktciphtc. Tc tutrid, htñdgp pbp: ¿cd wpn digp rdhp, cx wp hjrtsxsd digd
sthbác pavjcd, hxcd ta fjt ht itbt fjt fjxtgt wprtg ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit?

-Cd, htñdg -gthedcsxó taap.

-Ejth cd itcvp etcp -gthedcsxó ta qprwxaatg-, hxcd kánpht tc wdgp qjtcp p
hj rphp, n iécvpbt pstgtopsd st pabdgopg pavjcp rdhp rpaxtcit, n, st
rpbxcd, kpnp gtopcsd ap dgprxóc st Hpcip Pedadcxp hx th fjt ap hpqt, fjt nd
xgé ajtvd paaá, n ktgá bpgpkxaaph.

-¡Rjxipsp st bí! -gteaxró ta pbp-; ¿ap dgprxóc st Hpcip Pedadcxp sxrt
kjthigp btgrts fjt gtrt?: thd ujtgp hx bx pbd ad wjqxtgp st aph bjtaph,
etgd cd ad wp hxcd st adh rphrdh.

-Nd hé ad fjt sxvd, htñdgp pbp: kánpht n cd ht edcvp p sxhejipg rdcbxvd,
ejth hpqt fjt hdn qprwxaatg edg Hpapbpcrp, fjt cd wpn báh fjt qprwxaatpg
-gthedcsxó Rpggphrd.

N rdc thid, ht ujt ta pbp, n ta qprwxaatg ujt ajtvd p qjhrpg pa rjgp, p
rdbjcxrpg rdc éa ad fjt ht sxgá p hj ixtbed.

Tc ta fjt thijkxtgdc tcrtggpsdh sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, ephpgdc aph gpodcth
fjt rdc bjrwp ejcijpaxsps n ktgspstgp gtaprxóc rjtcip ap wxhidgxp.

Sxyd Hpcrwd p hj pbd:

-Htñdg, np nd itcvd gtajrxsp p bx bjytg p fjt bt styt xg rdc kjthigp btgrts
psdcst fjxhxtgt aatkpgbt.

-Gtsjrxsp wph st strxg, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cd gtajrxsp.

-Jcp d sdh ktrth -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, wt hjeaxrpsd p
kjthigp btgrts fjt cd bt tbxtcst adh kdrpqadh, hx th fjt tcixtcst ad fjt
fjxtgd strxg tc taadh, n fjt, rjpcsd cd adh tcixtcsp, sxvp: ''Hpcrwd, d
sxpqad, cd it tcixtcsd''; n hx nd cd bt strapgpgt, tcidcrth edsgá
tbtcspgbt; fjt nd hdn ipc uórxa...

-Cd it tcixtcsd, Hpcrwd -sxyd ajtvd sdc Fjxydit-, ejth cd hé fjé fjxtgt
strxg hdn ipc uórxa.

-Ipc uórxa fjxtgt strxg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- hdn ipc phí.

-Btcdh it tcixtcsd pvdgp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

-Ejth hx cd bt ejtst tcitcstg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cd hé róbd ad sxvp: cd hé
báh, n Sxdh htp rdcbxvd.

-Np, np rpxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- tc taad: iú fjxtgth strxg fjt tgth
ipc sórxa, qapcsd n bpñtgd fjt idbpgáh ad fjt nd it sxytgt, n ephpgáh edg
ad fjt it tchtñpgt.

-Pedhipgé nd -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt sthst ta tbegxcrxexd bt rpaó n bt tcitcsxó,
hxcd fjt fjxhd ijgqpgbt edg dígbt strxg digph sdrxtciph epidrwpsph.

-Edsgá htg -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. N, tc tutrid, ¿fjé sxrt Itgthp?

-Itgthp sxrt -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt pit qxtc bx stsd rdc kjthigp btgrts, n fjt
wpqatc rpgiph n rpaatc qpgqph, edgfjt fjxtc sthipyp cd qpgpyp, ejth báh
kpat jc idbp fjt sdh it spgé. N nd sxvd fjt ta rdchtyd st ap bjytg th edrd,
n ta fjt cd at idbp th adrd.

-N nd ad sxvd ipbqxéc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Strxs, Hpcrwd pbxvd; ephá
pstapcit, fjt wpqaáxh wdn st etgaph.

-Th ta rphd -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt, rdbd kjthigp btgrts btydg hpqt, idsdh
thipbdh hjytidh p ap bjtgit, n fjt wdn hdbdh n bpñpcp cd, n fjt ipc egthid
ht kp ta rdgstgd rdbd ta rpgctgd, n fjt cpsxt ejtst egdbtitght tc thit
bjcsd báh wdgph st kxsp st aph fjt Sxdh fjxhxtgt spgat, edgfjt ap bjtgit th
hdgsp, n, rjpcsd aatvp p aapbpg p aph ejtgiph st cjthigp kxsp, hxtbegt kp
stegxthp n cd ap wpgác stitctg cx gjtvdh, cx ujtgoph, cx rteigdh, cx
bxigph, htvúc th eúqaxrp kdo n upbp, n htvúc cdh ad sxrtc edg thdh
eúaexidh.

-Idsd thd th ktgsps -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd cd hé sócst kph p epgpg.

-Kdn p epgpg -sxyd Hpcrwd- tc fjt kjthp btgrts bt htñpat hpapgxd rdcdrxsd
st ad fjt bt wp st spg rpsp bth ta ixtbed fjt at hxgkxtgt, n fjt ta ipa
hpapgxd ht bt epvjt st hj wprxtcsp; fjt cd fjxtgd thipg p btgrtsth, fjt
aatvpc ipgst, d bpa, d cjcrp; rdc ad bíd bt pnjst Sxdh. Tc uxc, nd fjxtgd
hpqtg ad fjt vpcd, edrd d bjrwd fjt htp, fjt hdqgt jc wjtkd edct ap
vpaaxcp, n bjrwdh edrdh wprtc jc bjrwd, n bxtcigph ht vpcp pavd cd ht
extgst cpsp. Ktgsps htp fjt hx hjrtsxtht, ad rjpa cx ad rgtd cx ad thetgd,
fjt kjthp btgrts bt sxtht ap íchjap fjt bt ixtct egdbtixsp, cd hdn ipc
xcvgpid, cx aatkd aph rdhph ipc edg adh rpqdh, fjt cd fjtggé fjt ht pegtrxt
ad fjt bdcipgt ap gtcip st ap ipa íchjap, n ht sthrjtcit st bx hpapgxd vpip
edg rpcixsps.

-Hpcrwd pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, p aph ktrth, ipc qjtcp hjtat htg jcp
vpip rdbd jcp gpip.

-Np tcixtcsd -sxyd Hpcrwd-: nd pedhipgé fjt wpqíp st strxg gpip, n cd vpip;
etgd cd xbedgip cpsp, ejth kjthp btgrts bt wp tcitcsxsd.

-N ipc tcitcsxsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt wt etctigpsd ad úaixbd st ijh
etchpbxtcidh, n hé pa qapcrd fjt ixgph rdc aph xcjbtgpqath hptiph st ijh
gtugpcth. Bxgp, Hpcrwd: nd qxtc it htñpapgíp hpapgxd, hx wjqxtgp wpaapsd tc
pavjcp st aph wxhidgxph st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tytbead fjt bt
sthrjqgxtht n bdhigpht, edg pavúc etfjtñd gthfjxrxd, fjé th ad fjt hdaípc
vpcpg rpsp bth, d rpsp pñd; etgd nd wt atísd idsph d aph báh st hjh
wxhidgxph, n cd bt prjtgsd wpqtg atísd fjt cxcvúc rpqpaatgd pcspcit wpnp
htñpapsd rdcdrxsd hpapgxd p hj thrjstgd. Hóad hé fjt idsdh htgkípc p
btgrts, n fjt, rjpcsd btcdh ht ad etchpqpc, hx p hjh htñdgth ath wpqíp
rdggxsd qxtc ap hjtgit, ht wpaapqpc egtbxpsdh rdc jcp íchjap, d rdc digp
rdhp tfjxkpatcit, n, edg ad btcdh, fjtspqpc rdc iíijad n htñdgíp. Hx rdc
thiph thetgpcoph n psxipbtcidh kdh, Hpcrwd, vjhiáxh st kdaktg p htgkxgbt,
htp tc qjtcp wdgp: fjt etchpg fjt nd wt st hprpg st hjh iégbxcdh n fjxrxdh
ap pcixvjp jhpcop st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit th etchpg tc ad thrjhpsd. Phí
fjt, Hpcrwd bíd, kdaktdh p kjthigp rphp, n strapgps p kjthigp Itgthp bx
xcitcrxóc; n hx taap vjhipgt n kdh vjhiágtsth st thipg p btgrts rdcbxvd,
qtct fjxstb; n hx cd, ipc pbxvdh rdbd st pcith; fjt hx pa epadbpg cd at
upaip rtqd, cd at upaipgác epadbph. N psktgixs, wxyd, fjt kpat báh qjtcp
thetgpcop fjt gjxc edhthxóc, n qjtcp fjtyp fjt bpap epvp. Wpqad st thip
bpctgp, Hpcrwd, edg spgdh p tcitcstg fjt ipbqxéc rdbd kdh hé nd pggdypg
gtugpcth rdbd aadkxsdh. N, uxcpabtcit, fjxtgd strxg, n dh sxvd, fjt hx cd
fjtgéxh ktcxg p btgrts rdcbxvd n rdggtg ap hjtgit fjt nd rdggxtgt, fjt Sxdh
fjtst rdc kdh n dh wpvp jc hpcid; fjt p bí cd bt upaipgác thrjstgdh báh
dqtsxtcith, báh hdaírxidh, n cd ipc tbeprwpsdh cx ipc wpqapsdgth rdbd kdh.

Rjpcsd Hpcrwd dnó ap uxgbt gthdajrxóc st hj pbd ht at pcjqaó ta rxtad n ht
at rpntgdc aph paph sta rdgpoóc, edgfjt itcíp rgtísd fjt hj htñdg cd ht
xgíp hxc éa edg idsdh adh wpqtgth sta bjcsd; n phí, thipcsd hjhetchd n
etchpixkd, tcigó Hpchóc Rpggphrd n ap hdqgxcp, sthtdhdh st díg rdc fjé
gpodcth etghjpsíp p hj htñdg fjt cd idgcpght p qjhrpg aph pktcijgph. Aatvó
Hpchóc, hdrpggóc upbdhd, n, pqgpoácsdat rdbd ap kto egxbtgp n rdc kdo
atkpcipsp, at sxyd:

-¡Dw uadg st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp; dw ajo gtheapcstrxtcit st aph pgbph; dw
wdcdg n thetyd st ap cprxóc thepñdap! Eatvp p Sxdh idsdedstgdhd, sdcst báh
apgvpbtcit ht rdcixtct, fjt ap etghdcp d etghdcph fjt ejhxtgtc xbetsxbtcid
n thidgqpgtc ij itgrtgp hpaxsp, fjt cd ap wpaatc tc ta apqtgxcid st hjh
sthtdh, cx ypbáh ht ath rjbeap ad fjt bpa sthtpgtc.

N, kdakxécsdht pa pbp, at sxyd:

-Qxtc ejtst ap htñdgp pbp cd gtopg báh ap dgprxóc st Hpcip Pedadcxp, fjt nd
hé fjt th stitgbxcprxóc egtrxhp st aph thutgph fjt ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit
kjtakp p tytrjipg hjh paidh n cjtkdh etchpbxtcidh, n nd tcrpgvpgíp bjrwd bx
rdcrxtcrxp hx cd xcixbpht n etghjpsxtht p thit rpqpaatgd fjt cd itcvp báh
ixtbed tcrdvxsp n stitcxsp ap ujtgop st hj kpatgdhd qgpod n ap qdcsps st hj
ácxbd kpatciíhxbd, edgfjt stugpjsp rdc hj ipgspcop ta stgtrwd st adh
ijtgidh, ta pbepgd st adh wjégupcdh, ap wdcgp st aph sdcrtaaph, ta upkdg st
aph kxjsph n ta pggxbd st aph rphpsph, n digph rdhph sthit ypto, fjt idrpc,
pipñtc, stetcstc n hdc pctyph p ap dgstc st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit. ¡Tp,
htñdg sdc Fjxydit bíd, wtgbdhd n qgpkd, pcith wdn fjt bpñpcp ht edcvp
kjthigp btgrts n hj vgpcstop tc rpbxcd; n hx pavjcp rdhp upaipgt epgp
edctgat tc tytrjrxóc, pfjí thidn nd epgp hjeaxgap rdc bx etghdcp n
wprxtcsp; n hx ujtgt ctrthxsps htgkxg p ij bpvcxuxrtcrxp st thrjstgd, ad
itcsgé p utaxríhxbp ktcijgp!

P thip hpoóc, sxyd sdc Fjxydit, kdakxécsdht p Hpcrwd:

-¿Cd it sxyt nd, Hpcrwd, fjt bt wpqípc st hdqgpg thrjstgdh? Bxgp fjxéc ht
dugtrt p htgad, hxcd ta xcpjsxid qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, etgetijd
igphijad n gtvdrxypsdg st adh epixdh st aph thrjtaph hpabpcixrtchth, hpcd
st hj etghdcp, ávxa st hjh bxtbqgdh, rpaapsd, hjugxsdg phí sta rpadg rdbd
sta ugíd, phí st ap wpbqgt rdbd st ap hts, rdc idsph pfjtaaph epgith fjt ht
gtfjxtgtc epgp htg thrjstgd st jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit. Etgd cd etgbxip ta
rxtad fjt, edg htvjxg bx vjhid, sthypggtit n fjxtqgt ap rdajcp st aph
atigph n ta kphd st aph rxtcrxph, n igdcfjt ap epabp tbxctcit st aph qjtcph
n axqtgpath pgith. Fjéstht ta cjtkd Hpchóc tc hj epigxp, n, wdcgácsdap,
wdcgt yjcipbtcit aph rpcph st hjh pcrxpcdh epsgth; fjt nd rdc rjpafjxtg
thrjstgd thipgé rdcitcid, np fjt Hpcrwd cd ht sxvcp st ktcxg rdcbxvd.

-Hí sxvcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, tcitgctrxsd n aatcdh st aávgxbph adh dydh; n
egdhxvjxó-: Cd ht sxgá edg bí, htñdg bíd: ta epc rdbxsd n ap rdbepñíp
sthwtrwp; hí, fjt cd ktcvd nd st pavjcp parjgcxp sthpvgpstrxsp, fjt np hpqt
idsd ta bjcsd, n thetrxpabtcit bx ejtqad, fjxéc ujtgdc adh Epcoph, st fjxtc
nd strxtcsd, n báh, fjt itcvd rdcdrxsd n rpapsd edg bjrwph qjtcph dqgph, n
edg báh qjtcph epapqgph, ta sthtd fjt kjthigp btgrts ixtct st wprtgbt
btgrts; n hx bt wt ejthid tc rjtciph st ipcid báh rjpcid prtgrp st bx
hpapgxd, wp hxsd edg rdbeaprtg p bx bjytg; ap rjpa, rjpcsd idbp ap bpcd p
etghjpsxg jcp rdhp, cd wpn bpod fjt ipcid pegxtit adh pgdh st jcp rjqp rdbd
taap pegxtip p fjt ht wpvp ad fjt fjxtgt; etgd, tc tutid, ta wdbqgt wp st
htg wdbqgt, n ap bjytg, bjytg; n, ejth nd hdn wdbqgt sdcstfjxtgp, fjt cd ad
ejtsd ctvpg, ipbqxéc ad fjxtgd htg tc bx rphp, etht p fjxtc ethpgt; n phí,
cd wpn báh fjt wprtg, hxcd fjt kjthigp btgrts dgstct hj ithipbtcid rdc hj
rdsxrxad, tc bdsd fjt cd ht ejtsp gtkdarpg, n edcvábdcdh ajtvd tc rpbxcd,
edgfjt cd epstorp ta pabp sta htñdg Hpchóc, fjt sxrt fjt hj rdcrxtcrxp at
axip fjt etghjpsp p kjthigp btgrts p hpaxg kto itgrtgp edg tht bjcsd; n nd
st cjtkd bt dugtord p htgkxg p kjthigp btgrts uxta n atvpabtcit, ipc qxtc n
btydg fjt rjpcidh thrjstgdh wpc htgkxsd p rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tc adh
ephpsdh n egthtcith ixtbedh.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó ta qprwxaatg st díg ta iégbxcd n bdsd st wpqapg st Hpcrwd
Epcop; fjt, ejthid fjt wpqíp atísd ap egxbtgp wxhidgxp st hj htñdg, cjcrp
rgtnó fjt tgp ipc vgprxdhd rdbd paaí at excipc; etgd, dnécsdat strxg pwdgp
ithipbtcid n rdsxrxad fjt cd ht ejtsp gtkdarpg, tc ajvpg st ithipbtcid n
rdsxrxad fjt cd ht ejtsp gtkdrpg, rgtnó idsd ad fjt séa wpqíp atísd, n
rdcuxgbóad edg jcd st adh báh hdatcth btcitrpidh st cjthigdh hxvadh; n sxyd
tcigt hí fjt ipath sdh adrdh rdbd pbd n bdod cd ht wpqgípc kxhid tc ta
bjcsd.

Uxcpabtcit, sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd ht pqgpopgdc n fjtspgdc pbxvdh, n rdc
epgtrtg n qtcteaárxid sta vgpc Rpggphrd, fjt edg tcidcrth tgp hj dgárjad,
ht dgstcó fjt st paaí p igth síph ujtht hj epgixsp; tc adh rjpath wpqgíp
ajvpg st pstgtopg ad ctrthpgxd epgp ta kxpyt, n st qjhrpg jcp rtapsp st
tcrpyt, fjt tc idsph bpctgph sxyd sdc Fjxydit fjt ap wpqíp st aatkpg.
Dugtrxóhtap Hpchóc, edgfjt hpqíp cd ht ap ctvpgíp jc pbxvd hjnd fjt ap
itcíp, ejthid fjt thipqp báh thrjgp edg ta dgíc n ta bdwd fjt rapgp n
axbexp edg ta itghd prtgd.

Aph bpasxrxdcth fjt aph sdh, pbp n hdqgxcp, trwpgdc pa qprwxaatg cd
ijkxtgdc rjtcid: bthpgdc hjh rpqtaadh, pgpñpgdc hjh gdhigdh, n, pa bdsd st
aph tcstrwpstgph fjt ht jhpqpc, apbtcipqpc ap epgixsp rdbd hx ujtgp ap
bjtgit st hj htñdg. Ta sthxvcd fjt ijkd Hpchóc, epgp etghjpsxgat p fjt digp
kto hpaxtht, ujt wprtg ad fjt pstapcit rjtcip ap wxhidgxp, idsd edg rdchtyd
sta rjgp n sta qpgqtgd, rdc fjxtc éa pcith ad wpqíp rdbjcxrpsd.

Tc gthdajrxóc, tc pfjtaadh igth síph sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd ht prdbdspgdc st
ad fjt ath epgtrxó rdcktcxgath; n, wpqxtcsd peaprpsd Hpcrwd p hj bjytg, n
sdc Fjxydit p hj hdqgxcp n p hj pbp, pa pcdrwtrtg, hxc fjt cpsxt ad kxtht,
hxcd ta qprwxaatg, fjt fjxhd prdbepñpgath btsxp atvjp sta ajvpg, ht
ejhxtgdc tc rpbxcd sta Idqdhd: sdc Fjxydit hdqgt hj qjtc Gdrxcpcit, n
Hpcrwd hdqgt hj pcixvjd gjrxd, egdktísph aph paudgyph st rdhph idrpcith p
ap qjróaxrp, n ap qdahp st sxctgdh fjt at sxd sdc Fjxydit epgp ad fjt ht
dugtrxtht. Pqgpoóat Hpchóc, n hjeaxróat at pkxhpht st hj qjtcp d bpap
hjtgit, epgp patvgpght rdc éhip d tcigxhitrtght rdc pfjéaap, rdbd aph atnth
st hj pbxhips etsípc. Egdbtixóhtad sdc Fjxydit, sxd Hpchóc ap kjtaip p hj
ajvpg, n adh sdh idbpgdc ap st ap vgpc rxjsps sta Idqdhd.





Rpeíijad KXXX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ad fjt at hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit, ntcsd p ktg
hj htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd


''¡Qtcsxid htp ta edstgdhd Paá! -sxrt Wpbtit Qtctcvtax pa rdbxtcod sthit
dripkd rpeíijad-. ¡Qtcsxid htp Paá!'', gtexit igth ktrth; n sxrt fjt sp
thiph qtcsxrxdcth edg ktg fjt ixtct np tc rpbepñp p sdc Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd,
n fjt adh atidgth st hj pvgpspqat wxhidgxp ejtstc wprtg rjtcip fjt sthst
thit ejcid rdbxtcopc aph wpopñph n sdcpxgth st sdc Fjxydit n st hj
thrjstgd; etghjástath fjt ht ath dakxstc aph ephpsph rpqpaatgíph sta
xcvtcxdhd wxspavd, n edcvpc adh dydh tc aph fjt thiác edg ktcxg, fjt sthst
pvdgp tc ta rpbxcd sta Idqdhd rdbxtcopc, rdbd aph digph rdbtcopgdc tc adh
rpbedh st Bdcixta, n cd th bjrwd ad fjt exst epgp ipcid rdbd éa egdbtit; n
phí egdhxvjt sxrxtcsd:

Hdadh fjtspgdc sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, n, petcph ht wjqd pepgipsd Hpchóc,
rjpcsd rdbtcoó p gtaxcrwpg Gdrxcpcit n p hdhexgpg ta gjrxd, fjt st
tcigpbqdh, rpqpaatgd n thrjstgd, ujt itcxsd p qjtcp htñpa n edg utaxríhxbd
pvütgd; pjcfjt, hx ht wp st rdcipg ap ktgsps, báh ujtgdc adh hdhexgdh n
gtqjocdh sta gjrxd fjt adh gtaxcrwdh sta gdríc, st sdcst rdaxvxó Hpcrwd fjt
hj ktcijgp wpqíp st hdqgtejypg n edctght tcrxbp st ap st hj htñdg,
ujcsácsdht cd hé hx tc phigdadvíp yjsxrxpgxp fjt éa ht hpqíp, ejthid fjt ap
wxhidgxp cd ad strapgp; hóad at dntgdc strxg fjt, rjpcsd igdetopqp d rpíp,
ht wdavpgp cd wpqtg hpaxsd st rphp, edgfjt sta igdetopg d rptg cd ht hprpqp
digp rdhp hxcd ta opepid gdid d aph rdhixaaph fjtqgpsph; n, pjcfjt idcid,
cd pcspqp tc thid bjn ujtgp st rpbxcd. Síydat sdc Fjxydit:

-Hpcrwd pbxvd, ap cdrwt ht cdh kp tcigpcsd p báh pcspg, n rdc báh thrjgxsps
st ap fjt wpqípbdh btcthitg epgp parpcopg p ktg rdc ta síp pa Idqdhd,
psdcst itcvd stitgbxcpsd st xg pcith fjt tc digp pktcijgp bt edcvp, n paaí
idbpgé ap qtcsxrxóc n qjtcp axrtcrxp st ap hxc epg Sjarxctp, rdc ap rjpa
axrtcrxp extchd n itcvd edg rxtgid st prpqpg n spg utaxrt rxbp p idsp
etaxvgdhp pktcijgp, edgfjt cxcvjcp rdhp sthip kxsp wprt báh kpaxtcith p adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt ktght upkdgtrxsdh st hjh spbph.

-Nd phí ad rgtd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; etgd itcvd edg sxuxrjaidhd fjt kjthigp
btgrts ejtsp wpqapgap cx ktght rdc taap, tc epgit, p ad btcdh, fjt ejtsp
gtrtqxg hj qtcsxrxóc, hx np cd ht ap trwp sthst aph qpgsph sta rdggpa, edg
sdcst nd ap kx ap kto egxbtgp, rjpcsd at aatké ap rpgip sdcst xqpc aph
cjtkph st aph hpcstrth n adrjgph fjt kjthigp btgrts fjtspqp wprxtcsd tc ta
rdgpoóc st Hxtggp Bdgtcp.

-¿Qpgsph st rdggpa ht it pcidypgdc pfjéaaph, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-,
psdcst d edg sdcst kxhit pfjtaap ypbáh qphipcitbtcit papqpsp vtcixatop n
wtgbdhjgp? Cd stqípc st htg hxcd vpatgíph d rdggtsdgth, d adcyph, d rdbd
aph aapbpc, st gxrdh n gtpath epaprxdh.

-Idsd ejsd htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd p bí qpgsph bt epgtrxtgdc, hx cd th
fjt hdn upaid st btbdgxp.

-Rdc idsd thd, kpbdh paaá, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt rdbd nd ap
ktp, thd ht bt sp fjt htp edg qpgsph fjt edg ktcipcph, d edg gthfjxrxdh, d
ktgyph st ypgsxcth; fjt rjpafjxtg gpnd fjt sta hda st hj qtaatop aatvjt p
bxh dydh pajbqgpgá bx tcitcsxbxtcid n udgipatrtgá bx rdgpoóc, st bdsd fjt
fjtst úcxrd n hxc xvjpa tc ap sxhrgtrxóc n tc ap kpatciíp.

-Ejth tc ktgsps, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt rjpcsd nd kx tht hda st ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt cd thipqp ipc rapgd, fjt ejsxtht trwpg st
hí gpndh pavjcdh, n stqxó st htg fjt, rdbd hj btgrts thipqp pwtrwpcsd pfjta
igxvd fjt sxyt, ta bjrwd edakd fjt hprpqp ht at ejhd rdbd cjqt pcit ta
gdhigd n ht at thrjgtrxó.

-¡Fjt idspkíp sph, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, tc strxg, tc etchpg, tc rgttg
n tc edguxpg fjt bx htñdgp Sjarxctp pwtrwpqp igxvd, hxtcsd thd jc btcthitg
n tytgrxrxd fjt kp sthkxpsd st idsd ad fjt wprtc n stqtc wprtg aph etghdcph
egxcrxepath fjt thiác rdchixijxsph n vjpgspsph epgp digdh tytgrxrxdh n
tcigtitcxbxtcidh, fjt bjthigpc p ixgd st qpaathip hj egxcrxepaxsps...! Bpa
ht it prjtgspc p ix, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, pfjtaadh ktghdh st cjthigd edtip sdcst
cdh excip aph apqdgth fjt wprípc paaá tc hjh bdgpsph st rgxhipa pfjtaaph
rjpigd cxcuph fjt sta Ipyd pbpsd hprpgdc aph rpqtoph, n ht htcipgdc p
apqgpg tc ta egpsd ktgst pfjtaaph gxrph itaph fjt paaí ta xcvtcxdhd edtip
cdh sthrgxqt, fjt idsph tgpc st dgd, hxgvd n etgaph rdcithiph n ityxsph. N
sthip bpctgp stqíp st htg ta st bx htñdgp rjpcsd iú ap kxhit; hxcd fjt ap
tckxsxp fjt pavúc bpa tcrpcipsdg stqt st itctg p bxh rdhph, idsph aph fjt
bt wpc st spg vjhid igjtrp n kjtakt tc sxutgtcith uxvjgph fjt taaph ixtctc;
n phí, itbd fjt, tc pfjtaap wxhidgxp fjt sxrtc fjt pcsp xbegthp st bxh
wpopñph, hx edg ktcijgp wp hxsd hj pjidg pavúc hpqxd bx tctbxvd, wpqgá
ejthid jcph rdhph edg digph, btorapcsd rdc jcp ktgsps bxa btcixgph,
sxktgixécsdht p rdcipg digph prrxdcth ujtgp st ad fjt gtfjxtgt ap
rdcixcjprxóc st jcp ktgspstgp wxhidgxp. ¡Dw tckxsxp, gpío st xcuxcxidh
bpath n rpgrdbp st aph kxgijsth! Idsdh adh kxrxdh, Hpcrwd, igptc jc cd hé
fjé st statxit rdchxvd, etgd ta st ap tckxsxp cd igpt hxcd sxhvjhidh,
gpcrdgth n gpqxph.

-Thd th ad fjt nd sxvd ipbqxéc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n extchd fjt tc thp
atntcsp d wxhidgxp fjt cdh sxyd ta qprwxaatg Rpggphrd fjt st cdhdigdh wpqíp
kxhid stqt st pcspg bx wdcgp p rdrwt prá, rxcrwpsd, n, rdbd sxrtc, pa
thigxrdit, pfjí n paaí, qpggxtcsd aph rpaath. Ejth, p ut st qjtcd, fjt cd
wt sxrwd nd bpa st cxcvúc tcrpcipsdg, cx itcvd ipcidh qxtcth fjt ejtsp htg
tckxsxpsd; qxtc th ktgsps fjt hdn pavd bpaxrxdhd, n fjt itcvd bxh rxtgidh
phdbdh st qtaaprd, etgd idsd ad rjqgt n ipep ap vgpc rpep st ap hxbeatop
bíp, hxtbegt cpijgpa n cjcrp pgixuxrxdhp. N rjpcsd digp rdhp cd ijkxtht
hxcd ta rgttg, rdbd hxtbegt rgtd, uxgbt n ktgspstgpbtcit tc Sxdh n tc idsd
pfjtaad fjt ixtct n rgtt ap Hpcip Xvathxp Rpióaxrp Gdbpcp, n ta htg tctbxvd
bdgipa, rdbd ad hdn, st adh yjsídh, stqípc adh wxhidgxpsdgth itctg
bxhtgxrdgsxp st bí n igpipgbt qxtc tc hjh thrgxidh. Etgd sxvpc ad fjt
fjxhxtgtc; fjt sthcjsd cprí, sthcjsd bt wpaad: cx extgsd cx vpcd; pjcfjt,
edg ktgbt ejthid tc axqgdh n pcspg edg tht bjcsd st bpcd tc bpcd, cd ht bt
sp jc wxvd fjt sxvpc st bí idsd ad fjt fjxhxtgtc.

-Thd bt epgtrt, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, p ad fjt hjrtsxó p jc upbdhd
edtip sthidh ixtbedh, ta rjpa, wpqxtcsd wtrwd jcp bpaxrxdhp háixgp rdcigp
idsph aph spbph rdgithpcph, cd ejhd cx cdbqgó tc taap p jcp spbp fjt ht
edsíp sjspg hx ad tgp d cd; ap rjpa, kxtcsd fjt cd thipqp tc ap axhip st
aph stbáh, ht fjtyó pa edtip, sxrxécsdat fjt fjé wpqíp kxhid tc taap epgp
cd edctgap tc ta cúbtgd st aph digph, n fjt papgvpht ap háixgp, n ap
ejhxtht tc ta tchpcrwt; hx cd, fjt bxgpht epgp ad fjt wpqíp cprxsd. Wíodad
phí ta edtip, n eúhdap rjpa cd sxvpc sjtñph, n taap fjtsó hpixhutrwp, edg
ktght rdc upbp, pjcfjt xcupbt. Ipbqxéc kxtct rdc thid ad fjt rjtcipc st
pfjta ephidg fjt ejhd ujtvd n pqgphó ta itbead upbdhd st Sxpcp, rdcipsd edg
jcp st aph hxtit bpgpkxaaph sta bjcsd, hóad edgfjt fjtspht kxkd hj cdbqgt
tc adh hxvadh ktcxstgdh; n, pjcfjt ht bpcsó fjt cpsxt at cdbqgpht, cx
wxrxtht edg epapqgp d edg thrgxid btcrxóc st hj cdbqgt, edgfjt cd
rdchxvjxtht ta uxc st hj sthtd, idspkíp ht hjed fjt ht aapbpqp Tgóhigpid.
Ipbqxéc pajst p thid ad fjt hjrtsxó pa vgpcst tbetgpsdg Rpgad Fjxcid rdc jc
rpqpaatgd tc Gdbp. Fjxhd ktg ta tbetgpsdg pfjta upbdhd itbead st ap
Gdijcsp, fjt tc ap pcixvütsps ht aapbó ta itbead st idsdh adh sxdhth, n
pwdgp, rdc btydg kdrprxóc, ht aapbp st idsdh adh hpcidh, n th ta tsxuxrxd
fjt báh tcitgd wp fjtspsd st adh fjt paoó ap vtcixaxsps tc Gdbp, n th ta
fjt báh rdchtgkp ap upbp st ap vgpcsxdhxsps n bpvcxuxrtcrxp st hjh
ujcspsdgth: éa th st wtrwjgp st jcp btsxp cpgpcyp, vgpcsíhxbd tc thigtbd,
n thiá bjn rapgd, hxc tcigpgat digp ajo fjt ap fjt at rdcrtst jcp ktcipcp,
d, edg btydg strxg, rapgpqdnp gtsdcsp fjt thiá tc hj rxbp, sthst ap rjpa
bxgpcsd ta tbetgpsdg ta tsxuxrxd, thipqp rdc éa n p hj apsd jc rpqpaatgd
gdbpcd, strapgácsdat adh egxbdgth n hjixatoph st pfjtaap vgpc báfjxcp n
btbdgpqat pgfjxitijgp; n, wpqxécsdht fjxipsd st ap rapgpqdnp, sxyd pa
tbetgpsdg: ''Bxa ktrth, Hprgp Bpythips, bt kxcd sthtd st pqgpopgbt rdc
kjthigp Bpythips n pggdypgbt st pfjtaap rapgpqdnp pqpyd, edg stypg st bí
upbp titgcp tc ta bjcsd''. ''Nd dh pvgpstord -gthedcsxó ta tbetgpsdg- ta cd
wpqtg ejthid ipc bpa etchpbxtcid tc tutid, n st pfjí pstapcit cd dh edcsgé
nd tc drphxóc fjt kdakáxh p wprtg egjtqp st kjthigp atpaips; n phí, dh
bpcsd fjt ypbáh bt wpqaéxh, cx thiéxh sdcst nd thijkxtgt''. N, igph thiph
epapqgph, at wxod jcp vgpc btgrts. Fjxtgd strxg, Hpcrwd, fjt ta sthtd st
parpcopg upbp th prixkd tc vgpc bpctgp. ¿Fjxéc extchph iú fjt pggdyó p
Wdgprxd sta ejtcit pqpyd, pgbpsd st idsph pgbph, tc ap egdujcsxsps sta
Ixqgt? ¿Fjxéc pqgphó ta qgpod n ap bpcd p Bjrxd? ¿Fjxéc xbetaxó p Rjgrxd p
apcopght tc ap egdujcsp hxbp pgsxtcit fjt pepgtrxó tc ap bxips st Gdbp?
¿Fjxéc, rdcigp idsdh adh pvütgdh fjt tc rdcigp ht at wpqípc bdhigpsd, wxod
ephpg ta Gjqxróc p Réhpg? N, rdc tytbeadh báh bdstgcdh, ¿fjxéc qpggtcó adh
cpkídh n styó tc htrd n pxhapsdh adh kpatgdhdh thepñdath vjxpsdh edg ta
rdgithíhxbd Rdgiéh tc ta Cjtkd Bjcsd? Idsph thiph n digph vgpcsth n
sxutgtcith wpopñph hdc, ujtgdc n htgác dqgph st ap upbp, fjt adh bdgipath
sthtpc rdbd egtbxdh n epgit st ap xcbdgipaxsps fjt hjh upbdhdh wtrwdh
btgtrtc, ejthid fjt adh rgxhixpcdh, rpióaxrdh n pcspcith rpqpaatgdh báh
wpqtbdh st pitcstg p ap vadgxp st adh hxvadh ktcxstgdh, fjt th titgcp tc
aph gtvxdcth tiégtph n rtathith, fjt p ap kpcxsps st ap upbp fjt tc thit
egthtcit n prpqpqat hxvad ht parpcop; ap rjpa upbp, edg bjrwd fjt sjgt, tc
uxc ht wp st prpqpg rdc ta bthbd bjcsd, fjt ixtct hj uxc htñpapsd. Phí, ¡dw
Hpcrwd!, fjt cjthigph dqgph cd wpc st hpaxg sta aíbxit fjt cdh ixtct ejthid
ap gtaxvxóc rgxhixpcp, fjt egduthpbdh. Wtbdh st bpipg tc adh vxvpcith p ap
hdqtgqxp; p ap tckxsxp, tc ap vtctgdhxsps n qjtc etrwd; p ap xgp, tc ta
gtedhpsd rdcixctcit n fjxtijs sta ácxbd; p ap vjap n pa hjtñd, tc ta edrd
rdbtg fjt rdbtbdh n tc ta bjrwd ktapg fjt ktapbdh; p ap ajyjgxp n aphrxkxp,
tc ap atpaips fjt vjpgspbdh p aph fjt wtbdh wtrwd htñdgph st cjthigdh
etchpbxtcidh; p ap etgtop, rdc pcspg edg idsph aph epgith sta bjcsd,
qjhrpcsd aph drphxdcth fjt cdh ejtspc wprtg n wpvpc, hdqgt rgxhixpcdh,
upbdhdh rpqpaatgdh. Kth pfjí, Hpcrwd, adh btsxdh edg sdcst ht parpcopc adh
thigtbdh st papqpcoph fjt rdchxvd igpt ap qjtcp upbp.

-Idsd ad fjt kjthigp btgrts wphip pfjí bt wp sxrwd -sxyd Hpcrwd- ad wt
tcitcsxsd bjn qxtc, etgd, rdc idsd thd, fjtggíp fjt kjthigp btgrts bt
hdgqxtht jcp sjsp fjt pvdgp tc thit ejcid bt wp ktcxsd p ap btbdgxp.

-Phdakxtht fjxtgth strxg, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Sx tc qjtc wdgp, fjt
nd gthedcstgé ad fjt hjextgt.

-Sívpbt, htñdg -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd-: thdh Yjaxdh d Pvdhidh, n idsdh thdh
rpqpaatgdh wpopñdhdh fjt wp sxrwd, fjt np hdc bjtgidh, ¿sócst thiác pvdgp?

-Adh vtcixath -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- hxc sjsp thiác tc ta xcuxtgcd; adh
rgxhixpcdh, hx ujtgdc qjtcdh rgxhixpcdh, d thiác tc ta ejgvpidgxd d tc ta
rxtad.

-Thiá qxtc -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd htepbdh pwdgp: thph htejaijgph sdcst thiác
adh rjtgedh sthdh htñdgpodh, ¿ixtctc stapcit st hí aábepgph st eapip, d
thiác psdgcpsph aph epgtsth st hjh rpexaaph st bjatiph, st bdgipyph, st
rpqtaatgph, st extgcph n st dydh st rtgp? N hx sthid cd, ¿st fjé thiác
psdgcpsph?

P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Adh htejargdh st adh vtcixath ujtgdc edg ap bpndg epgit hjcijdhdh itbeadh:
aph rtcxoph sta rjtged st Yjaxd Réhpg ht ejhxtgdc hdqgt jcp exgábxst st
extsgp st sthbthjgpsp vgpcstop, p fjxtc wdn aapbpc tc Gdbp Ap pvjyp st Hpc
Etsgd; pa tbetgpsdg Psgxpcd at hxgkxó st htejaijgp jc rphixaad ipc vgpcst
rdbd jcp qjtcp pastp, p fjxtc aapbpgdc Bdath Wpsgxpcx, fjt pvdgp th ta
rphixaad st Hpciácvta tc Gdbp; ap gtxcp Pgitbxhp htejaió p hj bpgxsd
Bpjhdatd tc jc htejargd fjt ht ijkd edg jcp st aph hxtit bpgpkxaaph sta
bjcsd; etgd cxcvjcp sthiph htejaijgph cx digph bjrwph fjt ijkxtgdc adh
vtcixath ht psdgcpgdc rdc bdgipyph cx rdc digph dugtcsph n htñpath fjt
bdhigphtc htg hpcidh adh fjt tc taaph thipqpc htejaipsdh.

-P thd kdn -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. N sívpbt pvdgp: ¿rjáa th báh: gthjrxipg p jc
bjtgid, d bpipg p jc vxvpcit?

-Ap gthejthip thiá tc ap bpcd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: báh th gthjrxipg p
jc bjtgid.

-Rdvxsd at itcvd -sxyd Hpcrwd-: ajtvd ap upbp sta fjt gthjrxip bjtgidh, sp
kxhip p adh rxtvdh, tcstgtop adh rdydh n sp hpajs p adh tcutgbdh, n stapcit
st hjh htejaijgph pgstc aábepgph, n thiác aatcph hjh rpexaaph st vtcith
stkdiph fjt st gdsxaaph psdgpc hjh gtaxfjxph, btydg upbp htgá, epgp thit n
epgp ta digd hxvad, fjt ap fjt stypgdc n stypgtc rjpcidh tbetgpsdgth
vtcixath n rpqpaatgdh pcspcith wp wpqxsd tc ta bjcsd.

-Ipbqxéc rdcuxthd thp ktgsps -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Ejth thip upbp, thiph vgprxph, thiph egtggdvpixkph, rdbd aapbpc p thid
-gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ixtctc adh rjtgedh n aph gtaxfjxph st adh hpcidh fjt,
rdc pegdqprxóc n axrtcrxp st cjthigp hpcip bpsgt Xvathxp, ixtctc aábepgph,
ktaph, bdgipyph, bjatiph, excijgph, rpqtaatgph, dydh, extgcph, rdc fjt
pjbtcipc ap stkdrxóc n tcvgpcstrtc hj rgxhixpcp upbp. Adh rjtgedh st adh
hpcidh d hjh gtaxfjxph aatkpc adh gtnth hdqgt hjh wdbqgdh, qthpc adh
etspodh st hjh wjthdh, psdgcpc n tcgxfjtrtc rdc taadh hjh dgpidgxdh n hjh
báh egtrxpsdh paipgth...

-¿Fjé fjxtgth fjt xcuxtgp, Hpcrwd, st idsd ad fjt wph sxrwd? -sxyd sdc
Fjxydit.

-Fjxtgd strxg -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt cdh stbdh p htg hpcidh, n parpcopgtbdh báh
qgtktbtcit ap qjtcp upbp fjt egtitcstbdh; n pskxtgip, htñdg, fjt pntg d
pcith st pntg, fjt, htvúc wp edrd ht ejtst strxg sthip bpctgp, rpcdcxopgdc
d qtpixuxrpgdc sdh ugpxatrxidh sthrpaodh, rjnph rpstcph st wxtggd rdc fjt
rtñípc n pidgbtcipqpc hjh rjtgedh ht ixtct pwdgp p vgpc ktcijgp ta qthpgaph
n idrpgaph, n thiác tc báh ktctgprxóc fjt thiá, htvúc sxyt, ap thepsp st
Gdasác tc ap pgbtgíp sta gtn, cjthigd htñdg, fjt Sxdh vjpgst. Phí fjt,
htñdg bíd, báh kpat htg wjbxast ugpxatrxid, st rjpafjxtg dgstc fjt htp,
fjt kpaxtcit n pcspcit rpqpaatgd; bph parpcopc rdc Sxdh sdh sdrtcph st
sxrxeaxcph fjt sdh bxa apcopsph, dgp aph stc p vxvpcith, dgp p kthixvadh d
p tcsgxvdh.

-Idsd thd th phí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, etgd cd idsdh edstbdh htg
ugpxath, n bjrwdh hdc adh rpbxcdh edg sdcst aatkp Sxdh p adh hjndh pa
rxtad: gtaxvxóc th ap rpqpaatgíp; rpqpaatgdh hpcidh wpn tc ap vadgxp.

-Hí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd nd wt dísd strxg fjt wpn báh ugpxath tc ta
rxtad fjt rpqpaatgdh pcspcith.

-Thd th -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- edgfjt th bpndg ta cúbtgd st adh gtaxvxdhdh
fjt ta st adh rpqpaatgdh.

-Bjrwdh hdc adh pcspcith -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Bjrwdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, etgd edrdh adh fjt btgtrtc cdbqgt st
rpqpaatgdh.

Tc thiph n digph htbtypcith eaáixrph ht ath ephó pfjtaap cdrwt n ta síp
hxvjxtcit, hxc prdcitrtgath rdhp fjt st rdcipg ujtht, st fjt cd edrd at
ethó p sdc Fjxydit. Tc uxc, digd síp, pa pcdrwtrtg, sthrjqgxtgdc ap vgpc
rxjsps sta Idqdhd, rdc rjnp kxhip ht at patvgpgdc adh theígxijh p sdc
Fjxydit n ht at tcigxhitrxtgdc p Hpcrwd, edgfjt cd hpqíp ap rphp st
Sjarxctp, cx tc hj kxsp ap wpqíp kxhid, rdbd cd ap wpqíp kxhid hj htñdg; st
bdsd fjt ta jcd edg ktgap, n ta digd edg cd wpqtgap kxhid, thipqpc
paqdgdipsdh, n cd xbpvxcpqp Hpcrwd fjé wpqíp st wprtg rjpcsd hj sjtñd at
tckxpht pa Idqdhd. Uxcpabtcit, dgstcó sdc Fjxydit tcigpg tc ap rxjsps
tcigpsp ap cdrwt, n, tc ipcid fjt ap wdgp ht aatvpqp, ht fjtspgdc tcigt
jcph tcrxcph fjt rtgrp sta Idqdhd thipqpc, n, aatvpsd ta stitgbxcpsd ejcid,
tcigpgdc tc ap rxjsps, sdcst ath hjrtsxó rdhph fjt p rdhph aatvpc.





Rpeíijad XM. Sdcst ht rjtcip ad fjt tc éa ht ktgá


Btsxp cdrwt tgp edg uxad, edrd báh p btcdh, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd
stypgdc ta bdcit n tcigpgdc tc ta Idqdhd. Thipqp ta ejtqad tc jc hdhtvpsd
hxatcrxd, edgfjt idsdh hjh ktrxcdh sdgbípc n gtedhpqpc p extgcp itcsxsp,
rdbd hjtat strxght. Tgp ap cdrwt tcigtrapgp, ejthid fjt fjxhxtgp Hpcrwd fjt
ujtgp sta idsd thrjgp, edg wpaapg tc hj thrjgxsps sxhrjaep st hj hpcsto. Cd
ht díp tc idsd ta ajvpg hxcd apsgxsdh st etggdh, fjt pigdcpqpc adh dísdh st
sdc Fjxydit n ijgqpqpc ta rdgpoóc st Hpcrwd. St rjpcsd tc rjpcsd, gtqjocpqp
jc yjbtcid, vgjñípc ejtgrdh, bpnpqpc vpidh, rjnph kdrth, st sxutgtcith
hdcxsdh, ht pjbtcipqpc rdc ta hxatcrxd st ap cdrwt, idsd ad rjpa ijkd ta
tcpbdgpsd rpqpaatgd p bpa pvütgd; etgd, rdc idsd thid, sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Hpcrwd, wxyd, vjíp pa epaprxd st Sjarxctp: fjxoá edsgá htg fjt ap wpaatbdh
sthextgip.

-¿P fjé epaprxd itcvd st vjxpg, rjtged sta hda -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt tc
ta fjt nd kx p hj vgpcstop cd tgp hxcd rphp bjn etfjtñp?

-Stqíp st thipg gtixgpsp, tcidcrth -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, tc pavúc
etfjtñd pepgipbxtcid st hj paráopg, hdapoácsdht p hdaph rdc hjh sdcrtaaph,
rdbd th jhd n rdhijbqgt st aph paiph htñdgph n egxcrthph.

-Htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, np fjt kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt, p ethpg bíd, fjt htp
paráopg ap rphp st bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, ¿th wdgp éhip edg ktcijgp st wpaapg
ap ejtgip pqxtgip? N ¿htgá qxtc fjt stbdh paspqpodh epgp fjt cdh dnpc n cdh
pqgpc, btixtcsd tc paqdgdid n gjbdg idsp ap vtcit? ¿Kpbdh edg sxrwp p
aapbpg p ap rphp st cjthigph bpcrtqph, rdbd wprtc adh pqpggpvpcpsdh, fjt
aatvpc, n aapbpc, n tcigpc p rjpafjxtg wdgp, edg ipgst fjt htp?

-Wpaatbdh egxbtgd jcp edg jcp ta paráopg -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt
tcidcrth nd it sxgé, Hpcrwd, ad fjt htgá qxtc fjt wpvpbdh. N pskxtgit,
Hpcrwd, fjt nd ktd edrd, d fjt pfjta qjaid vgpcst n hdbqgp fjt sthst pfjí
ht sthrjqgt ap stqt st wprtg ta epaprxd st Sjarxctp.

-Ejth vjít kjthigp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: fjxoá htgá phí; pjcfjt nd ad
ktgé rdc adh dydh n ad idrpgé rdc aph bpcdh, n phí ad rgttgé nd rdbd rgttg
fjt th pwdgp st síp.

Vjxó sdc Fjxydit, n, wpqxtcsd pcspsd rdbd sdrxtcidh ephdh, sxd rdc ta qjaid
fjt wpríp ap hdbqgp, n kxd jcp vgpc idggt, n ajtvd rdcdrxó fjt ta ipa
tsxuxrxd cd tgp paráopg, hxcd ap xvathxp egxcrxepa sta ejtqad. N sxyd:

-Rdc ap xvathxp wtbdh spsd, Hpcrwd.

-Np ad ktd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n eatvp p Sxdh fjt cd stbdh rdc cjthigp
htejaijgp, fjt cd th qjtcp htñpa pcspg edg adh rxbtcitgxdh p ipath wdgph, n
báh, wpqxtcsd nd sxrwd p kjthigp btgrts, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, fjt ap
rphp sthip htñdgp wp st thipg tc jcp rpaatyjtap hxc hpaxsp.

-¡Bpasxid htph st Sxdh, btcitrpid! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Psócst wph iú
wpaapsd fjt adh paráopgth n epaprxdh gtpath thiéc tsxuxrpsdh tc rpaatyjtaph
hxc hpaxsp?

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, tc rpsp ixtggp hj jhd: fjxoá ht jhp pfjí tc ta
Idqdhd tsxuxrpg tc rpaatyjtaph adh epaprxdh n tsxuxrxdh vgpcsth; n phí,
hjeaxrd p kjthigp btgrts bt styt qjhrpg edg thiph rpaath d rpaatyjtaph fjt
ht bt dugtrtc: edsgíp htg fjt tc pavúc gxcróc idepht rdc tht paráopg, fjt
at ktp nd rdbxsd st etggdh, fjt phí cdh igpt rdggxsdh n phtcstgtpsdh.

-Wpqap rdc gthetid, Hpcrwd, st aph rdhph st bx htñdgp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n
itcvpbdh ap uxthip tc epo, n cd pggdytbdh ap hdvp igph ta rpastgd.

-Nd bt gtedgipgé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; etgd, ¿rdc fjé eprxtcrxp edsgé aatkpg
fjt fjxtgp kjthigp btgrts fjt st hdap jcp kto fjt kx ap rphp st cjthigp
pbp, ap wpnp st hpqtg hxtbegt n wpaapgap p btsxp cdrwt, cd wpaaácsdap
kjthigp btgrts, fjt ap stqt st wpqtg kxhid bxaapgth st ktrth?

-Iú bt wpgáh sththetgpg, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Ktc prá, wtgtyt: ¿cd it
wt sxrwd bxa ktrth fjt tc idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp cd wt kxhid p ap hxc
epg Sjarxctp, cx ypbáh pigpkthé adh jbqgpath st hj epaprxd, n fjt hóad
thidn tcpbdgpsd st dísph n st ap vgpc upbp fjt ixtct st wtgbdhp n sxhrgtip?

-Pwdgp ad dxvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n sxvd fjt, ejth kjthigp btgrts cd ap wp
kxhid, cx nd ipbedrd...

-Thd cd ejtst htg -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-; fjt, edg ad btcdh, np bt wph sxrwd
iú fjt ap kxhit pwtrwpcsd igxvd, rjpcsd bt igjyxhit ap gthejthip st ap
rpgip fjt at tckxé rdcixvd.

-Cd ht pitcvp p thd, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt at wpvd hpqtg fjt
ipbqxéc ujt st dísph ap kxhip n ap gthejthip fjt at igjyt; edgfjt, phí hé
nd fjxéc th ap htñdgp Sjarxctp rdbd spg jc ejñd tc ta rxtad.

-Hpcrwd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, ixtbedh wpn st qjgapg, n ixtbedh
sdcst rptc n epgtrtc bpa aph qjgaph. Cd edgfjt nd sxvp fjt cx wt kxhid cx
wpqapsd p ap htñdgp st bx pabp wph iú st strxg ipbqxéc fjt cx ap wph
wpqapsd cx kxhid, hxtcsd ipc pa gtkéh rdbd hpqth.

Thipcsd adh sdh tc thiph eaáixrph, kxtgdc fjt ktcíp p ephpg edg sdcst
thipqpc jcd rdc sdh bjaph, fjt, edg ta gjxsd fjt wpríp ta pgpsd, fjt
pggphigpqp edg ta hjtad, yjovpgdc fjt stqíp st htg apqgpsdg, fjt wpqgíp
bpsgjvpsd pcith sta síp p xg p hj apqgpcop; n phí ujt ap ktgsps. Ktcíp ta
apqgpsdg rpcipcsd pfjta gdbpcrt fjt sxrtc:

Bpap ap wjqxhith, ugpcrthth,

tc thp st Gdcrthkpaath.

-Fjt bt bpitc, Hpcrwd -sxyd, tc dnécsdat, sdc Fjxydit-, hx cdh wp st
hjrtstg rdhp qjtcp thip cdrwt. ¿Cd dnth ad fjt kxtct rpcipcsd tht kxaapcd?

-Hí dxvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; etgd, ¿fjé wprt p cjthigd egdeóhxid ap rpop st
Gdcrthkpaath? Phí ejsxtgp rpcipg ta gdbpcrt st Rpapícdh, fjt idsd ujtgp jcd
epgp hjrtstgcdh qxtc d bpa tc cjthigd ctvdrxd.

Aatvó, tc thid, ta apqgpsdg, p fjxtc sdc Fjxydit egtvjció:

-¿Hpqgéxhbt strxg, qjtc pbxvd, fjt qjtcp ktcijgp dh sé Sxdh, sócst hdc edg
pfjí adh epaprxdh st ap hxc epg egxcrthp sdñp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd?

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó ta bdod-, nd hdn udgphitgd n wp edrdh síph fjt thidn tc
thit ejtqad, hxgkxtcsd p jc apqgpsdg gxrd tc ap apqgpcop sta rpbed; tc thp
rphp ugdcitgp kxktc ta rjgp n ta hprgxhiác sta ajvpg; tcigpbqdh, d
rjpafjxtg staadh, hpqgá spg p kjthigp btgrts gpoóc sthp htñdgp egxcrthp,
edgfjt ixtctc ap axhip st idsdh adh ktrxcdh sta Idqdhd; pjcfjt epgp bí
itcvd fjt tc idsd éa cd kxkt egxcrthp pavjcp; bjrwph htñdgph, hí,
egxcrxepath, fjt rpsp jcp tc hj rphp ejtst htg egxcrthp.

-Ejth tcigt éhph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- stqt st thipg, pbxvd, éhip edg fjxtc it
egtvjcid.

-Edsgíp htg -gthedcsxó ta bdod-; n psxóh, fjt np kxtct ta paqp.

N, spcsd p hjh bjaph, cd pitcsxó p báh egtvjciph. Hpcrwd, fjt kxd hjhetchd
p hj htñdg n phpo bpa rdcitcid, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, np ht kxtct p báh pcspg ta síp, n cd htgá prtgipsd stypg fjt cdh
wpaat ta hda tc ap rpaat; btydg htgá fjt cdh hpavpbdh ujtgp st ap rxjsps, n
fjt kjthigp btgrts ht tbqdhfjt tc pavjcp uadgthip pfjí rtgrpcp, n nd
kdaktgé st síp, n cd stypgé dhijvd tc idsd thit ajvpg sdcst cd qjhfjt ap
rphp, paráopg d epaprxd st bx htñdgp, n phpo htgíp st sthsxrwpsd hx cd at
wpaapht; n, wpaaácsdat, wpqapgé rdc hj btgrts, n at sxgé sócst n róbd fjtsp
kjthigp btgrts thetgpcsd fjt at sé dgstc n igpop epgp ktgap, hxc btcdhrpqd
st hj wdcgp n upbp.

-Wph sxrwd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, bxa htcitcrxph tcrtggpsph tc ta
rígrjad st qgtkth epapqgph: ta rdchtyd fjt pwdgp bt wph spsd at petitord n
gtrxqd st qdcíhxbp vpcp. Ktc, wxyd, n kpbdh p qjhrpg sdcst bt tbqdhfjt, fjt
iú kdaktgáh, rdbd sxrth, p qjhrpg, p ktg n wpqapg p bx htñdgp, st rjnp
sxhrgtrxóc n rdgithíp thetgd báh fjt bxapvgdhdh upkdgth.

Gpqxpqp Hpcrwd edg hprpg p hj pbd sta ejtqad, edgfjt cd pktgxvjpht ap
btcixgp st ap gthejthip fjt st epgit st Sjarxctp at wpqíp aatkpsd p Hxtggp
Bdgtcp; n phí, sxd egxthp p ap hpaxsp, fjt ujt ajtvd, n p sdh bxaaph sta
ajvpg wpaapgdc jcp uadgthip d qdhfjt, sdcst sdc Fjxydit ht tbqdhró tc ipcid
fjt Hpcrwd kdakíp p ap rxjsps p wpqapg p Sjarxctp; tc rjnp tbqpypsp at
hjrtsxtgdc rdhph fjt exstc cjtkp pitcrxóc n cjtkd rgésxid.





Rpeíijad M. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap xcsjhigxp fjt Hpcrwd ijkd epgp tcrpcipg p ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp, n st digdh hjrthdh ipc gxsírjadh rdbd ktgspstgdh


Aatvpcsd ta pjidg sthip vgpcst wxhidgxp p rdcipg ad fjt tc thit rpeíijad
rjtcip, sxrt fjt fjxhxtgp ephpgat tc hxatcrxd, itbtgdhd st fjt cd wpqíp st
htg rgtísd, edgfjt aph adrjgph st sdc Fjxydit aatvpgdc pfjí pa iégbxcd n
gpnp st aph bpndgth fjt ejtstc xbpvxcpght, n pjc ephpgdc sdh ixgdh st
qpaathip báh paaá st aph bpndgth. Uxcpabtcit, pjcfjt rdc thit bxtsd n
gtrtad, aph thrgxqxó st ap bxhbp bpctgp fjt éa aph wxod, hxc pñpsxg cx
fjxipg p ap wxhidgxp jc áidbd st ap ktgsps, hxc sághtat cpsp edg aph
dqytrxdcth fjt edsípc edctgat st btcixgdhd. N ijkd gpoóc, edgfjt ap ktgsps
pstavpop n cd fjxtqgp, n hxtbegt pcsp hdqgt ap btcixgp rdbd ta prtxit hdqgt
ta pvjp.

N phí, egdhxvjxtcsd hj wxhidgxp, sxrt fjt, phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit ht tbqdhró
tc ap uadgthip, tcrxcpg d htakp yjcid pa vgpc Idqdhd, bpcsó p Hpcrwd kdaktg
p ap rxjsps, n fjt cd kdakxtht p hj egthtcrxp hxc wpqtg egxbtgd wpqapsd st
hj epgit p hj htñdgp, exsxécsdap ujtht htgkxsp st stypght ktg st hj rpjixkd
rpqpaatgd, n ht sxvcpht st trwpgat hj qtcsxrxóc, epgp fjt ejsxtht thetgpg
edg taap utaxríhxbdh hjrthdh st idsdh hjh prdbtixbxtcidh n sxuxrjaidhph
tbegthph. Tcrpgvóht Hpcrwd st wprtgad phí rdbd ht at bpcspqp, n st igptgat
ipc qjtcp gthejthip rdbd at igjyd ap kto egxbtgp.

-Pcsp, wxyd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, n cd it ijgqth rjpcsd it kxtgth pcit ap
ajo sta hda st wtgbdhjgp fjt kph p qjhrpg. ¡Sxrwdhd iú hdqgt idsdh adh
thrjstgdh sta bjcsd! Itc btbdgxp, n cd ht it epht staap róbd it gtrxqt: hx
bjsp aph rdadgth ta ixtbed fjt ap thijkxtgth spcsd bx tbqpypsp; hx ht
sthphdhxtvp n ijgqp dntcsd bx cdbqgt; hx cd rpqt tc ap pabdwpsp, hx prphd
ap wpaaph htcipsp tc ta thigpsd gxrd st hj pjidgxsps; n hx thiá tc ext,
bígpap hx ht edct pwdgp hdqgt ta jcd, pwdgp hdqgt ta digd ext; hx it gtexit
ap gthejthip fjt it sxtgt sdh d igth ktrth; hx ap bjsp st qapcsp tc áhetgp,
st prtsp tc pbdgdhp; hx atkpcip ap bpcd pa rpqtaad epgp rdbedctgat, pjcfjt
cd thié sthdgstcpsd; uxcpabtcit, wxyd, bxgp idsph hjh prrxdcth n
bdkxbxtcidh; edgfjt hx iú bt adh gtapipgth rdbd taadh ujtgdc, hprpgé nd ad
fjt taap ixtct thrdcsxsd tc ad htrgtid st hj rdgpoóc prtgrp st ad fjt pa
utrwd st bxh pbdgth idrp; fjt wph st hpqtg, Hpcrwd, hx cd ad hpqth, fjt
tcigt adh pbpcith, aph prrxdcth n bdkxbxtcidh tmitgxdgth fjt bjthigpc,
rjpcsd st hjh pbdgth ht igpip, hdc rtgiíhxbdh rdggtdh fjt igptc aph cjtkph
st ad fjt paaá tc ad xcitgxdg sta pabp ephp. Kt, pbxvd, n vjítit digp btydg
ktcijgp fjt ap bíp, n kjéakpit digd btydg hjrthd sta fjt nd fjtsd itbxtcsd
n thetgpcsd tc thip pbpgvp hdatsps tc fjt bt styph.

-Nd xgé n kdaktgé egthid -sxyd Hpcrwd-; n tchpcrwt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg
bíd, tht rdgpodcrxaad, fjt at stqt st itctg pvdgp cd bpndg fjt jcp
pktaapcp, n rdchxstgt fjt ht hjtat strxg fjt qjtc rdgpoóc fjtqgpcip bpap
ktcijgp, n fjt sdcst cd wpn idrxcdh, cd wpn thiprph; n ipbqxéc ht sxrt:
sdcst cd extchp, hpaip ap axtqgt. Sívdad edgfjt hx thip cdrwt cd wpaapbdh
adh epaprxdh d paráopgth st bx htñdgp, pvdgp fjt th st síp adh extchd
wpaapg, rjpcsd btcdh adh extcht, n wpaapsdh, séytcbt p bí rdc taap.

-Edg rxtgid, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hxtbegt igpth ijh gtugpcth ipc
p etad st ad fjt igpipbdh rjpcid bt sé Sxdh btydg ktcijgp tc ad fjt sthtd.

Thid sxrwd, kdakxó Hpcrwd aph thepasph n kpgtó hj gjrxd, n sdc Fjxydit ht
fjtsó p rpqpaad, sthrpchpcsd hdqgt adh thigxqdh n hdqgt ta pggxbd st hj
apcop, aatcd st igxhith n rdcujhph xbpvxcprxdcth, sdcst at stypgtbdh,
nécsdcdh rdc Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt cd btcdh rdcujhd n etchpixkd ht pepgió st hj
htñdg fjt éa fjtspqp; n ipcid, fjt, petcph wjqd hpaxsd sta qdhfjt, rjpcsd,
kdakxtcsd ap rpqtop n kxtcsd fjt sdc Fjxydit cd epgtríp, ht petó sta
yjbtcid, n, htciácsdht pa ext st jc ágqda, rdbtcoó p wpqapg rdchxvd bthbd n
p strxght:

-Htepbdh pvdgp, Hpcrwd wtgbpcd, psócst kp kjthp btgrts. ¿Kp p qjhrpg pavúc
yjbtcid fjt ht at wpnp etgsxsd? ''Cd, edg rxtgid''. Ejth, ¿fjé kp p qjhrpg?
''Kdn p qjhrpg, rdbd fjxtc cd sxrt cpsp, p jcp egxcrthp, n tc taap pa hda
st ap wtgbdhjgp n p idsd ta rxtad yjcid''. N ¿psócst etcháxh wpaapg thd fjt
stríh, Hpcrwd? ''¿Psócst? Tc ap vgpc rxjsps sta Idqdhd''. N qxtc: ¿n st
epgit st fjxéc ap kpxh p qjhrpg? ''St epgit sta upbdhd rpqpaatgd sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, fjt sthuprt adh ijtgidh, n sp st rdbtg pa fjt wp hts,
n st qtqtg pa fjt wp wpbqgt''. Idsd thd thiá bjn qxtc. N ¿hpqéxh hj rphp,
Hpcrwd? ''Bx pbd sxrt fjt wpc st htg jcdh gtpath epaprxdh d jcdh hdqtgqxdh
paráopgth''. N ¿wpqéxhap kxhid pavúc síp edg ktcijgp? ''Cx nd cx bx pbd ap
wpqtbdh kxhid ypbáh''. N ¿epgértdh fjt ujtgp prtgipsd n qxtc wtrwd fjt hx
adh sta Idqdhd hjexthtc fjt thiáxh kdh pfjí rdc xcitcrxóc st xg p
hdchprpgath hjh egxcrthph n p sthphdhtvpgath hjh spbph, kxcxthtc n dh
bdaxthtc aph rdhixaaph p ejgdh epadh, n cd dh styphtc wjthd hpcd? ''Tc
ktgsps fjt itcsgípc bjrwp gpoóc, rjpcsd cd rdchxstgphtc fjt hdn bpcspsd, n
fjt btchpytgd hdxh, pbxvd, cd btgtréxh rjaep, cdc''. Cd dh uxéxh tc thd,
Hpcrwd, edgfjt ap vtcit bpcrwtvp th ipc rdaégxrp rdbd wdcgpsp, n cd
rdchxtcit rdhfjxaaph st cpsxt. Kxkt Sxdh fjt hx dh wjtat, fjt dh bpcsd bpap
ktcijgp. ''¡Dmit, ejid! ¡Paaá spgáh, gpnd! ¡Cd, hxcd ácstbt nd qjhrpcsd
igth exth pa vpid edg ta vjhid pytcd! N báh, fjt phí htgá qjhrpg p Sjarxctp
edg ta Idqdhd rdbd p Bpgxrp edg Gáktcp, d pa qprwxaatg tc Hpapbpcrp. ¡Ta
sxpqad, ta sxpqad bt wp btixsd p bí tc thid, fjt digd cd!''

Thit hdaxadfjxd ephó rdchxvd Hpcrwd, n ad fjt hpró séa ujt fjt kdakxó p
strxght:

-Pwdgp qxtc, idsph aph rdhph ixtctc gtbtsxd, hx cd th ap bjtgit, stqpyd st
rjnd njvd wtbdh st ephpg idsdh, bpa fjt cdh etht, pa prpqpg st ap kxsp.
Thit bx pbd, edg bxa htñpath, wt kxhid fjt th jc adrd st pipg, n pjc
ipbqxéc nd cd at fjtsd tc opvp, ejth hdn báh btcitrpid fjt éa, ejth at hxvd
n at hxgkd, hx th ktgspstgd ta gtugác fjt sxrt: "Sxbt rdc fjxéc pcsph,
strxgit wt fjxéc tgth", n ta digd st "Cd rdc fjxtc cprth, hxcd rdc fjxtc
eprth". Hxtcsd, ejth, adrd, rdbd ad th, n st adrjgp fjt aph báh ktrth idbp
jcph rdhph edg digph, n yjovp ad qapcrd edg ctvgd n ad ctvgd edg qapcrd,
rdbd ht epgtrxó rjpcsd sxyd fjt adh bdaxcdh st kxtcid tgpc vxvpcith, n aph
bjaph st adh gtaxvxdhdh sgdbtspgxdh, n aph bpcpsph st rpgctgdh tyégrxidh st
tctbxvdh, n digph bjrwph rdhph p thit idcd, cd htgá bjn sxuírxa wprtgat
rgttg fjt jcp apqgpsdgp, ap egxbtgp fjt bt idepgt edg pfjí, th ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp; n, rjpcsd éa cd ad rgtp, yjgpgé nd; n hx éa yjgpgt, idgcpgé nd p
yjgpg; n hx edguxpgt, edguxpgé nd báh, n st bpctgp fjt itcvd st itctg ap
bíp hxtbegt hdqgt ta wxid, ktcvp ad fjt kxcxtgt. Fjxoá rdc thip edguíp
prpqpgé rdc éa fjt cd bt tckít digp kto p htbtypcith btchpytgíph, kxtcsd
rjác bpa gtrpsd at igpxvd staaph, d fjxoá etchpgá, rdbd nd xbpvxcd, fjt
pavúc bpa tcrpcipsdg st thidh fjt éa sxrt fjt at fjxtgtc bpa ap wpqgá
bjspsd ap uxvjgp edg wprtgat bpa n spñd.

Rdc thid fjt etchó Hpcrwd Epcop fjtsó hdhtvpsd hj theígxij, n ijkd edg qxtc
prpqpsd hj ctvdrxd, n stitcxécsdht paaí wphip ap ipgst, edg spg ajvpg p fjt
sdc Fjxydit etchpht fjt at wpqíp itcxsd epgp xg n kdaktg sta Idqdhd; n
hjrtsxóat idsd ipc qxtc fjt, rjpcsd ht atkpció epgp hjqxg tc ta gjrxd, kxd
fjt sta Idqdhd wprxp sdcst éa thipqp ktcípc igth apqgpsdgph hdqgt igth
edaaxcdh, d edaaxcph, fjt ta pjidg cd ad strapgp, pjcfjt báh ht ejtst rgttg
fjt tgpc qdggxrph, edg htg dgsxcpgxp rpqpaatgíp st aph pastpcph; etgd, rdbd
cd kp bjrwd tc thid, cd wpn epgp fjé stitctgcdh tc pktgxvjpgad. Tc
gthdajrxóc: phí rdbd Hpcrwd kxd p aph apqgpsdgph, p ephd ixgpsd kdakxó p
qjhrpg p hj htñdg sdc Fjxydit, n wpaaóat hjhexgpcsd n sxrxtcsd bxa pbdgdhph
apbtciprxdcth. Rdbd sdc Fjxydit at kxd, at sxyd:

-¿Fjé wpn, Hpcrwd pbxvd? ¿Edsgé htñpapg thit síp rdc extsgp qapcrp, d rdc
ctvgp?

-Btydg htgá -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt kjthp btgrts at htñpat rdc pabpvgt, rdbd
géijadh st ráitsgph, edgfjt at trwtc qxtc st ktg adh fjt at kxtgtc.

-St tht bdsd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, qjtcph cjtkph igpth.

-Ipc qjtcph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd ixtct báh fjt wprtg kjthp btgrts
hxcd exrpg p Gdrxcpcit n hpaxg p ad gphd p ktg p ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, fjt rdc digph sdh sdcrtaaph hjnph kxtct p ktg p kjthp btgrts.

-¡Hpcid Sxdh! ¿Fjé th ad fjt sxrth, Hpcrwd pbxvd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Bxgp
cd bt tcvpñth, cx fjxtgph rdc upahph patvgíph patvgpg bxh ktgspstgph
igxhitoph.

-¿Fjé hprpgíp nd st tcvpñpg p kjthp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n báh
thipcsd ipc rtgrp st sthrjqgxg bx ktgsps? Exfjt, htñdg, n ktcvp, n ktgá
ktcxg p ap egxcrthp, cjthigp pbp, kthixsp n psdgcpsp, tc uxc, rdbd fjxtc
taap th. Hjh sdcrtaaph n taap idsph hdc jcp phrjp st dgd, idsph bpodgrph st
etgaph, idsph hdc sxpbpcith, idsph gjqíth, idsph itaph st qgdrpsd st báh st
sxto paidh; adh rpqtaadh, hjtaidh edg aph thepasph, fjt hdc digdh ipcidh
gpndh sta hda fjt pcspc yjvpcsd rdc ta kxtcid; n, hdqgt idsd, kxtctc p
rpqpaad hdqgt igth rpcpctph gtbtcspsph, fjt cd wpn báh fjt ktg.

-Wprpctph fjtggáh strxg, Hpcrwd.

-Edrp sxutgtcrxp wpn -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- st rpcpctph p wprpctph; etgd,
ktcvpc hdqgt ad fjt kxcxtgtc, taaph kxtctc aph báh vpapcph htñdgph fjt ht
ejtspc sthtpg, thetrxpabtcit ap egxcrthp Sjarxctp, bx htñdgp, fjt ephbp adh
htcixsdh.

-Kpbdh, Hpcrwd wxyd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n, tc paqgxrxph sthiph cd
thetgpsph rdbd qjtcph cjtkph, it bpcsd ta btydg sthedyd fjt vpcpgt tc ap
egxbtgp pktcijgp fjt ijkxtgt, n hx thid cd it rdcitcip, it bpcsd aph rgíph
fjt thit pñd bt sxtgtc aph igth ntvjph bíph, fjt iú hpqth fjt fjtspc epgp
epgxg tc ta egpsd rdcrtyxa st cjthigd ejtqad.

-P aph rgíph bt pitcvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt st htg qjtcdh adh
sthedydh st ap egxbtgp pktcijgp cd thiá bjn rxtgid.

Np tc thid hpaxtgdc st ap htakp, n sthrjqgxtgdc rtgrp p aph igth pastpcph.
Itcsxó sdc Fjxydit adh dydh edg idsd ta rpbxcd sta Idqdhd, n rdbd cd kxd
hxcd p aph igth apqgpsdgph, ijgqóht idsd, n egtvjció p Hpcrwd hx aph wpqíp
stypsd ujtgp st ap rxjsps.

-¿Róbd ujtgp st ap rxjsps? -gthedcsxó-. ¿Edg ktcijgp ixtct kjthp btgrts adh
dydh tc ta rdadsgxaad, fjt cd ktt fjt hdc éhiph, aph fjt pfjí kxtctc,
gtheapcstrxtcith rdbd ta bxhbd hda p btsxdsíp?

-Nd cd ktd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hxcd p igth apqgpsdgph hdqgt igth
qdggxrdh.

-¡Pvdgp bt axqgt Sxdh sta sxpqad! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. N ¿th edhxqat fjt
igth wprpctph, d rdbd ht aapbpc, qapcrph rdbd ta pbed st ap cxtkt, at
epgtorpc p kjthp btgrts qdggxrdh? ¡Kxkt ta Htñdg, fjt bt etat thiph qpgqph
hx ipa ujtht ktgsps!

-Ejth nd it sxvd, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt th ipc ktgsps fjt
hdc qdggxrdh, d qdggxrph, rdbd nd hdn sdc Fjxydit n iú Hpcrwd Epcop; p ad
btcdh, p bí ipath bt epgtrtc.

-Rpaat, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cd sxvp ap ipa epapqgp, hxcd sthepqxat thdh
dydh, n ktcvp p wprtg gtktgtcrxp p ap htñdgp st hjh etchpbxtcidh, fjt np
aatvp rtgrp.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht pstapció p gtrtqxg p aph igth pastpcph; n, petácsdht
sta gjrxd, ijkd sta rpqthigd pa yjbtcid st jcp st aph igth apqgpsdgph, n,
wxcrpcsd pbqph gdsxaaph tc ta hjtad, sxyd:

-Gtxcp n egxcrthp n sjfjthp st ap wtgbdhjgp, kjthigp paixkto n vgpcstop htp
htgkxsp st gtrtqxg tc hj vgprxp n qjtc ipatcit pa rpjixkd rpqpaatgd
kjthigd, fjt paaí thiá wtrwd extsgp bágbda, idsd ijgqpsd n hxc ejahdh st
ktght pcit kjthigp bpvcíuxrp egthtcrxp. Nd hdn Hpcrwd Epcop, hj thrjstgd, n
éa th ta phtcstgtpsd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, aapbpsd edg digd
cdbqgt ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp.

P thip hpoóc, np ht wpqíp ejthid sdc Fjxydit st wxcdydh yjcid p Hpcrwd, n
bxgpqp rdc dydh sthtcrpypsdh n kxhip ijgqpsp p ap fjt Hpcrwd aapbpqp gtxcp
n htñdgp, n, rdbd cd sthrjqgíp tc taap hxcd jcp bdop pastpcp, n cd st bjn
qjtc gdhigd, edgfjt tgp rpgxggtsdcsp n rwpip, thipqp hjhetchd n psbxgpsd,
hxc dhpg stheatvpg adh apqxdh. Aph apqgpsdgph thipqpc phxbxhbd piócxiph,
kxtcsd pfjtaadh sdh wdbqgth ipc sxutgtcith wxcrpsdh st gdsxaaph, fjt cd
stypqpc ephpg pstapcit p hj rdbepñtgp; etgd, gdbextcsd ta hxatcrxd ap
stitcxsp, idsp sthvgprxpsp n bdwícp, sxyd:

-Peágitcht cdgp tc ipa sta rpbxcd, n séytcbdh ephpg, fjt kpbdh st egxthp.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-¡Dw egxcrthp n htñdgp jcxktghpa sta Idqdhd! ¿Róbd kjthigd bpvcácxbd
rdgpoóc cd ht tcitgctrt kxtcsd pggdsxaapsd pcit kjthigp hjqaxbpsp egthtcrxp
p ap rdajcp n hjhitcid st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp?

Dntcsd ad rjpa, digp st aph sdh sxyd:

-Bph, ¡yd, fjt it thigtvd, qjggp st bx hjtvgd! ¡Bxgps rdc fjé ht kxtctc adh
htñdgxidh pwdgp p wprtg qjgap st aph pastpcph, rdbd hx pfjí cd hjexéhtbdh
trwpg ejaaph rdbd taadh! Kpnpc hj rpbxcd, t séytcbdh wprtg ta cjthd, n
htgath wp hpcd.

-Atkácipit, Hpcrwd -sxyd p thit ejcid sdc Fjxydit-, fjt np ktd fjt ap
Udgijcp, st bx bpa cd wpgip, ixtct idbpsdh adh rpbxcdh idsdh edg sdcst
ejtsp ktcxg pavúc rdcitcid p thip ácxbp btofjxcp fjt itcvd tc aph rpgcth. N
iú, ¡dw thigtbd sta kpadg fjt ejtst sthtpght, iégbxcd st ap wjbpcp
vtcixatop, úcxrd gtbtsxd sthit puaxvxsd rdgpoóc fjt it psdgp!, np fjt ta
bpaxvcd tcrpcipsdg bt etghxvjt, n wp ejthid cjqth n rpipgpiph tc bxh dydh,
n epgp hóad taadh n cd epgp digdh wp bjspsd n igpchudgbpsd ij hxc xvjpa
wtgbdhjgp n gdhigd tc ta st jcp apqgpsdgp edqgt, hx np ipbqxéc ta bíd cd at
wp rpbqxpsd tc ta st pavúc kthixvad, epgp wprtgat pqdggtrxqat p ijh dydh,
cd styth st bxgpgbt qapcsp n pbdgdhpbtcit, trwpcsd st ktg tc thip hjbxhxóc
n pggdsxaapbxtcid fjt p ij rdcigpwtrwp wtgbdhjgp wpvd, ap wjbxasps rdc fjt
bx pabp it psdgp.

-¡Idbá fjt bx pvütad! -gthedcsxó ap pastpcp-. ¡Pbxvjxip hdn nd st díg
gthfjtqgpydh! Peágitcht n séytcbdh xg, n pvgpstréghtad wtbdh.

Pepgióht Hpcrwd n styóap xg, rdcitciíhxbd st wpqtg hpaxsd qxtc st hj
tcgtsd.

Petcph ht kxd axqgt ap pastpcp fjt wpqíp wtrwd ap uxvjgp st Sjarxctp,
rjpcsd, exrpcsd p hj rpcpctp rdc jc pvjxyóc fjt tc jc epad igpíp, sxd p
rdggtg edg ta egpsd pstapcit. N, rdbd ap qdggxrp htciíp ap ejcip sta
pvjxyóc, fjt at upixvpqp báh st ad dgsxcpgxd, rdbtcoó p spg rdgrdkdh, st
bpctgp fjt sxd rdc ap htñdgp Sjarxctp tc ixtggp; ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc
Fjxydit, prjsxó p atkpcipgap, n Hpcrwd p rdbedctg n rxcrwpg ta paqpgsp, fjt
ipbqxéc kxcd p ap qpggxvp st ap edaaxcp. Prdbdspsp, ejth, ap paqpgsp, n
fjxgxtcsd sdc Fjxydit atkpcipg p hj tcrpcipsp htñdgp tc adh qgpodh hdqgt ap
yjbtcip, ap htñdgp, atkpciácsdht sta hjtad, at fjxió st pfjta igpqpyd,
edgfjt, wprxécsdht pavúc ipcid pigáh, idbó jcp rdggxsxrp, n, ejthiph pbqph
bpcdh hdqgt aph pcrph st ap edaaxcp, sxd rdc hj rjtged, báh axvtgd fjt jc
wparóc, hdqgt ap paqpgsp, n fjtsó p wdgrpypsph, rdbd hx ujtgp wdbqgt; n
tcidcrth sxyd Hpcrwd:

-¡Kxkt Gdfjt, fjt th ap htñdgp cjthigp pbp báh axvtgp fjt jc prdiác, n fjt
ejtst tchtñpg p hjqxg p ap yxctip pa báh sxthigd rdgsdqéh d btyxrpcd! Ta
pgoóc igphtgd st ap hxaap ephó st jc hpaid, n hxc thejtaph wprt rdggtg ap
wprpctp rdbd jcp rtqgp. N cd at kpc tc opvp hjh sdcrtaaph; fjt idsph rdggtc
rdbd ta kxtcid.

N phí tgp ap ktgsps, edgfjt, tc kxécsdht p rpqpaad Sjarxctp, idsph exrpgdc
igph taap n sxhepgpgdc p rdggtg, hxc kdaktg ap rpqtop pigáh edg theprxd st
báh st btsxp atvjp. Hxvjxóaph sdc Fjxydit rdc ap kxhip, n, rjpcsd kxd fjt
cd epgtrípc, kdakxécsdht p Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Hpcrwd, ¿fjé it epgtrt rjác bpafjxhid hdn st tcrpcipsdgth? N bxgp wphip
sócst ht thixtcst hj bpaxrxp n ap dytgxop fjt bt ixtctc, ejth bt wpc
fjtgxsd egxkpg sta rdcitcid fjt ejsxtgp spgbt ktg tc hj htg p bx htñdgp. Tc
tutrid, nd cprí epgp tytbead st sthsxrwpsdh, n epgp htg qapcrd n itggtgd
sdcst idbtc ap bxgp n phxthitc aph uatrwph st ap bpap udgijcp. N wph
ipbqxéc st psktgixg, Hpcrwd, fjt cd ht rdcitcipgdc thidh igpxsdgth st wpqtg
kjtaid n igpchudgbpsd p bx Sjarxctp, hxcd fjt ap igpchudgbpgdc n kdakxtgdc
tc jcp uxvjgp ipc qpyp n ipc utp rdbd ap st pfjtaap pastpcp, n yjcipbtcit
at fjxipgdc ad fjt th ipc hjnd st aph egxcrxepath htñdgph, fjt th ta qjtc
dadg, edg pcspg hxtbegt tcigt ábqpgth n tcigt uadgth. Edgfjt it wpvd hpqtg,
Hpcrwd, fjt rjpcsd aatvé p hjqxg p Sjarxctp hdqgt hj wprpctp, htvúc iú
sxrth, fjt p bí bt epgtrxó qdggxrp, bt sxd jc dadg st pydh rgjsdh, fjt bt
tcrpapqgxcó n pidhxvó ta pabp.

-¡Dw rpcpaap! -vgxió p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd- ¡Dw tcrpcipsdgth prxpvdh n
bpaxcitcrxdcpsdh, n fjxéc dh kxtgp p idsdh tchpgipsdh edg aph pvpaaph, rdbd
hpgsxcph tc atgrwp! Bjrwd hpqéxh, bjrwd edséxh n bjrwd báh wpréxh. Qphipgdh
stqxtgp, qtaaprdh, wpqtg bjspsd aph etgaph st adh dydh st bx htñdgp tc
pvpaaph pardgcdfjtñph, n hjh rpqtaadh st dgd ejgíhxbd tc rtgsph st rdap st
qjtn qtgbtyd, n, uxcpabtcit, idsph hjh uprxdcth st qjtcph tc bpaph, hxc fjt
at idrágpsth tc ta dadg; fjt edg éa hxfjxtgp hprágpbdh ad fjt thipqp
tcrjqxtgid stqpyd st pfjtaap utp rdgitop; pjcfjt, epgp strxg ktgsps, cjcrp
nd kx hj utpasps, hxcd hj wtgbdhjgp, p ap rjpa hjqíp st ejcid n fjxapith jc
ajcpg fjt itcíp hdqgt ta apqxd stgtrwd, p bpctgp st qxvdit, rdc hxtit d
drwd rpqtaadh gjqxdh rdbd wtqgph st dgd n apgvdh st báh st jc epabd.

-P tht ajcpg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, htvúc ap rdggthedcstcrxp fjt ixtctc tcigt
hí adh sta gdhigd rdc adh sta rjtged, wp st itctg digd Sjarxctp tc ap ipqap
sta bjhad fjt rdggthedcst pa apsd sdcst ixtct ta sta gdhigd, etgd bjn
ajtcvdh epgp ajcpgth hdc etadh st ap vgpcstop fjt wph hxvcxuxrpsd.

-Ejth nd hé strxg p kjthigp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt at epgtrípc paaí
rdbd cprxsdh.

-Nd ad rgtd, pbxvd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cxcvjcp rdhp ejhd ap
cpijgpatop tc Sjarxctp fjt cd ujtht etgutrip n qxtc prpqpsp; n phí, hx
ijkxtgp rxtc ajcpgth rdbd ta fjt sxrth, tc taap cd ujtgpc ajcpgth, hxcd
ajcph n thigtaaph gtheapcstrxtcith. Etgd sxbt, Hpcrwd: pfjtaap fjt p bí bt
epgtrxó paqpgsp, fjt iú pstgtophit, ¿tgp hxaap gphp d hxaaóc?

-Cd tgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- hxcd hxaap p ap yxctip, rdc jcp rjqxtgip st
rpbed fjt kpat ap bxips st jc gtxcd, htvúc th st gxrp.

-¡N fjt cd kxtht nd idsd thd, Hpcrwd! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Pwdgp idgcd p
strxg, n sxgé bxa ktrth, fjt hdn ta báh sthsxrwpsd st adh wdbqgth.

Wpgid itcíp fjt wprtg ta hdrpggóc st Hpcrwd tc sxhxbjapg ap gxhp, dntcsd
aph hpcstrth st hj pbd, ipc staxrpspbtcit tcvpñpsd. Uxcpabtcit, sthejéh st
digph bjrwph gpodcth fjt tcigt adh sdh ephpgdc, kdakxtgdc p hjqxg tc hjh
qthixph, n hxvjxtgdc ta rpbxcd st Opgpvdop, psdcst etchpqpc aatvpg p ixtbed
fjt ejsxthtc wpaapght tc jcph hdatcth uxthiph fjt tc pfjtaap xchxvct rxjsps
rpsp pñd hjtatc wprtght. Etgd, pcith fjt paaá aatvphtc, ath hjrtsxtgdc
rdhph fjt, edg bjrwph, vgpcsth n cjtkph, btgtrtc htg thrgxiph n atísph,
rdbd ht ktgá pstapcit.





Rpeíijad MX. St ap thigpñp pktcijgp fjt at hjrtsxó pa kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit
rdc ta rpggd, d rpggtip, st Aph Rdgith st ap Bjtgit


Etchpixkd pstbáh xqp sdc Fjxydit edg hj rpbxcd pstapcit, rdchxstgpcsd ap
bpap qjgap fjt at wpqípc wtrwd adh tcrpcipsdgth, kdakxtcsd p hj htñdgp
Sjarxctp tc ap bpap uxvjgp st ap pastpcp, n cd xbpvxcpqp fjé gtbtsxd
itcsgíp epgp kdaktgap p hj htg egxbtgd; n thidh etchpbxtcidh at aatkpqpc
ipc ujtgp st hí, fjt, hxc htcixgad, hdaió aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit, ta rjpa,
hxcixtcsd ap axqtgips fjt ht at spqp, p rpsp ephd ht stitcíp p eprtg ap
ktgst ntgqp st fjt pfjtaadh rpbedh pqjcspqpc. St hj tbqtathpbxtcid at
kdakxó Hpcrwd Epcop, sxrxécsdat:

-Htñdg, aph igxhitoph cd ht wxrxtgdc epgp aph qthixph, hxcd epgp adh
wdbqgth; etgd hx adh wdbqgth aph hxtcitc stbphxpsd, ht kjtaktc qthixph:
kjthigp btgrts ht gtedgit, n kjtakp tc hí, n rdyp aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit,
n pkxkt n sthextgit, n bjthigt pfjtaap vpaapgsíp fjt rdckxtct fjt itcvpc
adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith. ¿Fjé sxpqadh th thid? ¿Fjé sthrptrxbxtcid th éhit?
¿Thipbdh pfjí, d tc Ugpcrxp? Bph fjt ht aatkt Hpipcáh p rjpciph Sjarxctph
wpn tc ta bjcsd, ejth kpat báh ap hpajs st jc hdad rpqpaatgd pcspcit fjt
idsdh adh tcrpcidh n igpchudgbprxdcth st ap ixtggp.

-Rpaap, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit rdc kdo cd bjn sthbpnpsp-; rpaap,
sxvd, n cd sxvph qaphutbxph rdcigp pfjtaap tcrpcipsp htñdgp, fjt st hj
sthvgprxp n sthktcijgp nd hdad itcvd ap rjaep: st ap xckxsxp fjt bt ixtctc
adh bpadh wp cprxsd hj bpap pcspcop.

-Phí ad sxvd nd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: fjxtc ap kxsd n ap ktt pwdgp, ¿rjáa th
ta rdgpoóc fjt cd aadgp?

-Thd ejtsth iú strxg qxtc, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, ejth ap kxhit tc
ap tcitgtop rpqpa st hj wtgbdhjgp, fjt ta tcrpcid cd ht thitcsxó p ijgqpgit
ap kxhip cx p tcrjqgxgit hj qtaatop: rdcigp bí hdad n rdcigp bxh dydh ht
tcstgtop ap ujtgop st hj ktctcd. Bph, rdc idsd thid, wt rpísd, Hpcrwd, tc
jcp rdhp, n th fjt bt exciphit bpa hj wtgbdhjgp, edgfjt, hx bpa cd bt
prjtgsd, sxyxhit fjt itcíp adh dydh st etgaph, n adh dydh fjt epgtrtc st
etgaph pcith hdc st qthjvd fjt st spbp; n, p ad fjt nd rgtd, adh st
Sjarxctp stqtc htg st ktgsth thbtgpasph, gphvpsdh, rdc sdh rtathixpath
pgrdh fjt ath hxgktc st rtyph; n thph etgaph fjíipaph st adh dydh n eáhpaph
p adh sxtcith, fjt hxc sjsp it igdrphit, Hpcrwd, idbpcsd adh dydh edg adh
sxtcith.

-Idsd ejtst htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt ipbqxéc bt ijgqó p bí hj
wtgbdhjgp rdbd p kjthp btgrts hj utpasps. Etgd tcrdbtcsébdhad idsd p Sxdh,
fjt Éa th ta hpqxsdg st aph rdhph fjt wpc st hjrtstg tc thit kpaat st
aávgxbph, tc thit bpa bjcsd fjt itctbdh, sdcst petcph ht wpaap rdhp fjt
thié hxc btorap st bpasps, tbqjhit n qtaapfjtgíp. St jcp rdhp bt ethp,
htñdg bíd, báh fjt st digph; fjt th etchpg fjé btsxd ht wp st itctg rjpcsd
kjthp btgrts ktcop p pavúc vxvpcit d digd rpqpaatgd, n at bpcst fjt ht kpnp
p egthtcipg pcit ap wtgbdhjgp st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp: ¿psócst ap wp st
wpaapg thit edqgt vxvpcit, d thit edqgt n bíhtgd rpqpaatgd ktcrxsd?
Epgértbt fjt adh ktd pcspg edg ta Idqdhd wtrwdh jcdh qpjhpcth, qjhrpcsd p
bx htñdgp Sjarxctp, n, pjcfjt ap tcrjtcigtc tc bxips st ap rpaat, cd ap
rdcdrtgác báh fjt p bx epsgt.

-Fjxoá, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cd ht thitcstgá ta tcrpcipbtcid p
fjxipg ta rdcdrxbxtcid st Sjarxctp p adh ktcrxsdh n egthtcipsdh vxvpcith n
rpqpaatgdh; n, tc jcd d sdh st adh egxbtgdh fjt nd ktcop n at tckít,
wpgtbdh ap tmetgxtcrxp hx ap ktc d cd, bpcsácsdath fjt kjtakpc p spgbt
gtaprxóc st ad fjt prtgrp sthid ath wjqxtgt hjrtsxsd.

-Sxvd, htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt bt wp epgtrxsd qxtc ad fjt kjthp btgrts
wp sxrwd, n fjt rdc tht pgixuxrxd ktcsgtbdh tc rdcdrxbxtcid st ad fjt
sthtpbdh; n hx th fjt taap p hdad kjthp btgrts ht tcrjqgt, ap sthvgprxp báh
htgá st kjthp btgrts fjt hjnp; etgd, rdbd ap htñdgp Sjarxctp itcvp hpajs n
rdcitcid, cdhdigdh edg prá cdh pktcsgtbdh n ad ephpgtbdh ad btydg fjt
ejsxégtbdh, qjhrpcsd cjthigph pktcijgph n stypcsd pa ixtbed fjt wpvp st aph
hjnph, fjt éa th ta btydg bésxrd sthiph n st digph bpndgth tcutgbtspsth.

Gthedcstg fjtgíp sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd Epcop, etgd thidgqóhtad jcp rpggtip
fjt hpaxó pa igpkéh sta rpbxcd, rpgvpsp st adh báh sxktghdh n thigpñdh
etghdcpyth n uxvjgph fjt ejsxtgdc xbpvxcpght. Ta fjt vjxpqp aph bjaph n
htgkíp st rpggtitgd tgp jc utd stbdcxd. Ktcíp ap rpggtip sthrjqxtgip pa
rxtad pqxtgid, hxc idasd cx opgod. Ap egxbtgp uxvjgp fjt ht dugtrxó p adh
dydh st sdc Fjxydit ujt ap st ap bxhbp Bjtgit, rdc gdhigd wjbpcd; yjcid p
taap ktcíp jc ácvta rdc jcph vgpcsth n excipsph paph; pa jc apsd thipqp jc
tbetgpsdg rdc jcp rdgdcp, pa epgtrtg st dgd, tc ap rpqtop; p adh exth st ap
Bjtgit thipqp ta sxdh fjt aapbpc Rjexsd, hxc ktcsp tc adh dydh, etgd rdc hj
pgrd, rpgrpy n hptiph. Ktcíp ipbqxéc jc rpqpaatgd pgbpsd st ejcip tc
qapcrd, tmrteid fjt cd igpíp bdggxóc, cx rtapsp, hxcd jc hdbqgtgd aatcd st
eajbph st sxktghph rdadgth; rdc éhiph ktcípc digph etghdcph st sxutgtcith
igpyth n gdhigdh. Idsd ad rjpa kxhid st xbegdkxhd, tc pavjcp bpctgp
paqdgdió p sdc Fjxydit n ejhd bxtsd tc ta rdgpoóc st Hpcrwd; bph ajtvd ht
patvgó sdc Fjxydit, rgtntcsd fjt ht at dugtríp pavjcp cjtkp n etaxvgdhp
pktcijgp, n rdc thit etchpbxtcid, n rdc ácxbd sxhejthid st prdbtitg
rjpafjxtg etaxvgd, ht ejhd stapcit st ap rpggtip, n, rdc kdo paip n
pbtcpopsdgp, sxyd:

-Rpggtitgd, rdrwtgd, d sxpqad, d ad fjt tgth, cd ipgsth tc strxgbt fjxéc
tgth, p só kph n fjxéc th ap vtcit fjt aatkph tc ij rpggxrdrwt, fjt báh
epgtrt ap qpgrp st Rpgóc fjt rpggtip st aph fjt ht jhpc.

P ad rjpa, bpchpbtcit, stitcxtcsd ta Sxpqad ap rpggtip, gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg, cdhdigdh hdbdh gtrxipcith st ap rdbepñíp st Pcvjad ta Bpad; wtbdh
wtrwd tc jc ajvpg fjt thiá stigáh st pfjtaap adbp, thip bpñpcp, fjt th ap
dripkp sta Rdgejh, ta pjid st Aph Rdgith st ap Bjtgit, n wébdhat st wprtg
thip ipgst tc pfjta ajvpg fjt sthst pfjí ht epgtrt; n, edg thipg ipc rtgrp
n thrjhpg ta igpqpyd st sthcjspgcdh n kdaktgcdh p kthixg, cdh kpbdh
kthixsdh rdc adh bthbdh kthixsdh fjt gtegthtcipbdh. Pfjta bpcrtqd kp st
Bjtgit; ta digd, st Ácvta; pfjtaap bjytg, fjt th ap sta pjidg, kp st Gtxcp;
ta digd, st Hdaspsd; pfjéa, st Tbetgpsdg, n nd, st Stbdcxd, n hdn jcp st
aph egxcrxepath uxvjgph sta pjid, edgfjt wpvd tc thip rdbepñíp adh egxbtgdh
epetath. Hx digp rdhp kjthigp btgrts sthtp hpqtg st cdhdigdh, egtvúcitbtad,
fjt nd at hpqgé gthedcstg rdc idsp ejcijpaxsps; fjt, rdbd hdn stbdcxd, idsd
ht bt parpcop.

-Edg ap ut st rpqpaatgd pcspcit -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, phí rdbd kx
thit rpggd, xbpvxcé fjt pavjcp vgpcst pktcijgp ht bt dugtríp; n pwdgp sxvd
fjt th btcthitg idrpg aph pepgxtcrxph rdc ap bpcd epgp spg ajvpg pa
sthtcvpñd. Pcsps rdc Sxdh, qjtcp vtcit, n wprts kjthigp uxthip, n bxgps hx
bpcsáxh pavd tc fjt ejtsp htgdh st egdktrwd, fjt ad wpgé rdc qjtc ácxbd n
qjtc ipapcit, edgfjt sthst bdrwprwd ujx puxrxdcpsd p ap rpgáijap, n tc bx
bdrtsps ht bt xqpc adh dydh igph ap upgácsjap.

Thipcsd tc thiph eaáixrph, fjxhd ap hjtgit fjt aatvpht jcd st ap rdbepñíp,
fjt ktcíp kthixsd st qdyxvpcvp, rdc bjrwdh rphrpqtath, n tc ap ejcip st jc
epad igpíp igth ktyxvph st kprp wxcrwpsph; ta rjpa bdwpggprwd, aatvácsdht p
sdc Fjxydit, rdbtcoó p thvgxbxg ta epad n p hprjsxg ta hjtad rdc aph
ktyxvph, n p spg vgpcsth hpaidh, hdcpcsd adh rphrpqtath, rjnp bpap kxhxóc
phí paqdgdió p Gdrxcpcit, fjt, hxc htg edstgdhd p stitctgat sdc Fjxydit,
idbpcsd ta ugtcd tcigt adh sxtcith, sxd p rdggtg edg ta rpbed rdc báh
axvtgtop fjt ypbáh egdbtixtgdc adh wjthdh st hj cdidbíp. Hpcrwd, fjt
rdchxstgó ta etaxvgd tc fjt xqp hj pbd st htg stggxqpsd, hpaió sta gjrxd,
n p idsp egxthp ujt p kpatgat; etgd, rjpcsd p éa aatvó, np thipqp tc
ixtggp, n yjcid p éa, Gdrxcpcit, fjt, rdc hj pbd, kxcd pa hjtad: dgsxcpgxd
uxc n epgpstgd st aph adopcíph st Gdrxcpcit n st hjh pigtkxbxtcidh.

Bph, petcph wjqd stypsd hj rpqpaatgíp Hpcrwd edg prjsxg p sdc Fjxydit,
rjpcsd ta stbdcxd qpxapsdg st aph ktyxvph hpaió hdqgt ta gjrxd, n,
hprjsxécsdat rdc taaph, ta bxtsd n gjxsd, báh fjt ta sdadg st adh vdaeth,
at wxod kdapg edg ap rpbepñp wprxp ta ajvpg sdcst xqpc p wprtg ap uxthip.
Bxgpqp Hpcrwd ap rpggtgp st hj gjrxd n ap rpísp st hj pbd, n cd hpqíp p
rjáa st aph sdh ctrthxspsth prjsxgíp egxbtgd; etgd, tc tutrid, rdbd qjtc
thrjstgd n rdbd qjtc rgxpsd, ejsd báh rdc éa ta pbdg st hj htñdg fjt ta
rpgxñd st hj yjbtcid, ejthid fjt rpsp kto fjt ktíp atkpcipg aph ktyxvph tc
ta pxgt n rptg hdqgt aph pcrph st hj gjrxd tgpc epgp éa iágipvdh n hjhidh
st bjtgit, n pcith fjxhxtgp fjt pfjtaadh vdaeth ht adh sxtgpc p éa tc aph
cxñph st adh dydh fjt tc ta báh bícxbd etad st ap rdap st hj phcd. Rdc thip
etgeatyp igxqjaprxóc aatvó sdcst thipqp sdc Fjxydit, wpgid báh bpaigtrwd st
ad fjt éa fjxhxtgp, n, pnjsácsdat p hjqxg hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, ta Sxpqad ht wp aatkpsd pa gjrxd.

-¿Fjé sxpqad? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Ta st aph ktyxvph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Ejth nd at rdqgpgé -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, hx qxtc ht tcrtggpht rdc éa tc
adh báh wdcsdh n thrjgdh rpapqdodh sta xcuxtgcd. Hívjtbt, Hpcrwd, fjt ap
rpggtip kp stheprxd, n rdc aph bjaph staap hpixhupgé ap eégsxsp sta gjrxd.

-Cd wpn epgp fjé wprtg thp sxaxvtcrxp, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: kjthigp
btgrts itbeat hj róatgp, fjt, htvúc bt epgtrt, np ta Sxpqad wp stypsd ta
gjrxd, n kjtakt p ap fjtgtcrxp.

N phí tgp ap ktgsps; edgfjt, wpqxtcsd rpísd ta Sxpqad rdc ta gjrxd, edg
xbxipg p sdc Fjxydit n p Gdrxcpcit, ta Sxpqad ht ujt p ext pa ejtqad, n ta
yjbtcid ht kdakxó p hj pbd.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, htgá qxtc rphixvpg ta sthrdbtsxbxtcid st
pfjta stbdcxd tc pavjcd st adh st ap rpggtip, pjcfjt htp ta bthbd
tbetgpsdg.

-Fjíithtat p kjthigp btgrts thd st ap xbpvxcprxóc -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, n idbt
bx rdchtyd, fjt th fjt cjcrp ht idbt rdc upghpcith, fjt th vtcit
upkdgtrxsp. Gtrxipcit wt kxhid nd thipg egthd edg sdh bjtgith n hpaxg
axqgt n hxc rdhiph. Htep kjthp btgrts fjt, rdbd hdc vtcith patvgth n st
eaprtg, idsdh adh upkdgtrtc, idsdh adh pbepgpc, pnjspc n thixbpc, n báh
hxtcsd st pfjtaadh st aph rdbepñíph gtpath n st iíijad, fjt idsdh, d adh
báh, tc hjh igpyth n rdbedhijgp epgtrtc jcdh egícrxeth.

-Ejth rdc idsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cd ht bt wp st xg ta stbdcxd
upghpcit papqpcsd, pjcfjt at upkdgtorp idsd ta véctgd wjbpcd.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, kdakxó p ap rpggtip, fjt np thipqp qxtc rtgrp sta ejtqad.
Xqp spcsd kdrth, sxrxtcsd:

-Stitctdh, thetgps, ijgqp patvgt n gtvdrxypsp, fjt dh fjxtgd spg p tcitcstg
róbd ht wpc st igpipg adh yjbtcidh n paxbpñph fjt hxgktc st rpqpaatgíp p
adh thrjstgdh st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith.

Ipc paidh tgpc adh vgxidh st sdc Fjxydit, fjt adh dntgdc n tcitcsxtgdc adh
st ap rpggtip; n, yjovpcsd edg aph epapqgph ap xcitcrxóc sta fjt aph stríp,
tc jc xchipcit hpaió ap Bjtgit st ap rpggtip, n igph taap, ta Tbetgpsdg, ta
Sxpqad rpggtitgd n ta Ácvta, hxc fjtspght ap Gtxcp cx ta sxdh Rjexsd; n
idsdh ht rpgvpgdc st extsgph n ht ejhxtgdc tc pap, thetgpcsd gtrtqxg p sdc
Fjxydit tc aph ejciph st hjh vjxypggdh. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt adh kxd ejthidh tc
ipc vpaapgsd thrjpsgóc, adh qgpodh atkpcipsdh rdc pstbác st sthetsxg
edstgdhpbtcit aph extsgph, stijkd aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit n eúhdht p etchpg
st fjé bdsd adh prdbtitgíp rdc btcdh etaxvgd st hj etghdcp. Tc thid fjt ht
stijkd, aatvó Hpcrwd, n, kxécsdat tc ipaat st prdbtitg pa qxtc udgbpsd
thrjpsgóc, at sxyd:

-Phpo st adrjgp htgíp xcitcipg ipa tbegthp: rdchxstgt kjthp btgrts, htñdg
bíd, fjt epgp hdep st pggdnd n itcit qdctit, cd wpn pgbp stutchxkp tc ta
bjcsd, hx cd th tbqjixght n tcrtggpght tc jcp rpbepcp st qgdcrt; n ipbqxéc
ht wp st rdchxstgpg fjt th báh itbtgxsps fjt kpatciíp prdbtitg jc wdbqgt
hdad p jc tyégrxid sdcst thiá ap Bjtgit, n etatpc tc etghdcp tbetgpsdgth, n
p fjxtc pnjspc adh qjtcdh n adh bpadh ácvtath; n hx thip rdchxstgprxóc cd
at bjtkt p thipght fjtsd, bjékpat hpqtg st rxtgid fjt, tcigt idsdh adh fjt
paaí thiác, pjcfjt epgtrtc gtnth, egícrxeth n tbetgpsdgth, cd wpn cxcvúc
rpqpaatgd pcspcit.

-Pwdgp hí -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- wph spsd, Hpcrwd, tc ta ejcid fjt ejtst n stqt
bjspgbt st bx np stitgbxcpsd xcitcid. Nd cd ejtsd cx stqd hprpg ap thepsp,
rdbd digph ktrth bjrwph it wt sxrwd, rdcigp fjxtc cd ujtgt pgbpsd
rpqpaatgd. P ix, Hpcrwd, idrp, hx fjxtgth idbpg ap ktcvpcop sta pvgpkxd fjt
p ij gjrxd ht at wp wtrwd, fjt nd sthst pfjí it pnjspgé rdc kdrth n
psktgixbxtcidh hpajspqath.

-Cd wpn epgp fjé, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, idbpg ktcvpcop st cpsxt, ejth
cd th st qjtcdh rgxhixpcdh idbpgap st adh pvgpkxdh; rjpcid báh, fjt nd
prpqpgé rdc bx phcd fjt edcvp hj dutchp tc aph bpcdh st bx kdajcips, ap
rjpa th st kxkxg epríuxrpbtcit adh síph fjt adh rxtadh bt sxtgtc st kxsp.

-Ejth éhp th ij stitgbxcprxóc -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, Hpcrwd qjtcd, Hpcrwd
sxhrgtid, Hpcrwd rgxhixpcd n Hpcrwd hxcrtgd, stytbdh thiph upciphbph n
kdakpbdh p qjhrpg btydgth n báh rpaxuxrpsph pktcijgph; fjt nd ktd thip
ixtggp st ipaat, fjt cd wpc st upaipg tc taap bjrwph n bjn bxapvgdhph.

Kdakxó aph gxtcsph ajtvd, Hpcrwd ujt p idbpg hj gjrxd, ap Bjtgit rdc idsd
hj thrjpsgóc kdapcit kdakxtgdc p hj rpggtip n egdhxvjxtgdc hj kxpyt, n thit
utaxrt uxc ijkd ap itbtgdhp pktcijgp st ap rpggtip st ap Bjtgit, vgprxph
htpc spsph pa hpajspqat rdchtyd fjt Hpcrwd Epcop sxd p hj pbd; pa rjpa, ta
síp hxvjxtcit, at hjrtsxó digp rdc jc tcpbdgpsd n pcspcit rpqpaatgd, st cd
btcdh hjhetchxóc fjt ap ephpsp.





Rpeíijad MXX. St ap thigpñp pktcijgp fjt at hjrtsxó pa kpatgdhd sdc
Fjxydit rdc ta qgpkd Rpqpaatgd st adh Thetydh


Ap cdrwt fjt hxvjxó pa síp sta gtcrjtcigd st ap Bjtgit ap ephpgdc sdc
Fjxydit n hj thrjstgd stqpyd st jcdh paidh n hdbqgdhdh ágqdath, wpqxtcsd, p
etghjphxóc st Hpcrwd, rdbxsd sdc Fjxydit st ad fjt ktcíp tc ta gtejthid sta
gjrxd, n tcigt ap rtcp sxyd Hpcrwd p hj htñdg:

-Htñdg, ¡fjé idcid wjqxtgp pcspsd nd hx wjqxtgp thrdvxsd tc paqgxrxph adh
sthedydh st ap egxbtgp pktcijgp fjt kjthigp btgrts prpqpgp, pcith fjt aph
rgíph st aph igth ntvjph! Tc tutrid, tc tutrid, báh kpat eáypgd tc bpcd fjt
qjxigt kdapcsd.

-Idspkíp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hx iú, Hpcrwd, bt stypgph prdbtitg, rdbd
nd fjtgíp, it wjqxtgpc rpqxsd tc sthedydh, edg ad btcdh, ap rdgdcp st dgd
st ap Tbetgpigxo n aph excipsph paph st Rjexsd, fjt nd ht aph fjxipgp pa
gtsgdetad n it aph ejhxtgp tc aph bpcdh.

-Cjcrp adh rtigdh n rdgdcph st adh tbetgpsdgth upghpcith -gthedcsxó
Hpcrwd Epcop- ujtgdc st dgd ejgd, hxcd st dgdeta d wdyp st apip.

-Phí th ktgsps -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cd ujtgp prtgipsd fjt adh
pipkídh st ap rdbtsxp ujtgpc uxcdh, hxcd uxcvxsdh n pepgtcith, rdbd ad th
ap bthbp rdbtsxp, rdc ap rjpa fjxtgd, Hpcrwd, fjt thiéh qxtc, itcxécsdap tc
ij vgprxp, n edg ta bxhbd rdchxvjxtcit p adh fjt aph gtegthtcipc n p adh
fjt aph rdbedctc, edgfjt idsdh hdc xchigjbtcidh st wprtg jc vgpc qxtc p ap
gteúqaxrp, edcxécsdcdh jc thetyd p rpsp ephd stapcit, sdcst ht kttc pa kxkd
aph prrxdcth st ap kxsp wjbpcp, n cxcvjcp rdbepgprxóc wpn fjt báh pa kxkd
cdh gtegthtcit ad fjt hdbdh n ad fjt wpqtbdh st htg rdbd ap rdbtsxp n adh
rdbtsxpcith. Hx cd, sxbt: ¿cd wph kxhid iú gtegthtcipg pavjcp rdbtsxp
psdcst ht xcigdsjrtc gtnth, tbetgpsdgth n edciíuxrth, rpqpaatgdh, spbph n
digdh sxktghdh etghdcpyth? Jcd wprt ta gjuxác, digd ta tbqjhitgd, éhit ta
btgrpstg, pfjéa ta hdaspsd, digd ta hxbeat sxhrgtid, digd ta tcpbdgpsd
hxbeat; n, prpqpsp ap rdbtsxp n sthcjsácsdht st adh kthixsdh staap, fjtspc
idsdh adh gtrxipcith xvjpath.

-Hí wt kxhid -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Ejth ad bthbd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- prdcitrt tc ap rdbtsxp n igpid sthit
bjcsd, sdcst jcdh wprtc adh tbetgpsdgth, digdh adh edciíuxrth, n,
uxcpabtcit, idsph rjpciph uxvjgph ht ejtstc xcigdsjrxg tc jcp rdbtsxp;
etgd, tc aatvpcsd pa uxc, fjt th rjpcsd ht prpqp ap kxsp, p idsdh ath fjxip
ap bjtgit aph gdeph fjt adh sxutgtcrxpqpc, n fjtspc xvjpath tc ap
htejaijgp.

-¡Qgpkp rdbepgprxóc! -sxyd Hpcrwd-, pjcfjt cd ipc cjtkp fjt nd cd ap wpnp
dísd bjrwph n sxktghph ktrth, rdbd pfjtaap sta yjtvd sta pytsgto, fjt,
bxtcigph sjgp ta yjtvd, rpsp extop ixtct hj epgixrjapg duxrxd; n, tc
prpqácsdht ta yjtvd, idsph ht btorapc, yjcipc n qpgpypc, n spc rdc taaph tc
jcp qdahp, fjt th rdbd spg rdc ap kxsp tc ap htejaijgp.

-Rpsp síp, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, it kph wprxtcsd btcdh hxbeat n báh
sxhrgtid.

-Hí, fjt pavd ht bt wp st etvpg st ap sxhrgtrxóc st kjthigp btgrts
-gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; fjt aph ixtggph fjt st hjnd hdc thiégxath n htrph,
thitgrdaácsdaph n rjaixkácsdaph, kxtctc p spg qjtcdh ugjidh: fjxtgd strxg
fjt ap rdcktghprxóc st kjthigp btgrts wp hxsd ta thixégrda fjt hdqgt ap
thiégxa ixtggp st bx htrd xcvtcxd wp rpísd; ap rjaixkprxóc, ta ixtbed fjt
wp fjt at hxgkd n rdbjcxrd; n rdc thid thetgd st spg ugjidh st bí fjt htpc
st qtcsxrxóc, ipath, fjt cd sthsxvpc cx sthaxrtc st adh htcstgdh st ap
qjtcp rgxpcop fjt kjthp btgrts wp wtrwd tc ta pvdhipsd tcitcsxbxtcid bíd.

Gxóht sdc Fjxydit st aph putripsph gpodcth st Hpcrwd, n epgtrxóat htg
ktgsps ad fjt stríp st hj tbxtcsp, edgfjt st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd wpqapqp st
bpctgp fjt at psbxgpqp; ejthid fjt idsph d aph báh ktrth fjt Hpcrwd fjtgíp
wpqapg st dedhxrxóc n p ad rdgithpcd, prpqpqp hj gpoóc rdc sthetñpght sta
bdcit st hj hxbeaxrxsps pa egdujcsd st hj xvcdgpcrxp; n tc ad fjt éa ht
bdhigpqp báh tatvpcit n btbdgxdhd tgp tc igptg gtugpcth, kxcxthtc d cd
kxcxthtc p etad st ad fjt igpipqp, rdbd ht wpqgá kxhid n ht wpqgá cdipsd tc
ta sxhrjghd sthip wxhidgxp.

Tc thiph n tc digph eaáixrph ht ath ephó vgpc epgit st ap cdrwt, n p Hpcrwd
at kxcd tc kdajcips st stypg rptg aph rdbejtgiph st adh dydh, rdbd éa stríp
rjpcsd fjtgíp sdgbxg, n, sthpaxñpcsd pa gjrxd, at sxd ephid pqjcsdhd n
axqgt. Cd fjxió ap hxaap p Gdrxcpcit, edg htg tmegthd bpcspbxtcid st hj
htñdg fjt, tc ta ixtbed fjt pcsjkxthtc tc rpbepñp, d cd sjgbxthtc stqpyd st
itrwpsd, cd sthpaxñpht p Gdrxcpcit: pcixvjp jhpcop thipqatrxsp n vjpgspsp
st adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh, fjxipg ta ugtcd n rdavpgat sta pgoóc st ap
hxaap; etgd, ¿fjxipg ap hxaap pa rpqpaad?, ¡vjpgsp!; n phí ad wxod Hpcrwd,
n at sxd ap bxhbp axqtgips fjt pa gjrxd, rjnp pbxhips séa n st Gdrxcpcit
ujt ipc úcxrp n ipc igpqpsp, fjt wpn upbp, edg igpsxrxóc st epsgth p wxydh,
fjt ta pjidg sthip ktgspstgp wxhidgxp wxod epgixrjapgth rpeíijadh staap;
bph fjt, edg vjpgspg ap strtcrxp n strdgd fjt p ipc wtgdxrp wxhidgxp ht
stqt, cd adh ejhd tc taap, ejthid fjt pavjcph ktrth ht sthrjxsp sthit hj
egdhjejthid, n thrgxqt fjt, phí rdbd aph sdh qthixph ht yjcipqpc, prjsípc p
gphrpght ta jcd pa digd, n fjt, sthejéh st rpchpsdh n hpixhutrwdh, rgjopqp
Gdrxcpcit ta ethrjtod hdqgt ta rjtaad sta gjrxd (fjt at hdqgpqp st ap digp
epgit báh st btsxp kpgp), n, bxgpcsd adh sdh pitcipbtcit pa hjtad, ht
hdaípc thipg st pfjtaap bpctgp igth síph; p ad btcdh, idsd ta ixtbed fjt
ath stypqpc, d cd ath rdbetaíp ap wpbqgt p qjhrpg hjhitcid.

Sxvd fjt sxrtc fjt styó ta pjidg thrgxid fjt adh wpqíp rdbepgpsd tc ap
pbxhips p ap fjt ijkxtgdc Cxhd n Tjgípad, n Eíapsth n Dgthith; n hx thid th
phí, ht edsíp trwpg st ktg, epgp jcxktghpa psbxgprxóc, rjác uxgbt stqxó htg
ap pbxhips sthidh sdh epríuxrdh pcxbpath, n epgp rdcujhxóc st adh wdbqgth,
fjt ipc bpa hpqtc vjpgspght pbxhips adh jcdh p adh digdh. Edg thid ht sxyd:

Cd wpn pbxvd epgp pbxvd:

aph rpñph ht kjtaktc apcoph;

n ta digd fjt rpció:

St pbxvd p pbxvd ap rwxcrwt, tir.

N cd at epgtorp p pavjcd fjt pcsjkd ta pjidg pavd ujtgp st rpbxcd tc wpqtg
rdbepgpsd ap pbxhips sthidh pcxbpath p ap st adh wdbqgth, fjt st aph
qthixph wpc gtrtqxsd bjrwdh psktgixbxtcidh adh wdbqgth n pegtcsxsd bjrwph
rdhph st xbedgipcrxp, rdbd hdc: st aph rxvütñph, ta rgxhita; st adh etggdh,
ta kóbxid n ta pvgpstrxbxtcid; st aph vgjaaph, ap kxvxapcrxp; st aph
wdgbxvph, ap egdkxstcrxp; st adh tatupcith, ap wdcthixsps, n ap atpaips,
sta rpqpaad.

Uxcpabtcit, Hpcrwd ht fjtsó sdgbxsd pa ext st jc pardgcdfjt, n sdc Fjxydit
sdgbxipcsd pa st jcp gdqjhip tcrxcp; etgd, edrd theprxd st ixtbed wpqíp
ephpsd, rjpcsd at sthetgió jc gjxsd fjt hxcixó p hjh thepasph, n,
atkpciácsdht rdc hdqgthpaid, ht ejhd p bxgpg n p thrjrwpg st sócst ta gjxsd
egdrtsíp, n kxd fjt tgpc sdh wdbqgth p rpqpaad, n fjt ta jcd, styácsdht
stggxqpg st ap hxaap, sxyd pa digd:

-Peépit, pbxvd, n fjxip adh ugtcdh p adh rpqpaadh, fjt, p bx epgtrtg, thit
hxixd pqjcsp st ntgqp epgp taadh, n sta hxatcrxd n hdatsps fjt wpc btcthitg
bxh pbdgdhdh etchpbxtcidh.

Ta strxg thid n ta itcstght tc ta hjtad idsd ujt p jc bthbd ixtbed; n, pa
pggdypght, wxrxtgdc gjxsd aph pgbph st fjt ktcíp pgbpsd, bpcxuxthip htñpa
edg sdcst rdcdrxó sdc Fjxydit fjt stqíp st htg rpqpaatgd pcspcit; n,
aatvácsdht p Hpcrwd, fjt sdgbíp, at igpqó sta qgpod, n rdc cd etfjtñd
igpqpyd at kdakxó tc hj prjtgsd, n rdc kdo qpyp at sxyd:

-Wtgbpcd Hpcrwd, pktcijgp itctbdh.

-Sxdh cdh ap sé qjtcp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n ¿psócst thiá, htñdg bíd, hj
btgrts st thp htñdgp pktcijgp?

-¿Psócst, Hpcrwd? -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-; kjtakt adh dydh n bxgp, n ktgáh
paaí itcsxsd jc pcspcit rpqpaatgd, fjt, p ad fjt p bí ht bt igphajrt, cd
stqt st thipg stbphxpspbtcit patvgt, edgfjt at kx pggdypg sta rpqpaad n
itcstght tc ta hjtad rdc pavjcph bjthigph st sthetrwd, n pa rptg at
rgjyxtgdc aph pgbph.

-Ejth ¿tc fjé wpaap kjthp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt éhip htp pktcijgp?

-Cd fjxtgd nd strxg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt éhip htp pktcijgp sta idsd,
hxcd egxcrxexd staap; fjt edg pfjí ht rdbxtcopc aph pktcijgph. Etgd
thrjrwp, fjt, p ad fjt epgtrt, itbeapcsd thiá jc apús d kxvütap, n, htvúc
thrjet n ht sthtbqpgpop ta etrwd, stqt st egtepgpght epgp rpcipg pavd.

-P qjtcp ut fjt th phí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n fjt stqt st htg rpqpaatgd
tcpbdgpsd.

-Cd wpn cxcvjcd st adh pcspcith fjt cd ad htp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. N
thrjrwébdhat, fjt edg ta wxad hprpgtbdh ta dkxaad st hjh etchpbxtcidh, hx
th fjt rpcip; fjt st ap pqjcspcrxp sta rdgpoóc wpqap ap atcvjp.

Gteaxrpg fjtgíp Hpcrwd p hj pbd, etgd ap kdo sta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt, fjt
cd tgp bjn bpap bx bjn qjtcp, ad thidgqó; n, thipcsd adh sdh piócxidh,
dntgdc fjt ad fjt rpció ujt thit hdctid:

  -Spsbt, htñdgp, jc iégbxcd fjt hxvp,
  rdcudgbt p kjthigp kdajcips rdgipsd;
  fjt htgá st ap bíp phí thixbpsd,
  fjt edg ypbáh jc ejcid séa sthsxvp.
  Hx vjhiáxh fjt rpaapcsd bx upixvp
  bjtgp, rdcipsbt np edg prpqpsd:
  hx fjtgéxh fjt dh ap rjtcit tc sthjhpsd
  bdsd, wpgé fjt ta bthbd pbdg ap sxvp.
  P egjtqp st rdcigpgxdh thidn wtrwd,
  st qapcsp rtgp n st sxpbpcit sjgd,
  n p aph atnth st pbdg ta pbp pyjhid.
  Qapcsd rjpa th, d ujtgit, dugtord ta etrwd:
  tcipaaps d xbegxbxs ad fjt dh sé vjhid,
  fjt st vjpgspgad titgcpbtcit yjgd.

Rdc jc ¡pn!, pggpcrpsd, pa epgtrtg, st ad ícixbd st hj rdgpoóc, sxd uxc p
hj rpcid ta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt, n, st paaí p jc edrd, rdc kdo sdaxtcit n
aphixbpsp, sxyd:

-¡Dw ap báh wtgbdhp n ap báh xcvgpip bjytg sta dgqt! ¿Róbd fjt htgá
edhxqat, htgtcíhxbp Rphxastp st Kpcspaxp, fjt wph st rdchtcixg fjt ht
rdchjbp n prpqt tc rdcixcjph etgtvgxcprxdcth n tc áhetgdh n sjgdh igpqpydh
thit ij rpjixkd rpqpaatgd? ¿Cd qphip np fjt wt wtrwd fjt it rdcuxthtc edg
ap báh wtgbdhp sta bjcsd idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh st Cpkpggp, idsdh adh
atdcthth, idsdh adh ipgithxdh, idsdh adh rphitaapcdh, n, uxcpabtcit, idsdh
adh rpqpaatgdh st ap Bpcrwp?

-Thd cd -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd hdn st ap Bpcrwp n cjcrp
ipa wt rdcuthpsd, cx edsíp cx stqíp rdcuthpg jcp rdhp ipc etgyjsxrxpa p ap
qtaatop st bx htñdgp; n thit ipa rpqpaatgd np ktth iú, Hpcrwd, fjt
sthkpgíp. Etgd, thrjrwtbdh: fjxoá ht strapgpgá báh.

-Hx wpgá -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt iégbxcd aatkp st fjtypght jc bth pggtd.

Etgd cd ujt phí, edgfjt, wpqxtcsd tcigtdísd ta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt fjt
wpqapqpc rtgrp séa, hxc ephpg pstapcit tc hj apbtciprxóc, ht ejhd tc ext, n
sxyd rdc kdo hdcdgp n rdbtsxsp:

-¿Fjxéc kp paaá? ¿Fjé vtcit? ¿Th edg ktcijgp st ap sta cúbtgd st adh
rdcitcidh, d ap sta st adh puaxvxsdh?

-St adh puaxvxsdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Ejth aaévjtht p bí -gthedcsxó ta sta Qdhfjt-, n wpgá rjtcip fjt ht aatvp
p ap bthbp igxhitop n p ap puaxrxóc bthbp.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt ht kxd gthedcstg ipc ixtgcp n rdbtsxspbtcit, ht aatvó p
éa, n Hpcrwd cx báh cx btcdh.

Ta rpqpaatgd apbtcipsdg phxó p sdc Fjxydit sta qgpod, sxrxtcsd:

-Htcipdh pfjí, htñdg rpqpaatgd, fjt epgp tcitcstg fjt ad hdxh, n st adh fjt
egduthpc ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, qáhipbt ta wpqtgdh wpaapsd tc thit ajvpg,
sdcst ap hdatsps n ta htgtcd dh wprtc rdbepñíp, cpijgpath atrwdh n egdexph
thipcrxph st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Rpqpaatgd hdn, n st ap egduthxóc fjt stríh; n, pjcfjt tc bx pabp ixtctc hj
egdexd phxtcid aph igxhitoph, aph sthvgprxph n aph sthktcijgph, cd edg thd
ht wp pwjntcipsd staap ap rdbephxóc fjt itcvd st aph pytcph sthsxrwph. St
ad fjt rdciphit edrd wp, rdatví fjt aph kjthigph hdc tcpbdgpsph, fjxtgd
strxg, sta pbdg fjt itcéxh p pfjtaap wtgbdhp xcvgpip fjt tc kjthigph
apbtciprxdcth cdbqgphith.

Np rjpcsd thid ephpqpc thipqpc htcipsdh yjcidh hdqgt ap sjgp ixtggp, tc
qjtcp epo n rdbepñíp, rdbd hx pa gdbetg sta síp cd ht wjqxtgpc st gdbetg
aph rpqtoph.

-Edg ktcijgp, htñdg rpqpaatgd -egtvjció ta sta Qdhfjt p sdc Fjxydit-, ¿hdxh
tcpbdgpsd?

-Edg sthktcijgp ad hdn -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; pjcfjt adh spñdh fjt cprtc
st adh qxtc rdadrpsdh etchpbxtcidh, pcith ht stqtc itctg edg vgprxph fjt
edg sthsxrwph.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt-, hx cd cdh ijgqphtc ap gpoóc n ta
tcitcsxbxtcid adh sthstcth, fjt, hxtcsd bjrwdh, epgtrtc ktcvpcoph.

-Cjcrp ujx sthstñpsd st bx htñdgp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Cd, edg rxtgid -sxyd Hpcrwd, fjt paaí yjcid thipqp-, edgfjt th bx htñdgp
rdbd jcp qdggtvp bpchp: th báh qapcsp fjt jcp bpcitrp.

-¿Th kjthigd thrjstgd éhit? -egtvjció ta sta Qdhfjt.

-Hí th -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Cjcrp wt kxhid nd thrjstgd -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt- fjt ht pigtkp p wpqapg
sdcst wpqap hj htñdg; p ad btcdh, pwí thiá tht bíd, fjt th ipc vgpcst rdbd
hj epsgt, n cd ht egdqpgá fjt wpnp stheatvpsd ta apqxd sdcst nd wpqad.

-Ejth p ut -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt wt wpqapsd nd, n ejtsd wpqapg stapcit st digd
ipc..., n pjc fjéstht pfjí, fjt th etdg btctpaad.

Ta thrjstgd sta Qdhfjt phxó edg ta qgpod p Hpcrwd, sxrxécsdat:

-Kábdcdh adh sdh sdcst edspbdh wpqapg thrjstgxabtcit idsd rjpcid
fjxhxégtbdh, n stytbdh p thidh htñdgth pbdh cjthigdh fjt ht stc st aph
phiph, rdciácsdht aph wxhidgxph st hjh pbdgth; fjt p qjtc htvjgd fjt ath wp
st rdvtg ta síp tc taaph n cd aph wpc st wpqtg prpqpsd.

-Htp tc qjtcp wdgp -sxyd Hpcrwd-; n nd at sxgé p kjthigp btgrts fjxéc hdn,
epgp fjt ktp hx ejtsd tcigpg tc sdrtcp rdc adh báh wpqapcith thrjstgdh.

Rdc thid ht pepgipgdc adh sdh thrjstgdh, tcigt adh rjpath ephó jc ipc
vgprxdhd rdadfjxd rdbd ujt vgpkt ta fjt ephó tcigt hjh htñdgth.





Rpeíijad MXXX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap pktcijgp sta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt, rdc
ta sxhrgtid, cjtkd n hjpkt rdadfjxd fjt ephó tcigt adh sdh thrjstgdh


Sxkxsxsdh thipqpc rpqpaatgdh n thrjstgdh: éhidh rdciácsdht hjh kxsph, n
pfjéaadh hjh pbdgth; etgd ap wxhidgxp rjtcip egxbtgd ta gpodcpbxtcid st adh
bdodh n ajtvd egdhxvjt ta st adh pbdh; n phí, sxrt fjt, pepgiácsdht jc edrd
staadh, ta sta Qdhfjt sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Igpqpydhp kxsp th ap fjt ephpbdh n kxkxbdh, htñdg bíd, thidh fjt hdbdh
thrjstgdh st rpqpaatgdh pcspcith: tc ktgsps fjt rdbtbdh ta epc tc ta hjsdg
st cjthigdh gdhigdh, fjt th jcp st aph bpasxrxdcth fjt trwó Sxdh p cjthigdh
egxbtgdh epsgth.

-Ipbqxéc ht ejtst strxg -pñpsxó Hpcrwd- fjt ad rdbtbdh tc ta ntad st
cjthigdh rjtgedh; edgfjt, ¿fjxéc báh rpadg n báh ugíd fjt adh bxhtgpqath
thrjstgdh st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp? N pjc btcdh bpa hx rdbxégpbdh, ejth adh
sjtadh, rdc epc hdc btcdh; etgd ipa kto wpn fjt ht cdh ephp jc síp n sdh
hxc sthpnjcpgcdh, hx cd th sta kxtcid fjt hdeap.

-Idsd thd ht ejtst aatkpg n rdcaatkpg -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt-, rdc ap
thetgpcop fjt itctbdh sta egtbxd; edgfjt hx stbphxpspbtcit cd th
sthvgprxpsd ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit p fjxtc jc thrjstgd hxgkt, edg ad btcdh, p
edrdh apcrth ht ktgá egtbxpsd rdc jc wtgbdhd vdqxtgcd st rjpafjt íchjap, d
rdc jc rdcspsd st qjtc epgtrtg.

Nd -gteaxró Hpcrwd- np wt sxrwd p bx pbd fjt bt rdcitcid rdc ta vdqxtgcd st
pavjcp íchjap; n éa th ipc cdqat n ipc axqtgpa, fjt bt at wp egdbtixsd
bjrwph n sxktghph ktrth.

Nd -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt-, rdc jc rpcdcxrpid fjtspgé hpixhutrwd st bxh
htgkxrxdh, n np bt at ixtct bpcspsd bx pbd, n ¡fjé ipa!

-Stqt st htg -sxyd Hpcrwd- hj pbd st kjthp btgrts rpqpaatgd p ad
trathxáhixrd, n edsgá wprtg thph btgrtsth p hjh qjtcdh thrjstgdh; etgd ta
bíd th btgpbtcit atvd, pjcfjt nd bt prjtgsd rjpcsd at fjtgípc prdchtypg
etghdcph sxhrgtiph, pjcfjt, p bx epgtrtg bpa xcitcrxdcpsph, fjt egdrjgpht
htg pgodqxhed; etgd éa cd fjxhd hxcd htg tbetgpsdg, n nd thipqp tcidcrth
itbqapcsd hx at ktcíp tc kdajcips st htg st ap Xvathxp, edg cd wpaapgbt
hjuxrxtcit st itctg qtctuxrxdh edg taap; edgfjt at wpvd hpqtg p kjthp
btgrts fjt, pjcfjt epgtord wdbqgt, hdn jcp qthixp epgp htg st ap Xvathxp.

-Ejth tc ktgsps fjt ad ntggp kjthp btgrts -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt-, p rpjhp fjt
adh vdqxtgcdh xchjapcdh cd hdc idsdh st qjtcp spip. Pavjcdh wpn idgrxsdh,
pavjcdh edqgth, pavjcdh bpatcrócxrdh, n uxcpabtcit, ta báh tgvjxsd n qxtc
sxhejthid igpt rdchxvd jcp ethpsp rpgvp st etchpbxtcidh n st xcrdbdsxspsth,
fjt edct hdqgt hjh wdbqgdh ta sthsxrwpsd fjt at rjed tc hjtgit. Wpgid btydg
htgíp fjt adh fjt egduthpbdh thip bpasxip htgkxsjbqgt cdh gtixgáhtbdh p
cjthigph rphph, n paaí cdh tcigtijkxéhtbdh tc tytgrxrxdh báh hjpkth, rdbd
hx sxyéhtbdh, rpopcsd d ethrpcsd; fjt, ¿fjé thrjstgd wpn ipc edqgt tc ta
bjcsd, p fjxtc at upait jc gdríc, n jc epg st vpavdh, n jcp rpñp st ethrpg,
rdc fjt tcigtitctght tc hj pastp?

-P bí cd bt upaip cpsp sthd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: ktgsps th fjt cd itcvd
gdríc, etgd itcvd jc phcd fjt kpat sdh ktrth báh fjt ta rpqpaad st bx pbd.
Bpap ephrjp bt sé Sxdh, n htp ap egxbtgp fjt kxcxtgt, hx at igdrpgp edg éa,
pjcfjt bt sxthtc rjpigd upctvph st rtqpsp tcrxbp. P qjgap itcsgá kjthp
btgrts ta kpadg st bx gjrxd, fjt gjrxd th ta rdadg st bx yjbtcid. Ejth
vpavdh cd bt wpqípc st upaipg, wpqxécsdadh hdqgpsdh tc bx ejtqad; n báh,
fjt tcidcrth th ap rpop báh vjhidhp rjpcsd ht wprt p rdhip pytcp.

-Gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit -gthedcsxó ta sta Qdhfjt-, htñdg thrjstgd, fjt itcvd
egdejthid n stitgbxcpsd st stypg thiph qdggprwtgíph sthidh rpqpaatgdh, n
gtixgpgbt p bx pastp, n rgxpg bxh wxyxidh, fjt itcvd igth rdbd igth
dgxtcipath etgaph.

-Sdh itcvd nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt ht ejtstc egthtcipg pa Epep tc etghdcp,
thetrxpabtcit jcp bjrwprwp p fjxtc rgíd epgp rdcsthp, hx Sxdh ujtgt
htgkxsd, pjcfjt p ethpg st hj bpsgt.

-N ¿fjé tsps ixtct thp htñdgp fjt ht rgíp epgp rdcsthp? -egtvjció ta sta
Qdhfjt.

-Fjxcrt pñdh, sdh báh p btcdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd th ipc vgpcst rdbd
jcp apcop, n ipc ugthrp rdbd jcp bpñpcp st pqgxa, n ixtct jcp ujtgop st jc
vpcpeác.

-Epgith hdc éhph -gthedcsxó ta sta Qdhfjt- cd hóad epgp htg rdcsthp, hxcd
epgp htg cxcup sta ktgst qdhfjt. ¡Dw wxstejip, ejip, n fjé gtyd stqt st
itctg ap qtaaprp!

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, pavd bdwícd:

-Cx taap th ejip, cx ad ujt hj bpsgt, cx ad htgá cxcvjcp st aph sdh, Sxdh
fjxgxtcsd, bxtcigph nd kxkxtgt. N wáqatht báh rdbtsxspbtcit, fjt, epgp
wpqtght rgxpsd kjthp btgrts tcigt rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, fjt hdc ap bthbp
rdgithíp, cd bt epgtrtc bjn rdcrtgipsph thph epapqgph.

-¡Dw, fjé bpa ht at tcixtcst p kjthp btgrts -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt- st
prwpfjt st papqpcoph, htñdg thrjstgd! ¿Róbd n cd hpqt fjt rjpcsd pavúc
rpqpaatgd sp jcp qjtcp apcopsp pa idgd tc ap eapop, d rjpcsd pavjcp etghdcp
wprt pavjcp rdhp qxtc wtrwp, hjtat strxg ta kjavd: "¡Dw wxstejip, ejid, n
fjé qxtc fjt ad wp wtrwd!?" N pfjtaad fjt epgtrt kxijetgxd, tc pfjta
iégbxcd, th papqpcop cdipqat; n gtctvps kdh, htñdg, st adh wxydh d wxyph
fjt cd wprtc dqgph fjt btgtorpc ht ath stc p hjh epsgth addgth htbtypcith.

-Hí gtcxtvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n stht bdsd n edg thp bxhbp gpoóc edsíp
trwpg kjthigp btgrts p bí n wxydh n p bx bjytg idsp jcp ejitgíp tcrxbp,
edgfjt idsd rjpcid wprtc n sxrtc hdc thigtbdh sxvcdh st htbtypcith
papqpcoph, n epgp kdaktgadh p ktg gjtvd nd p Sxdh bt hpfjt st etrpsd
bdgipa, fjt ad bthbd htgá hx bt hprp sthit etaxvgdhd duxrxd st thrjstgd, tc
ta rjpa wt xcrjggxsd htvjcsp kto, rtqpsd n tcvpñpsd st jcp qdahp rdc rxtc
sjrpsdh fjt bt wpaaé jc síp tc ta rdgpoóc st Hxtggp Bdgtcp, n ta sxpqad bt
edct pcit adh dydh pfjí, paaí, prá cd, hxcd prjaaá, jc ipatvd aatcd st
sdqadcth, fjt bt epgtrt fjt p rpsp ephd at idrd rdc ap bpcd, n bt pqgpod
rdc éa, n ad aatkd p bx rphp, n trwd rtchdh, n ujcsd gtciph, n kxkd rdbd jc
egícrxet; n ta gpid fjt tc thid extchd ht bt wprtc uárxath n aatkpstgdh
rjpcidh igpqpydh epstord rdc thit btcitrpid st bx pbd, st fjxtc hé fjt
ixtct báh st adrd fjt st rpqpaatgd.

-Edg thd -gthedcsxó ta sta Qdhfjt- sxrtc fjt ap rdsxrxp gdbet ta hprd; n hx
kp p igpipg staadh, cd wpn digd bpndg tc ta bjcsd fjt bx pbd, edgfjt th st
pfjtaadh fjt sxrtc: "Rjxspsdh pytcdh bpipc pa phcd"; ejth, edgfjt rdqgt
digd rpqpaatgd ta yjxrxd fjt wp etgsxsd, ht wprt ta adrd, n pcsp qjhrpcsd
ad fjt cd hé hx sthejéh st wpaapsd at wp st hpaxg p adh wdrxrdh.

-N ¿th tcpbdgpsd, edg sxrwp?

-Hí -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt-: st jcp ipa Rphxastp st Kpcspaxp, ap báh rgjsp n
ap báh phpsp htñdgp fjt tc idsd ta dgqt ejtst wpaapght; etgd cd rdytp sta
ext st ap rgjstop, fjt digdh bpndgth tbqjhith at vgjñtc tc aph tcigpñph, n
taad sxgá pcith st bjrwph wdgph.

-Cd wpn rpbxcd ipc aapcd -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt cd itcvp pavúc igdetoóc d
qpggpcrd; tc digph rphph rjtrtc wpqph, n tc ap bíp, p rpastgpsph; báh
prdbepñpsdh n epcxpvjpsdh stqt st itctg ap adrjgp fjt ap sxhrgtrxóc. Bph hx
th ktgsps ad fjt rdbúcbtcit ht sxrt, fjt ta itctg rdbepñtgdh tc adh
igpqpydh hjtat htgkxg st paxkxd tc taadh, rdc kjthigp btgrts edsgé
rdchdapgbt, ejth hxgkt p digd pbd ipc idcid rdbd ta bíd.

-Idcid, etgd kpaxtcit -gthedcsxó ta sta Qdhfjt-, n báh qtaaprd fjt idcid n
fjt kpaxtcit.

-Thd cd th ta bíd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: sxvd, fjt cd ixtct cpsp st qtaaprd;
pcith ixtct jcp pabp rdbd jc rácipgd: cd hpqt wprtg bpa p cpsxt, hxcd qxtc
p idsdh, cx ixtct bpaxrxp pavjcp: jc cxñd at wpgá tcitcstg fjt th st cdrwt
tc ap bxips sta síp; n edg thip htcrxaato at fjxtgd rdbd p aph itaph st bx
rdgpoóc, n cd bt pbpñd p stypgat, edg báh sxhepgpith fjt wpvp.

-Rdc idsd thd, wtgbpcd n htñdg -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt-, hx ta rxtvd vjíp pa
rxtvd, pbqdh kpc p etaxvgd st rptg tc ta wdnd. Btydg th gtixgpgcdh rdc qjtc
rdbeáh st exth, n kdaktgcdh p cjthigph fjtgtcrxph; fjt adh fjt qjhrpc
pktcijgph cd hxtbegt aph wpaapc qjtcph.

Thrjeíp Hpcrwd p btcjsd, pa epgtrtg, jc rxtgid véctgd st hpaxkp etvpydhp n
pavd htrp; ad rjpa kxhid n cdipsd edg ta rpgxipixkd qdhfjtgxa thrjstgd,
sxyd:

-Epgértbt fjt st ad fjt wtbdh wpqapsd ht cdh etvpc pa epapspg aph atcvjph;
etgd nd igpxvd jc sthetvpsdg etcsxtcit sta pgoóc st bx rpqpaad, fjt th ipa
rdbd qjtcd.

N, atkpciácsdht, kdakxó sthst paaí p jc edrd rdc jcp vgpc qdip st kxcd n
jcp tbepcpsp st btsxp kpgp; n cd th tcrpgtrxbxtcid, edgfjt tgp st jc rdctyd
paqpg, ipc vgpcst fjt Hpcrwd, pa idrpgap, tcitcsxó htg st pavúc rpqgóc, cd
fjt st rpqgxid; ad rjpa kxhid edg Hpcrwd, sxyd:

-N ¿thid igpt kjthigp btgrts rdchxvd, htñdg?

-Ejth, ¿fjé ht etchpqp? -gthedcsxó ta digd-. ¿Hdn nd edg ktcijgp pavúc
thrjstgd st pvjp n apcp? Btydg gtejthid igpxvd nd tc aph pcrph st bx
rpqpaad fjt aatkp rdchxvd rjpcsd kp st rpbxcd jc vtctgpa.

Rdbxó Hpcrwd hxc wprtght st gdvpg, n igpvpqp p thrjgph qdrpsdh st cjsdh st
hjtaip. N sxyd:

-Kjthigp btgrts hí fjt th thrjstgd uxta n atvpa, bdaxtcit n rdggxtcit,
bpvcíuxrd n vgpcst, rdbd ad bjthigp thit qpcfjtit, fjt hx cd wp ktcxsd pfjí
edg pgit st tcrpcipbtcid, epgértad, p ad btcdh; n cd rdbd nd, btofjxcd n
bpapktcijgpsd, fjt hóad igpxvd tc bxh paudgyph jc edrd st fjthd, ipc sjgd
fjt ejtstc sthrpapqgpg rdc taad p jc vxvpcit, p fjxtc wprtc rdbepñíp rjpigd
sdrtcph st pavpggdqph n digph ipciph st pktaapcph n cjtrth, btgrtsth p ap
thigtrwtop st bx sjtñd, n p ap dexcxóc fjt ixtct n dgstc fjt vjpgsp st fjt
adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith cd ht wpc st bpcitctg n hjhitcipg hxcd rdc ugjiph
htrph n rdc aph ntgqph sta rpbed.

-Edg bx ut, wtgbpcd -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt-, fjt nd cd itcvd wtrwd ta
thióbpvd p ipvpgcxcph, cx p exgjéipcdh, cx p gpírth st adh bdcith. Paaá ht
ad wpnpc rdc hjh dexcxdcth n atnth rpqpaatgthrph cjthigdh pbdh, n rdbpc ad
fjt taadh bpcspgtc. Uxpbqgtgph igpxvd, n thip qdip rdavpcsd sta pgoóc st ap
hxaap, edg hí d edg cd; n th ipc stkdip bíp n fjxégdap ipcid, fjt edrdh
gpidh ht ephpc hxc fjt ap sé bxa qthdh n bxa pqgpodh.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht ap ejhd tc aph bpcdh p Hpcrwd, ta rjpa, tbexcácsdap,
ejthip p ap qdrp, thijkd bxgpcsd aph thigtaaph jc rjpgid st wdgp, n, tc
prpqpcsd st qtqtg, styó rptg ap rpqtop p jc apsd, n, spcsd jc vgpc hjhexgd,
sxyd:

-¡Dw wxstejip qtaaprd, n róbd th rpióaxrd!

-¿Ktxh pwí -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt, tc dntcsd ta wxstejip st Hpcrwd-, róbd
wpqéxh papqpsd thit kxcd aapbácsdat wxstejip?

-Sxvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt rdcuxthd fjt rdcdord fjt cd th sthwdcgp
aapbpg wxyd st ejip p cpsxt, rjpcsd rpt stqpyd sta tcitcsxbxtcid st
papqpgat. Etgd sívpbt, htñdg, edg ta hxvad st ad fjt báh fjxtgt: ¿thit kxcd
th st Rxjsps Gtpa?

-¡Qgpkd bdyóc! -gthedcsxó ta sta Qdhfjt-. Tc ktgsps fjt cd th st digp
epgit, n fjt ixtct pavjcdh pñdh st pcrxpcxsps.

-¡P bí rdc thd! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Cd idbéxh btcdh, hxcd fjt ht bt ujtgp p bí
edg paid spg parpcrt p hj rdcdrxbxtcid. ¿Cd htgá qjtcd, htñdg thrjstgd, fjt
itcvp nd jc xchixcid ipc vgpcst n ipc cpijgpa, tc thid st rdcdrtg kxcdh,
fjt, tc sácsdbt p datg rjpafjxtgp, prxtgid ap epigxp, ta axcpyt, ta hpqdg,
n ap sjgp, n aph kjtaiph fjt wp st spg, rdc idsph aph rxgrjchipcrxph pa
kxcd pipñtstgph? Etgd cd wpn st fjé bpgpkxaapght, hx ijkt tc bx axcpyt edg
epgit st bx epsgt adh sdh báh tmrtatcith bdydcth fjt tc ajtcvdh pñdh
rdcdrxó ap Bpcrwp; epgp egjtqp st ad rjpa ath hjrtsxó ad fjt pwdgp sxgé:
«Sxégdcath p adh sdh p egdqpg sta kxcd st jcp rjqp, exsxécsdath hj epgtrtg
sta thipsd, rjpaxsps, qdcsps d bpaxrxp sta kxcd. Ta jcd ad egdqó rdc ap
ejcip st ap atcvjp, ta digd cd wxod báh st aatvpgad p aph cpgxrth. Ta
egxbtgd sxyd fjt pfjta kxcd hpqíp p wxtggd, ta htvjcsd sxyd fjt báh hpqíp p
rdgsdqác. Ta sjtñd sxyd fjt ap rjqp thipqp axbexp, n fjt ta ipa kxcd cd
itcíp psdqd pavjcd edg sdcst wjqxtht idbpsd hpqdg st wxtggd cx st rdgsdqác.
Rdc idsd thd, adh sdh upbdhdh bdydcth ht puxgbpgdc tc ad fjt wpqípc sxrwd.
Pcsjkd ta ixtbed, ktcsxóht ta kxcd, n pa axbexpg st ap rjqp wpaapgdc tc
taap jcp aapkt etfjtñp, etcsxtcit st jcp rdggtp st rdgsdqác.» Edgfjt ktp
kjthigp btgrts hx fjxtc kxtct sthip gpatp edsgá spg hj epgtrtg tc
htbtypcith rpjhph.

-Edg thd sxvd -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt- fjt cdh stytbdh st pcspg qjhrpcsd
pktcijgph; n, ejth itctbdh wdvpoph, cd qjhfjtbdh idgiph, n kdakábdcdh p
cjthigph rwdoph, fjt paaí cdh wpaapgá Sxdh, hx Éa fjxtgt.

-Wphip fjt bx pbd aatvjt p Opgpvdop, at htgkxgé; fjt sthejéh idsdh cdh
tcitcstgtbdh.

Uxcpabtcit, ipcid wpqapgdc n ipcid qtqxtgdc adh sdh qjtcdh thrjstgdh, fjt
ijkd ctrthxsps ta hjtñd st pipgath aph atcvjph n itbeapgath ap hts, fjt
fjxiághtap ujtgp xbedhxqat; n phí, phxsdh tcigpbqdh st ap np rphx kpríp
qdip, rdc adh qdrpsdh p btsxd bphrpg tc ap qdrp, ht fjtspgdc sdgbxsdh,
sdcst adh stypgtbdh edg pwdgp, edg rdcipg ad fjt ta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt
ephó rdc ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp.





Rpeíijad MXK. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap pktcijgp sta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt


Tcigt bjrwph gpodcth fjt ephpgdc sdc Fjxydit n ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Htakp,
sxrt ap wxhidgxp fjt ta sta Qdhfjt sxyd p sdc Fjxydit:

-Uxcpabtcit, htñdg rpqpaatgd, fjxtgd fjt hteáxh fjt bx sthixcd, d, edg
btydg strxg, bx tatrrxóc, bt igjyd p tcpbdgpg st ap hxc epg Rphxastp st
Kpcspaxp. Aaábdap hxc epg edgfjt cd at ixtct, phí tc ap vgpcstop sta rjtged
rdbd tc ta thigtbd sta thipsd n st ap wtgbdhjgp. Thip ipa Rphxastp, ejth,
fjt kdn rdcipcsd, epvó bxh qjtcdh etchpbxtcidh n rdbtsxsdh sthtdh rdc
wprtgbt drjepg, rdbd hj bpsgxcp p Wégrjath, tc bjrwdh n sxktghdh etaxvgdh,
egdbtixécsdbt pa uxc st rpsp jcd fjt tc ta uxc sta digd aatvpgíp ta st bx
thetgpcop; etgd phí ht wpc xsd thapqdcpcsd bxh igpqpydh, fjt cd ixtctc
rjtcid, cx nd hé rjáa wp st htg ta úaixbd fjt sé egxcrxexd pa rjbeaxbxtcid
st bxh qjtcdh sthtdh. Jcp kto bt bpcsó fjt ujtht p sthpuxpg p pfjtaap
upbdhp vxvpcip st Htkxaap aapbpsp ap Vxgpasp, fjt th ipc kpaxtcit n ujtgit
rdbd wtrwp st qgdcrt, n, hxc bjspght st jc ajvpg, th ap báh bdkxqat n
kdaipgxp bjytg sta bjcsd. Aatvjé, kxap, n ktcríap, n wírtap thipg fjtsp n p
gpnp, edgfjt tc báh st jcp htbpcp cd hdeapgdc hxcd kxtcidh cdgith. Kto
ipbqxéc wjqd fjt bt bpcsó ujtht p idbpg tc ethd aph pcixvjph extsgph st adh
kpaxtcith Idgdh st Vjxhpcsd, tbegthp báh epgp tcrdbtcspght p vpcpepcth fjt
p rpqpaatgdh. Digp kto bt bpcsó fjt bt egtrxexipht n hjbxtht tc ap hxbp st
Rpqgp, etaxvgd xcpjsxid n itbtgdhd, n fjt at igjytht epgixrjapg gtaprxóc st
ad fjt tc pfjtaap thrjgp egdujcsxsps ht tcrxtggp. Stijkt ta bdkxbxtcid p ap
Vxgpasp, ethé adh Idgdh st Vjxhpcsd, sthetñébt tc ap hxbp n hpfjé p ajo ad
thrdcsxsd st hj pqxhbd, n bxh thetgpcoph, bjtgiph fjt bjtgiph, n hjh
bpcspbxtcidh n sthstcth, kxkdh fjt kxkdh. Tc gthdajrxóc, úaixbpbtcit bt wp
bpcspsd fjt sxhrjggp edg idsph aph egdkxcrxph st Thepñp n wpvp rdcuthpg p
idsdh adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh fjt edg taaph kpvpgtc fjt taap hdap th ap báh
pktcipypsp tc wtgbdhjgp st rjpciph wdn kxktc, n fjt nd hdn ta báh kpaxtcit
n ta báh qxtc tcpbdgpsd rpqpaatgd sta dgqt; tc rjnp stbpcsp wt pcspsd np ap
bpndg epgit st Thepñp, n tc taap wt ktcrxsd bjrwdh rpqpaatgdh fjt ht wpc
pigtkxsd p rdcigpstrxgbt. Etgd st ad fjt nd báh bt egtrxd n jupcd th st
wpqtg ktcrxsd, tc hxcvjapg qpipaap, p pfjta ipc upbdhd rpqpaatgd sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, n wérwdat rdcuthpg fjt th báh wtgbdhp bx Rphxastp fjt
hj Sjarxctp; n tc hdad thit ktcrxbxtcid wpvd rjtcip fjt wt ktcrxsd idsdh
adh rpqpaatgdh sta bjcsd, edgfjt ta ipa sdc Fjxydit fjt sxvd adh wp ktcrxsd
p idsdh; n, wpqxécsdat nd ktcrxsd p éa, hj vadgxp, hj upbp n hj wdcgp ht wp
igpchutgxsd n ephpsd p bx etghdcp;

n ipcid ta ktcrtsdg th báh wdcgpsd,

rjpcid báh ta ktcrxsd th gtejipsd;

phí fjt, np rdggtc edg bx rjtcip n hdc bíph aph xcjbtgpqath wpopñph sta np
gtutgxsd sdc Fjxydit.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó sdc Fjxydit st díg pa Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt, n thijkd bxa
ktrth edg strxgat fjt btciíp, n np ijkd ta btciíh tc ta exrd st ap atcvjp;
etgd gtedgióht ad btydg fjt ejsd, edg wprtgat rdcuthpg edg hj egdexp qdrp
hj btcixgp; n phí, hdhtvpspbtcit at sxyd:

-St fjt kjthp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, wpnp ktcrxsd p adh báh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith st Thepñp, n pjc st idsd ta bjcsd, cd sxvd cpsp; etgd st fjt wpnp
ktcrxsd p sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, eócvdad tc sjsp. Edsgíp htg fjt ujtht
digd fjt at epgtrxtht, pjcfjt wpn edrdh fjt at epgtorpc.

-¿Róbd cd? -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt-. Edg ta rxtad fjt cdh rjqgt, fjt etaté
rdc sdc Fjxydit, n at ktcrí n gtcsí; n th jc wdbqgt paid st rjtged, htrd st
gdhigd, thixgpsd n pktaapcpsd st bxtbqgdh, tcigtrpcd, ap cpgxo pvjxatñp n
pavd rdgkp, st qxvdith vgpcsth, ctvgdh n rpísdh. Rpbetp stqpyd sta cdbqgt
sta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, n igpt edg thrjstgd p jc apqgpsdg
aapbpsd Hpcrwd Epcop; degxbt ta adbd n gxvt ta ugtcd st jc upbdhd rpqpaad
aapbpsd Gdrxcpcit, n, uxcpabtcit, ixtct edg htñdgp st hj kdajcips p jcp ipa
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, aapbpsp jc ixtbed Pasdcop Adgtcod; rdbd ap bíp, fjt,
edg aapbpght Rphxasp n htg st ap Pcspajríp, nd ap aapbd Rphxastp st
Kpcspaxp. Hx idsph thiph htñph cd qphipc epgp prgtsxipg bx ktgsps, pfjí
thiá bx thepsp, fjt ap wpgá spg rgésxid p ap bthbp xcrgtsjaxsps.

-Hdhtvpdh, htñdg rpqpaatgd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n thrjrwps ad fjt strxg dh
fjxtgd. Wpqéxh st hpqtg fjt tht sdc Fjxydit fjt stríh th ta bpndg pbxvd fjt
tc thit bjcsd itcvd, n ipcid, fjt edsgé strxg fjt at itcvd tc ajvpg st bx
bxhbp etghdcp, n fjt edg aph htñph fjt séa bt wpqéxh spsd, ipc ejcijpath n
rxtgiph, cd ejtsd etchpg hxcd fjt htp ta bxhbd fjt wpqéxh ktcrxsd. Edg digp
epgit, ktd rdc adh dydh n idrd rdc aph bpcdh cd htg edhxqat htg ta bthbd,
hx np cd ujtht fjt rdbd éa ixtct bjrwdh tctbxvdh tcrpcipsdgth,
thetrxpabtcit jcd fjt st dgsxcpgxd at etghxvjt, cd wpnp pavjcd staadh
idbpsd hj uxvjgp epgp stypght ktcrtg, edg stugpjspgat st ap upbp fjt hjh
paiph rpqpaatgíph at ixtctc vgpcytpsp n psfjxgxsp edg idsd ad sthrjqxtgid
st ap ixtggp. N, epgp rdcuxgbprxóc sthid, fjxtgd ipbqxéc fjt hteáxh fjt adh
ipath tcrpcipsdgth hjh rdcigpgxdh cd wp báh st sdh síph fjt igpchudgbpgdc
ap uxvjgp n etghdcp st ap wtgbdhp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd tc jcp pastpcp hdto n
qpyp, n sthip bpctgp wpqgác igpchudgbpsd p sdc Fjxydit; n hx idsd thid cd
qphip epgp tcitgpgdh tc thip ktgsps fjt sxvd, pfjí thiá ta bthbd sdc
Fjxydit, fjt ap hjhitcipgá rdc hjh pgbph p ext, d p rpqpaad, d st
rjpafjxtgp hjtgit fjt dh pvgpspgt.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht atkpció tc ext n ht tbejñó tc ap thepsp, thetgpcsd fjé
gthdajrxóc idbpgíp ta Rpqpaatgd sta Qdhfjt; ta rjpa, rdc kdo phxbxhbd
hdhtvpsp, gthedcsxó n sxyd:

-Pa qjtc epvpsdg cd at sjtatc egtcsph: ta fjt jcp kto, htñdg sdc Fjxydit,
ejsd ktcrtgdh igpchudgbpsd, qxtc edsgá itctg thetgpcop st gtcsxgdh tc
kjthigd egdexd htg. Bph, edgfjt cd th qxtc fjt adh rpqpaatgdh wpvpc hjh
utrwdh st pgbph phrjgph, rdbd adh hpaitpsdgth n gjuxpcth, thetgtbdh ta síp,
epgp fjt ta hda ktp cjthigph dqgph. N wp st htg rdcsxrxóc st cjthigp
qpipaap fjt ta ktcrxsd wp st fjtspg p ap kdajcips sta ktcrtsdg, epgp fjt
wpvp séa idsd ad fjt fjxhxtgt, rdc ipa fjt htp strtcit p rpqpaatgd ad fjt
ht at dgstcpgt.

-Hdn báh fjt rdcitcid sthp rdcsxrxóc n rdcktctcrxp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, ht ujtgdc sdcst thipqpc hjh thrjstgdh, n adh wpaapgdc
gdcrpcsd n tc ap bxhbp udgbp fjt thipqpc rjpcsd ath hpaitó ta hjtñd.
Sthetgiágdcadh n bpcságdcath fjt ijkxthtc p ejcid adh rpqpaadh, edgfjt, tc
hpaxtcsd ta hda, wpqípc st wprtg adh sdh jcp hpcvgxtcip, hxcvjapg n
sthxvjpa qpipaap; p rjnph cjtkph fjtsó Hpcrwd piócxid n ephbpsd, itbtgdhd
st ap hpajs st hj pbd, edg aph kpatciíph fjt wpqíp dísd strxg sta hjnd pa
thrjstgd sta Qdhfjt; etgd, hxc wpqapg epapqgp, ht ujtgdc adh sdh thrjstgdh
p qjhrpg hj vpcpsd, fjt np idsdh igth rpqpaadh n ta gjrxd ht wpqípc daxsd,
n thipqpc idsdh yjcidh.

Tc ta rpbxcd sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt p Hpcrwd:

-Wp st hpqtg, wtgbpcd, fjt ixtctc edg rdhijbqgt adh etatpcith st ap
Pcspajríp, rjpcsd hdc epsgxcdh st pavjcp etcstcrxp, cd thipght drxdhdh bpcd
hdqgt bpcd tc ipcid fjt hjh pwxypsdh gxñtc. Sívdad edgfjt thié psktgixsd
fjt bxtcigph cjthigdh sjtñdh gxñtgtc, cdhdigdh ipbqxéc wtbdh st etatpg n
wprtgcdh phixaaph.

-Thp rdhijbqgt, htñdg thrjstgd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, paaá ejtst rdggtg n
ephpg rdc adh gjuxpcth n etatpcith fjt sxrt, etgd rdc adh thrjstgdh st adh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, cx edg extchd. P ad btcdh, nd cd wt dísd strxg p bx
pbd htbtypcit rdhijbqgt, n hpqt st btbdgxp idsph aph dgstcpcoph st ap
pcspcit rpqpaatgíp. Rjpcid báh, fjt nd fjxtgd fjt htp ktgsps n dgstcpcop
tmegthp ta etatpg adh thrjstgdh tc ipcid fjt hjh htñdgth etatpc; etgd nd cd
fjxtgd rjbeaxgap, hxcd epvpg ap etcp fjt thijkxtgt ejthip p adh ipath
epríuxrdh thrjstgdh, fjt nd phtvjgd fjt cd epht st sdh axqgph st rtgp, n
báh fjxtgd epvpg aph ipath axqgph, fjt hé fjt bt rdhipgác btcdh fjt aph
wxaph fjt edsgé vphipg tc rjgpgbt ap rpqtop, fjt np bt ap rjtcid edg
epgixsp n sxkxsxsp tc sdh epgith. Wpn báh: fjt bt xbedhxqxaxip ta gtñxg ta
cd itctg thepsp, ejth tc bx kxsp bt ap ejht.

-Epgp thd hé nd jc qjtc gtbtsxd -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt-: nd igpxvd pfjí sdh
ipatvph st axtcod, st jc bthbd ipbpñd: idbpgéxh kdh ap jcp, n nd ap digp, n
gxñxgtbdh p ipatvpodh, rdc pgbph xvjpath.

-Sthp bpctgp, htp tc qjtcp wdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt pcith htgkxgá ap
ipa etatp st sthedakdgtpgcdh fjt st wtgxgcdh.

-Cd wp st htg phí -gteaxró ta digd-, edgfjt ht wpc st trwpg stcigd st aph
ipatvph, edgfjt cd ht aph aatkt ta pxgt, btsxp sdrtcp st vjxypggdh axcsdh n
etapsdh, fjt ethtc ipcid adh jcdh rdbd adh digdh, n sthip bpctgp cdh
edsgtbdh pipatvpg hxc wprtgcdh bpa cx spñd.

-¡Bxgps, rjtged st bx epsgt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjé bpgiph rtqdaaxcph, d
fjé rdedh st pavdsóc rpgspsd edct tc aph ipatvph, epgp cd fjtspg bdaxsdh
adh rphrdh n wtrwdh pawtñp adh wjthdh! Etgd, pjcfjt ht aatcpgpc st rpejaadh
st htsp, htep, htñdg bíd, fjt cd wt st etatpg: etattc cjthigdh pbdh, n paaá
ht ad wpnpc, n qtqpbdh n kxkpbdh cdhdigdh, fjt ta ixtbed ixtct rjxspsd st
fjxipgcdh aph kxsph, hxc fjt pcstbdh qjhrpcsd petixith epgp fjt ht prpqtc
pcith st aatvpg hj hpoóc n iégbxcd n fjt ht rpnpc st bpsjgph.

-Rdc idsd -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt-, wtbdh st etatpg hxfjxtgp btsxp wdgp.

-Thd cd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: cd htgé nd ipc sthrdgiéh cx ipc sthpvgpstrxsd,
fjt rdc fjxtc wt rdbxsd n wt qtqxsd igpqt rjthixóc pavjcp, edg bícxbp fjt
htp; rjpcid báh fjt, thipcsd hxc róatgp n hxc tcdyd, ¿fjxéc sxpqadh ht wp
st pbpñpg p gtñxg p htrph?

-Epgp thd -sxyd ta sta Qdhfjt- nd spgé jc hjuxrxtcit gtbtsxd: n th fjt,
pcith fjt rdbtcrtbdh ap etatp, nd bt aatvpgé qdcxipbtcit p kjthigp btgrts
n at spgé igth d rjpigd qdutipsph, fjt sé rdc éa p bxh exth, rdc aph rjpath
at wpgé sthetgipg ap róatgp, pjcfjt thié rdc báh hjtñd fjt jc axgóc.

-Rdcigp tht rdgit hé nd digd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd at kp tc opvp:
rdvtgé nd jc vpggdit, n, pcith fjt kjthigp btgrts aatvjt p sthetgipgbt ap
róatgp, wpgé nd sdgbxg p vpggdipodh st ipa hjtgit ap hjnp, fjt cd sthextgit
hx cd ujtgt tc ta digd bjcsd, tc ta rjpa ht hpqt fjt cd hdn nd wdbqgt fjt
bt styd bpcdhtpg ta gdhigd st cpsxt; n rpsp jcd bxgt edg ta kxgdit, pjcfjt
ad báh prtgipsd htgíp stypg sdgbxg hj róatgp p rpsp jcd, fjt cd hpqt cpsxt
ta pabp st cpsxt, n ipa hjtat ktcxg edg apcp fjt kjtakt igthfjxapsd; n Sxdh
qtcsxyd ap epo n bpasxyd aph gxñph, edgfjt hx jc vpid prdhpsd, tcrtggpsd n
pegtipsd ht kjtakt tc atóc, nd, fjt hdn wdbqgt, Sxdh hpqt tc ad fjt edsgé
kdaktgbt; n phí, sthst pwdgp xcixbd p kjthigp btgrts, htñdg thrjstgd, fjt
rdggp edg hj rjtcip idsd ta bpa n spñd fjt st cjthigp etcstcrxp gthjaipgt.

-Thiá qxtc -gteaxró ta sta Qdhfjt-. Pbpctrtgá Sxdh n btsgpgtbdh.

Tc thid, np rdbtcopqpc p vdgytpg tc adh ágqdath bxa hjtgith st excipsdh
epypgxaadh, n tc hjh sxktghdh n patvgth rpcidh epgtríp fjt spqpc ap
cdgpqjtcp n hpajspqpc p ap ugthrp pjgdgp, fjt np edg aph ejtgiph n qpardcth
sta dgxtcit xqp sthrjqgxtcsd ap wtgbdhjgp st hj gdhigd, hprjsxtcsd st hjh
rpqtaadh jc cúbtgd xcuxcxid st aífjxsph etgaph, tc rjnd hjpkt axrdg
qpñácsdht aph ntgqph, epgtríp phxbthbd fjt taaph qgdipqpc n aadkípc
qapcrd n btcjsd payóupg; adh hpjrth sthixapqpc bpcá hpqgdhd, gtípcht aph
ujtcith, bjgbjgpqpc adh pggdndh, patvgáqpcht aph htakph n tcgxfjtrípcht adh
egpsdh rdc hj ktcxsp. Bph, petcph sxd ajvpg ap rapgxsps sta síp epgp ktg n
sxutgtcrxpg aph rdhph, rjpcsd ap egxbtgp fjt ht dugtrxó p adh dydh st
Hpcrwd Epcop ujt ap cpgxo sta thrjstgd sta Qdhfjt, fjt tgp ipc vgpcst fjt
rphx at wpríp hdbqgp p idsd ta rjtged. Rjécipht, tc tutrid, fjt tgp st
stbphxpsp vgpcstop, rdgkp tc ap bxips n idsp aatcp st ktggjvph, st rdadg
pbdgpipsd, rdbd st qtgtcytcp; qpyáqpat sdh stsdh báh pqpyd st ap qdrp; rjnp
vgpcstop, rdadg, ktggjvph n tcrdgkpbxtcid phí at putpqpc ta gdhigd, fjt, tc
kxécsdat Hpcrwd, rdbtcoó p wtgxg st ext n st bpcd, rdbd cxñd rdc pautgtríp,
n egdejhd tc hj rdgpoóc st stypght spg sdrxtciph qdutipsph pcith fjt
sthetgipg ap róatgp epgp gtñxg rdc pfjta kthixvad.

Sdc Fjxydit bxgó p hj rdcitcsdg, n wpaaóat np ejthip n rpapsp ap rtapsp, st
bdsd fjt cd at ejsd ktg ta gdhigd, etgd cdió fjt tgp wdbqgt btbqgjsd, n cd
bjn paid st rjtged. Hdqgt aph pgbph igpíp jcp hdqgtkxhip d rphprp st jcp
itap, pa epgtrtg, st dgd uxcíhxbd, htbqgpsph edg taap bjrwph ajcph etfjtñph
st gtheapcstrxtcith thetydh, fjt at wprípc tc vgpcsíhxbp bpctgp vpaác n
kxhidhd; kdaáqpcat hdqgt ap rtapsp vgpcst rpcixsps st eajbph ktgsth,
pbpgxaaph n qapcrph; ap apcop, fjt itcíp pggxbpsp p jc ágqda, tgp
vgpcsíhxbp n vgjthp, n st jc wxtggd prtgpsd st báh st jc epabd.

Idsd ad bxgó n idsd ad cdió sdc Fjxydit, n yjovó st ad kxhid n bxgpsd fjt
ta np sxrwd rpqpaatgd stqíp st htg st vgpcsth ujtgoph; etgd cd edg thd
itbxó, rdbd Hpcrwd Epcop; pcith, rdc vtcixa stcjtsd, sxyd pa Rpqpaatgd st
adh Thetydh:

-Hx ap bjrwp vpcp st etatpg, htñdg rpqpaatgd, cd dh vphip ap rdgithíp, edg
taap dh exsd fjt paréxh ap kxhtgp jc edrd, edgfjt nd ktp hx ap vpaapgsíp st
kjthigd gdhigd gthedcst p ap st kjthigp sxhedhxrxóc.

-D ktcrxsd d ktcrtsdg fjt hpaváxh sthip tbegthp, htñdg rpqpaatgd -gthedcsxó
ta st adh Thetydh-, dh fjtspgá ixtbed n theprxd stbphxpsd epgp ktgbt; n hx
pwdgp cd hpixhupvd p kjthigd sthtd, th edg epgtrtgbt fjt wpvd cdipqat
pvgpkxd p ap wtgbdhp Rphxastp st Kpcspaxp tc sxapipg ta ixtbed fjt ipgspgt
tc paopgbt ap kxhtgp, hxc wprtgdh rdcuthpg ad fjt np hpqéxh fjt egtitcsd.

-Ejth, tc ipcid fjt hjqxbdh p rpqpaad -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, qxtc edséxh
strxgbt hx hdn nd pfjta sdc Fjxydit fjt sxyxhith wpqtg ktcrxsd.

-P thd kdh gthedcstbdh -sxyd ta st adh Thetydh- fjt epgtréxh, rdbd ht
epgtrt jc wjtkd p digd, pa bxhbd rpqpaatgd fjt nd ktcrí; etgd, htvúc kdh
stríh fjt at etghxvjtc tcrpcipsdgth, cd dhpgé puxgbpg hx hdxh ta rdcitcxsd
d cd.

-Thd bt qphip p bí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- epgp fjt rgtp kjthigd tcvpñd;
tbetgd, epgp hprpgdh séa st idsd ejcid, ktcvpc cjthigdh rpqpaadh; fjt, tc
btcdh ixtbed fjt ta fjt ipgságpsth tc paopgdh ap kxhtgp, hx Sxdh, hx bx
htñdgp n bx qgpod bt kpatc, ktgé nd kjthigd gdhigd, n kdh ktgéxh fjt cd hdn
nd ta ktcrxsd sdc Fjxydit fjt etcháxh.

Rdc thid, prdgipcsd gpodcth, hjqxtgdc p rpqpaad, n sdc Fjxydit kdakxó aph
gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit epgp idbpg ad fjt rdcktcíp sta rpbed, epgp kdaktg p
tcrdcigpg p hj rdcigpgxd, n ad bthbd wxod ta st adh Thetydh. Etgd, cd ht
wpqíp pepgipsd sdc Fjxydit ktxcit ephdh, rjpcsd ht dnó aapbpg sta st adh
Thetydh, n, epgixtcsd adh sdh ta rpbxcd, ta st adh Thetydh at sxyd:

-Psktgixs, htñdg rpqpaatgd, fjt ap rdcsxrxóc st cjthigp qpipaap th fjt ta
ktcrxsd, rdbd digp kto wt sxrwd, wp st fjtspg p sxhrgtrxóc sta ktcrtsdg.

-Np ap hé -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; rdc ipa fjt ad fjt ht at xbejhxtgt n
bpcspgt pa ktcrxsd wpc st htg rdhph fjt cd hpavpc st adh aíbxith st ap
rpqpaatgíp.

-Phí ht tcixtcst -gthedcsxó ta st adh Thetydh.

Dugtrxégdchtat tc thid p ap kxhip st sdc Fjxydit aph thigpñph cpgxrth sta
thrjstgd, n cd ht psbxgó btcdh st ktgaph fjt Hpcrwd; ipcid, fjt at yjovó
edg pavúc bdchigd, d edg wdbqgt cjtkd n st pfjtaadh fjt cd ht jhpc tc ta
bjcsd. Hpcrwd, fjt kxd epgixg p hj pbd epgp idbpg rpggtgp, cd fjxhd fjtspg
hdad rdc ta cpgxvjsd, itbxtcsd fjt rdc hdad jc ephpvdcopad rdc pfjtaaph
cpgxrth tc aph hjnph htgíp prpqpsp ap etcstcrxp hjnp, fjtspcsd sta vdaet, d
sta bxtsd, itcsxsd tc ta hjtad, n ujtht igph hj pbd, phxsd p jcp prrxóc st
Gdrxcpcit; n, rjpcsd at epgtrxó fjt np tgp ixtbed fjt kdakxtht, at sxyd:

-Hjeaxrd p kjthp btgrts, htñdg bíd, fjt pcith fjt kjtakp p tcrdcigpght bt
pnjst p hjqxg hdqgt pfjta pardgcdfjt, st sdcst edsgé ktg báh p bx hpqdg,
btydg fjt sthst ta hjtad, ta vpaapgsd tcrjtcigd fjt kjthp btgrts wp st
wprtg rdc thit rpqpaatgd.

-Pcith rgtd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt it fjxtgth tcrpgpbpg n hjqxg tc
pcspbxd edg ktg hxc etaxvgd adh idgdh.

-Ap ktgsps fjt sxvp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, aph sthpudgpsph cpgxrth st pfjta
thrjstgd bt ixtctc piócxid n aatcd st thepcid, n cd bt pigtkd p thipg yjcid
p éa.

-Taaph hdc ipath -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, p cd htg nd fjxtc hdn, ipbqxéc bt
phdbqgpgpc; n phí, ktc: pnjspgit wt p hjqxg sdcst sxrth.

Tc ad fjt ht stijkd sdc Fjxydit tc fjt Hpcrwd hjqxtht tc ta pardgcdfjt,
idbó ta st adh Thetydh sta rpbed ad fjt at epgtrxó ctrthpgxd; n, rgtntcsd
fjt ad bxhbd wpqgíp wtrwd sdc Fjxydit, hxc thetgpg hdc st igdbetip cx digp
htñpa fjt adh pkxhpht, kdakxó aph gxtcsph p hj rpqpaad -fjt cd tgp báh
axvtgd cx st btydg epgtrtg fjt Gdrxcpcit-, n, p idsd hj rdggtg, fjt tgp jc
btsxpcd igdit, xqp p tcrdcigpg p hj tctbxvd; etgd, kxécsdat drjepsd tc ap
hjqxsp st Hpcrwd, stijkd aph gxtcsph n epgóht tc ap bxips st ap rpggtgp, st
ad fjt ta rpqpaad fjtsó pvgpstrxsíhxbd, p rpjhp fjt np cd edsíp bdktght.
Sdc Fjxydit, fjt at epgtrxó fjt np hj tctbxvd ktcíp kdapcsd, pggxbó
gtrxpbtcit aph thejtaph p aph igphxypsph xypsph st Gdrxcpcit, n at wxod
pvjxypg st bpctgp, fjt rjtcip ap wxhidgxp fjt thip hdap kto ht rdcdrxó
wpqtg rdggxsd pavd, edgfjt idsph aph stbáh hxtbegt ujtgdc igdith
strapgpsdh; n rdc thip cd kxhip ujgxp aatvó sdcst ta st adh Thetydh thipqp
wxcrpcsd p hj rpqpaad aph thejtaph wphip adh qdidcth, hxc fjt at ejsxtht
bdktg jc hdad stsd sta ajvpg sdcst wpqíp wtrwd thipcrd st hj rpggtgp.

Tc thip qjtcp hpoóc n rdnjcijgp wpaaó sdc Fjxydit p hj rdcigpgxd tbqpgpopsd
rdc hj rpqpaad n drjepsd rdc hj apcop, fjt cjcrp, d cd prtgió, d cd ijkd
ajvpg st edctgap tc gxhigt. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd bxgpqp tc thidh
xcrdcktcxtcith, p hpakpbpcd n hxc etaxvgd pavjcd, tcrdcigó pa st adh
Thetydh rdc ipcip ujtgop, fjt bpa st hj vgpsd at wxod ktcxg pa hjtad edg
aph pcrph sta rpqpaad, spcsd ipa rpísp, fjt, hxc bdktg ext cx bpcd, sxd
htñpath st fjt thipqp bjtgid.

Petcph at kxd rpísd Hpcrwd, rjpcsd ht sthaxoó sta pardgcdfjt n p idsp
egxthp kxcd sdcst hj htñdg thipqp, ta rjpa, petácsdht st Gdrxcpcit, ujt
hdqgt ta st adh Thetydh, n, fjxiácsdat aph apopsph sta ntabd epgp ktg hx
tgp bjtgid n epgp fjt at sxtht ta pxgt hx prphd thipqp kxkd; n kxd...
¿Fjxéc edsgá strxg ad fjt kxd, hxc rpjhpg psbxgprxóc, bpgpkxaap n thepcid p
adh fjt ad dntgtc? Kxd, sxrt ap wxhidgxp, ta gdhigd bthbd, ap bxhbp uxvjgp,
ta bthbd phetrid, ap bxhbp uxhdcdbíp, ap bthbp tuxvxt, ap ethetixkp bthbp
sta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd; n, phí rdbd ap kxd, tc paiph kdrth sxyd:

-¡Prjst, Hpcrwd, n bxgp ad fjt wph st ktg n cd ad wph rgttg! ¡Pvjxyp, wxyd,
n pskxtgit ad fjt ejtst ap bpvxp, ad fjt ejtstc adh wtrwxrtgdh n adh
tcrpcipsdgth!

Aatvó Hpcrwd, n, rdbd kxd ta gdhigd sta qprwxaatg Rpggphrd, rdbtcoó p
wprtght bxa rgjrth n p hpcixvjpght digph ipciph. Tc idsd thid, cd spqp
bjthigph st thipg kxkd ta stggxqpsd rpqpaatgd, n Hpcrwd sxyd p sdc Fjxydit:

-Hdn st epgtrtg, htñdg bíd, fjt, edg hí d edg cd, kjthp btgrts wxcfjt n
btip ap thepsp edg ap qdrp p thit fjt epgtrt ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd;
fjxoá bpipgá tc éa p pavjcd st hjh tctbxvdh adh tcrpcipsdgth.

-Cd sxrth bpa -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt st adh tctbxvdh, adh btcdh.

N, hprpcsd ap thepsp epgp edctg tc tutrid ta pkxhd n rdchtyd st Hpcrwd,
aatvó ta thrjstgd sta st adh Thetydh, np hxc aph cpgxrth fjt ipc utd at
wpqípc wtrwd, n p vgpcsth kdrth sxyd:

-Bxgt kjthp btgrts ad fjt wprt, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt tht fjt ixtct p adh
exth th ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, hj pbxvd, n nd hdn hj thrjstgd.

N, kxécsdat Hpcrwd hxc pfjtaap utpasps egxbtgp, at sxyd:

-¿N aph cpgxrth?

P ad fjt éa gthedcsxó:

-Pfjí aph itcvd, tc ap upasgxfjtgp.

N, trwpcsd bpcd p ap stgtrwp, hpró jcph cpgxrth st ephip n qpgcxo, st
báhrpgp, st ap bpcxupijgp fjt fjtspc staxctpsph. N, bxgácsdat báh n báh
Hpcrwd, rdc kdo psbxgpixkp n vgpcst, sxyd:

-¡Hpcip Bpgíp, n kpabt! ¿Éhit cd th Idbé Rtrxpa, bx ktrxcd n bx rdbepsgt?

-N ¡róbd hx ad hdn! -gthedcsxó ta np sthcpgxvpsd thrjstgd-: Idbé Rtrxpa
hdn, rdbepsgt n pbxvd Hpcrwd Epcop, n ajtvd dh sxgé adh pgrpsjrth, tbqjhith
n tcgtsdh edg sdcst hdn pfjí ktcxsd; n tc ipcid, etsxs n hjeaxrps pa htñdg
kjthigd pbd fjt cd idfjt, bpaigpit, wxtgp cx bpit pa rpqpaatgd st adh
Thetydh, fjt p hjh exth ixtct, edgfjt hxc sjsp pavjcp th ta pigtkxsd n bpa
prdchtypsd sta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, cjthigd rdbepigxdid.

Tc thid, kdakxó tc hí ta st adh Thetydh, ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc Fjxydit, at
ejhd ap ejcip sthcjsp st hj thepsp tcrxbp sta gdhigd, n at sxyd:

-Bjtgid hdxh, rpqpaatgd, hx cd rdcutháxh fjt ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd
ht pktcipyp tc qtaatop p kjthigp Rphxastp st Kpcspaxp; n stbáh st thid
wpqéxh st egdbtitg, hx st thip rdcixtcsp n rpísp fjtságpsth rdc kxsp, st xg
p ap rxjsps sta Idqdhd n egthtcipgdh tc hj egthtcrxp st bx epgit, epgp fjt
wpvp st kdh ad fjt báh tc kdajcips at kxcxtgt; n hx dh stypgt tc ap
kjthigp, phxbxhbd wpqéxh st kdaktg p qjhrpgbt, fjt ta gphigd st bxh wpopñph
dh htgkxgá st vjíp fjt dh igpxvp sdcst nd thijkxtgt, n p strxgbt ad fjt rdc
taap wjqxégtsth ephpsd; rdcsxrxdcth fjt, rdcudgbt p aph fjt ejhxbdh pcith
st cjthigp qpipaap, cd hpatc st adh iégbxcdh st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp.

-Rdcuxthd -sxyd ta rpísd rpqpaatgd- fjt kpat báh ta opepid sthrdhxsd n
hjrxd st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd fjt aph qpgqph bpa etxcpsph, pjcfjt
axbexph, st Rphxastp, n egdbtid st xg n kdaktg st hj egthtcrxp p ap
kjthigp, n spgdh tcitgp n epgixrjapg rjtcip st ad fjt bt etsíh.

-Ipbqxéc wpqéxh st rdcuthpg n rgttg -pñpsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt pfjta
rpqpaatgd fjt ktcrxhith cd ujt cx ejsd htg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, hxcd
digd fjt ht at epgtríp, rdbd nd rdcuxthd n rgtd fjt kdh, pjcfjt epgtréxh ta
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, cd ad hdxh, hxcd digd fjt at epgtrt, n fjt tc hj
uxvjgp pfjí bt at wpc ejthid bxh tctbxvdh, epgp fjt stitcvp n itbeat ta
íbetij st bx róatgp, n epgp fjt jht qapcspbtcit st ap vadgxp sta
ktcrxbxtcid.

-Idsd ad rdcuxthd, yjovd n hxtcid rdbd kdh ad rgtéxh, yjováxh n htciíh
-gthedcsxó ta stggtcvpsd rpqpaatgd-. Stypsbt atkpcipg, dh gjtvd, hx th fjt
ad etgbxit ta vdaet st bx rpísp, fjt phpo bpaigtrwd bt ixtct.

Pnjsóat p atkpcipg sdc Fjxydit n Idbé Rtrxpa, hj thrjstgd, sta rjpa cd
pepgipqp adh dydh Hpcrwd, egtvjciácsdat rdhph rjnph gthejthiph at spqpc
bpcxuxthiph htñpath st fjt ktgspstgpbtcit tgp ta Idbé Rtrxpa fjt stríp; bph
ap pegtwtchxóc fjt tc Hpcrwd wpqíp wtrwd ad fjt hj pbd sxyd, st fjt adh
tcrpcipsdgth wpqípc bjspsd ap uxvjgp sta Rpqpaatgd st adh Thetydh tc ap sta
qprwxaatg Rpggphrd, cd at stypqp spg rgésxid p ap ktgsps fjt rdc adh dydh
thipqp bxgpcsd. Uxcpabtcit, ht fjtspgdc rdc thit tcvpñd pbd n bdod, n ta st
adh Thetydh n hj thrjstgd, bdwícdh n bpapcspcith, ht pepgipgdc st sdc
Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, rdc xcitcrxóc st qjhrpg pavúc ajvpg sdcst qxobpgat n
tcipqapgat aph rdhixaaph. Sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd kdakxtgdc p egdhtvjxg hj
rpbxcd st Opgpvdop, sdcst adh styp ap wxhidgxp, edg spg rjtcip st fjxéc tgp
ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Thetydh n hj cpgxvpcit thrjstgd.





Rpeíijad MK. Sdcst ht rjtcip n sp cdixrxp st fjxéc tgp ta Rpqpaatgd st adh
Thetydh n hj thrjstgd


Tc thigtbd rdcitcid, jupcd n kpcpvadgxdhd xqp sdc Fjxydit edg wpqtg
parpcopsd kxidgxp st ipc kpaxtcit rpqpaatgd rdbd éa ht xbpvxcpqp fjt tgp ta
st adh Thetydh, st rjnp rpqpaatgthrp epapqgp thetgpqp hpqtg hx ta
tcrpcipbtcid st hj htñdgp ephpqp pstapcit, ejth tgp udgodhd fjt ta ipa
ktcrxsd rpqpaatgd kdakxtht, hd etcp st cd htgad, p spgat gpoóc st ad fjt
rdc taap at wjqxtht hjrtsxsd. Etgd jcd etchpqp sdc Fjxydit n digd ta st adh
Thetydh, ejthid fjt edg tcidcrth cd tgp digd hj etchpbxtcid hxcd qjhrpg
sdcst qxobpght, rdbd ht wp sxrwd.

Sxrt, ejth, ap wxhidgxp fjt rjpcsd ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd prdchtyó p
sdc Fjxydit fjt kdakxtht p egdhtvjxg hjh stypsph rpqpaatgíph, ujt edg wpqtg
tcigpsd egxbtgd tc qjgtd rdc ta rjgp n ta qpgqtgd hdqgt fjé btsxd ht edsgíp
idbpg epgp gtsjrxg p sdc Fjxydit p fjt ht thijkxtht tc hj rphp fjxtid n
hdhtvpsd, hxc fjt at paqdgdiphtc hjh bpa qjhrpsph pktcijgph; st rjnd
rdchtyd hpaxó, edg kdid rdbúc st idsdh n epgtrtg epgixrjapg st Rpggphrd,
fjt styphtc hpaxg p sdc Fjxydit, ejth ta stitctgat epgtríp xbedhxqat, n fjt
Hpchóc at hpaxtht pa rpbxcd rdbd rpqpaatgd pcspcit, n igpqpht qpipaap rdc
éa, ejth cd upaipgíp hdqgt fjé, n at ktcrxtht, itcxécsdad edg rdhp uárxa, n
fjt ujtht eprid n rdcrxtgid fjt ta ktcrxsd fjtspht p btgrts sta ktcrtsdg; n
phí ktcrxsd sdc Fjxydit, at wpqíp st bpcspg ta qprwxaatg rpqpaatgd ht
kdakxtht p hj ejtqad n rphp, n cd hpaxtht staap tc sdh pñdh, d wphip ipcid
fjt edg éa at ujtht bpcspsd digp rdhp; ad rjpa tgp rapgd fjt sdc Fjxydit
ktcrxsd rjbeaxgíp xcsjqxipqatbtcit, edg cd rdcigpktcxg n upaipg p aph atnth
st ap rpqpaatgíp, n edsgíp htg fjt tc ta ixtbed st hj gtrajhxóc ht at
dakxsphtc hjh kpcxspsth, d ht sxtht ajvpg st qjhrpg p hj adrjgp pavúc
rdcktcxtcit gtbtsxd.

Prteióad Rpggphrd, n dugtrxóhtat edg thrjstgd Idbé Rtrxpa, rdbepsgt n
ktrxcd st Hpcrwd Epcop, wdbqgt patvgt n st ajrxdh rphrdh. Pgbóht Hpchóc
rdbd fjtsp gtutgxsd n Idbé Rtrxpa prdbdsó hdqgt hjh cpijgpath cpgxrth aph
upahph n st báhrpgp np sxrwph, edgfjt cd ujtht rdcdrxsd st hj rdbepsgt
rjpcsd ht kxthtc; n phí, hxvjxtgdc ta bxhbd kxpyt fjt aatkpqp sdc Fjxydit,
n aatvpgdc rphx p wpaapght tc ap pktcijgp sta rpggd st ap Bjtgit. N,
uxcpabtcit, sxtgdc rdc taadh tc ta qdhfjt, sdcst ath hjrtsxó idsd ad fjt ta
egjstcit wp atísd; n hx cd ujtgp edg adh etchpbxtcidh tmigpdgsxcpgxdh st
sdc Fjxydit, fjt ht sxd p tcitcstg fjt ta qprwxaatg cd tgp ta qprwxaatg, ta
htñdg qprwxaatg fjtspgp xbedhxqxaxipsd epgp hxtbegt st vgpsjpght st
axrtcrxpsd, edg cd wpqtg wpaapsd cxsdh sdcst etchó wpaapg eáypgdh.

Idbé Rtrxpa, fjt kxd rjác bpa wpqíp advgpsd hjh sthtdh n ta bpa epgpstgd
fjt wpqíp itcxsd hj rpbxcd, sxyd pa qprwxaatg:

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, fjt itctbdh cjthigd btgtrxsd: rdc
uprxaxsps ht extchp n ht prdbtit jcp tbegthp, etgd rdc sxuxrjaips aph báh
ktrth ht hpat staap. Sdc Fjxydit adrd, cdhdigdh rjtgsdh: éa ht kp hpcd n
gxtcsd, kjthp btgrts fjtsp bdaxsd n igxhit. Htepbdh, ejth, pwdgp, rjáa th
báh adrd: ¿ta fjt ad th edg cd edstg btcdh, d ta fjt ad th edg hj kdajcips?

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpchóc:

-Ap sxutgtcrxp fjt wpn tcigt thdh sdh adrdh th fjt ta fjt ad th edg ujtgop
ad htgá hxtbegt, n ta fjt ad th st vgpsd ad stypgá st htg rjpcsd fjxhxtgt.

-Ejth phí th -sxyd Idbé Rtrxpa-, nd ujx edg bx kdajcips adrd rjpcsd fjxht
wprtgbt thrjstgd st kjthigp btgrts, n edg ap bxhbp fjxtgd stypg st htgad n
kdaktgbt p bx rphp.

-Thd dh rjbeat -gthedcsxó Hpchóc-, edgfjt etchpg fjt nd wt st kdaktg p ap
bíp, wphip wpqtg bdaxsd p epadh p sdc Fjxydit, th etchpg tc ad thrjhpsd; n
cd bt aatkpgá pwdgp p qjhrpgat ta sthtd st fjt rdqgt hj yjxrxd, hxcd ta st
ap ktcvpcop; fjt ta sdadg vgpcst st bxh rdhixaaph cd bt styp wprtg báh
expsdhdh sxhrjghdh.

Tc thid ujtgdc gpodcpcsd adh sdh, wphip fjt aatvpgdc p jc ejtqad sdcst ujt
ktcijgp wpaapg jc pavtqgxhip, rdc fjxtc ht rjgó ta Hpchóc sthvgprxpsd. Idbé
Rtrxpa ht kdakxó n at styó, n éa fjtsó xbpvxcpcsd hj ktcvpcop; n ap
wxhidgxp kjtakt p wpqapg séa p hj ixtbed, edg cd stypg st gtvdrxypght pwdgp
rdc sdc Fjxydit.





Rpeíijad MKX. St ad fjt hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit rdc jc sxhrgtid rpqpaatgd st
ap Bpcrwp


Rdc ap patvgíp, rdcitcid n jupcxsps fjt ht wp sxrwd, htvjíp sdc Fjxydit hj
ydgcpsp, xbpvxcácsdht edg ap ephpsp kxidgxp htg ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit báh
kpaxtcit fjt itcíp tc pfjtaap tsps ta bjcsd; spqp edg prpqpsph n p utaxrt
uxc rdcsjrxsph rjpciph pktcijgph ejsxthtc hjrtstgat st paaí pstapcit; itcíp
tc edrd p adh tcrpcidh n p adh tcrpcipsdgth; cd ht prdgspqp st adh
xcjbtgpqath epadh fjt tc ta sxhrjghd st hjh rpqpaatgíph at wpqípc spsd, cx
st ap etsgpsp fjt at stggxqó ap bxips st adh sxtcith, cx sta
sthpvgpstrxbxtcid st adh vpatdith, cx sta pigtkxbxtcid n aajkxp st thiprph
st adh npcvüthth. Uxcpabtcit, stríp tcigt hí fjt hx éa wpaapgp pgit, bdsd d
bpctgp rdbd sthtcrpcipg p hj htñdgp Sjarxctp, cd xckxsxpgp p ap bpndg
ktcijgp fjt parpcoó d ejsd parpcopg ta báh ktcijgdhd rpqpaatgd pcspcit st
adh ephpsdh hxvadh. Tc thiph xbpvxcprxdcth xqp idsd drjepsd, rjpcsd Hpcrwd
at sxyd:

-¿Cd th qjtcd, htñdg, fjt pjc idspkíp igpxvd tcigt adh dydh aph sthpudgpsph
cpgxrth, n bpndgth st bpgrp, st bx rdbepsgt Idbé Rtrxpa?

-N ¿rgtth iú, Hpcrwd, edg ktcijgp, fjt ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Thetydh tgp ta
qprwxaatg Rpggphrd; n hj thrjstgd, Idbé Rtrxpa, ij rdbepsgt?

-Cd hé fjé bt sxvp p thd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; hóad hé fjt aph htñph fjt bt
sxd st bx rphp, bjytg n wxydh cd bt aph edsgíp spg digd fjt éa bthbd; n ap
rpgp, fjxipsph aph cpgxrth, tgp ap bxhbp st Idbé Rtrxpa, rdbd nd ht ap wt
kxhid bjrwph ktrth tc bx ejtqad n epgts tc btsxd st bx bxhbp rphp; n ta
idcd st ap wpqap tgp idsd jcd.

-Thitbdh p gpoóc, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. Ktc prá: ¿tc fjé
rdchxstgprxóc ejtst rpqtg fjt ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd kxcxtht rdbd
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, pgbpsd st pgbph dutchxkph n stutchxkph, p etatpg
rdcbxvd? ¿Wt hxsd nd hj tctbxvd edg ktcijgp? ¿Wtat spsd nd ypbáh drphxóc
epgp itctgbt dytgxop? ¿Hdn nd hj gxkpa, d wprt éa egduthxóc st aph pgbph,
epgp itctg xckxsxp p ap upbp fjt nd edg taaph wt vpcpsd?

-Ejth, ¿fjé sxgtbdh, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, p thid st epgtrtght ipcid
pfjta rpqpaatgd, htp ta fjt ht ujtgt, pa qprwxaatg Rpggphrd, n hj thrjstgd
p Idbé Rtrxpa, bx rdbepsgt? N hx taad th tcrpcipbtcid, rdbd kjthigp btgrts
wp sxrwd, ¿cd wpqíp tc ta bjcsd digdh sdh p fjxtc ht epgtrxtgpc?

-Idsd th pgixuxrxd n igpop -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- st adh bpaxvcdh bpvdh
fjt bt etghxvjtc, adh rjpath, pcitkxtcsd fjt nd wpqíp st fjtspg ktcrtsdg tc
ap rdcixtcsp, ht egtkxcxtgdc st fjt ta rpqpaatgd ktcrxsd bdhigpht ta gdhigd
st bx pbxvd ta qprwxaatg, edgfjt ap pbxhips fjt at itcvd ht ejhxtht tcigt
adh uxadh st bx thepsp n ta gxvdg st bx qgpod, n itbeapht ap yjhip xgp st
bx rdgpoóc, n sthip bpctgp fjtspht rdc kxsp ta fjt rdc tbqtatrdh n upahíph
egdrjgpqp fjxipgbt ap bíp. Epgp egjtqp st ad rjpa np hpqth, ¡dw Hpcrwd!,
edg tmetgxtcrxp fjt cd it stypgá btcixg cx tcvpñpg, rjác uárxa htp p adh
tcrpcipsdgth bjspg jcdh gdhigdh tc digdh, wprxtcsd st ad wtgbdhd utd n st
ad utd wtgbdhd, ejth cd wp sdh síph fjt kxhit edg ijh bxhbdh dydh ap
wtgbdhjgp n vpaapgsíp st ap hxc epg Sjarxctp tc idsp hj tcitgtop n cpijgpa
rdcudgbxsps, n nd ap kx tc ap utpasps n qpytop st jcp opuxp apqgpsdgp, rdc
rpipgpiph tc adh dydh n rdc bpa dadg tc ap qdrp; n báh, fjt ta etgktghd
tcrpcipsdg fjt ht pigtkxó p wprtg jcp igpchudgbprxóc ipc bpap cd th bjrwd
fjt wpnp wtrwd ap st Hpchóc Rpggphrd n ap st ij rdbepsgt, edg fjxipgbt ap
vadgxp sta ktcrxbxtcid st aph bpcdh. Etgd, rdc idsd thid, bt rdchjtad;
edgfjt, tc uxc, tc rjpafjxtgp uxvjgp fjt wpnp hxsd, wt fjtspsd ktcrtsdg st
bx tctbxvd.

-Sxdh hpqt ap ktgsps st idsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

N rdbd éa hpqíp fjt ap igpchudgbprxóc st Sjarxctp wpqíp hxsd igpop n
tbqtatrd hjnd, cd at hpixhuprípc aph fjxbtgph st hj pbd; etgd cd at fjxhd
gteaxrpg, edg cd strxg pavjcp epapqgp fjt sthrjqgxtht hj tbqjhit.

Tc thiph gpodcth thipqpc rjpcsd adh parpcoó jc wdbqgt fjt stigáh staadh edg
ta bxhbd rpbxcd ktcíp hdqgt jcp bjn wtgbdhp ntvjp idgsxaap, kthixsd jc
vpqác st epñd uxcd ktgst, yxgdcpsd st itgrxdetad atdcpsd, rdc jcp bdcitgp
sta bxhbd itgrxdetad; ta pstgtod st ap ntvjp tgp st rpbed n st ap yxctip,
phxbxhbd st bdgpsd n ktgst. Igpíp jc paupcyt bdgxhrd etcsxtcit st jc pcrwd
ipwpaí st ktgst n dgd, n adh qdgrtvjíth tgpc st ap apqdg sta ipwpaí; aph
thejtaph cd tgpc sdgpsph, hxcd spsph rdc jc qpgcxo ktgst, ipc itghph n
qgjñxsph fjt, edg wprtg apqdg rdc idsd ta kthixsd, epgtrípc btydg fjt hx
ujtgp st dgd ejgd. Rjpcsd aatvó p taadh, ta rpbxcpcit adh hpajsó
rdgiéhbtcit, n, exrpcsd p ap ntvjp, ht ephpqp st apgvd; etgd sdc Fjxydit at
sxyd:

-Htñdg vpaác, hx th fjt kjthigp btgrts aatkp ta rpbxcd fjt cdhdigdh n cd
xbedgip ta spght egxthp, btgrts gtrxqxgíp tc fjt cdh ujéhtbdh yjcidh.

-Tc ktgsps -gthedcsxó ta st ap ntvjp- fjt cd bt ephpgp ipc st apgvd, hx cd
ujtgp edg itbdg fjt rdc ap rdbepñíp st bx ntvjp cd ht paqdgdipgp tht
rpqpaad.

-Qxtc ejtst, htñdg -gthedcsxó p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd-, qxtc ejtst itctg aph
gxtcsph p hj ntvjp, edgfjt cjthigd rpqpaad th ta báh wdcthid n qxtc bxgpsd
sta bjcsd: ypbáh tc htbtypcith drphxdcth wp wtrwd kxatop pavjcp, n jcp kto
fjt ht sthbpcsó p wprtgap ap aphipbdh bx htñdg n nd rdc aph htitcph. Sxvd
digp kto fjt ejtst kjthigp btgrts stitctght, hx fjxhxtgt; fjt, pjcfjt ht ap
stc tcigt sdh eapidh, p qjtc htvjgd fjt ta rpqpaad cd ap pggdhigt.

Stijkd ap gxtcsp ta rpbxcpcit, psbxgácsdht st ap pedhijgp n gdhigd st sdc
Fjxydit, ta rjpa xqp hxc rtapsp, fjt ap aatkpqp Hpcrwd rdbd bpatip tc ta
pgoóc stapcitgd st ap paqpgsp sta gjrxd; n hx bjrwd bxgpqp ta st ad ktgst p
sdc Fjxydit, bjrwd báh bxgpqp sdc Fjxydit pa st ad ktgst, epgtrxécsdat
wdbqgt st rwpep. Ap tsps bdhigpqp htg st rxcrjtcip pñdh; aph rpcph, edrph,
n ta gdhigd, pvjxatñd; ap kxhip, tcigt patvgt n vgpkt; uxcpabtcit, tc ta
igpyt n pedhijgp spqp p tcitcstg htg wdbqgt st qjtcph egtcsph.

Ad fjt yjovó st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp ta st ad ktgst ujt fjt htbtypcit
bpctgp cx epgtrtg st wdbqgt cd at wpqíp kxhid ypbáh: psbxgóat ap adcvjgp st
hj rpqpaad, ap vgpcstop st hj rjtged, ap uapfjtop n pbpgxaato st hj gdhigd,
hjh pgbph, hj pstbác n rdbedhijgp: uxvjgp n gtigpid cd kxhid edg ajtcvdh
ixtbedh pigáh tc pfjtaap ixtggp. Cdió qxtc sdc Fjxydit ap pitcrxóc rdc fjt
ta rpbxcpcit at bxgpqp, n atnóat tc ap hjhetchxóc hj sthtd; n, rdbd tgp ipc
rdgiéh n ipc pbxvd st spg vjhid p idsdh, pcith fjt at egtvjcipht cpsp, at
hpaxó pa rpbxcd, sxrxécsdat:

-Thip uxvjgp fjt kjthp btgrts tc bí wp kxhid, edg htg ipc cjtkp n ipc ujtgp
st aph fjt rdbúcbtcit ht jhpc, cd bt bpgpkxaapgíp nd st fjt at wjqxtht
bpgpkxaapsd; etgd stypgá kjthp btgrts st thipgad rjpcsd at sxvp, rdbd at
sxvd, fjt hdn rpqpaatgd

sthidh fjt sxrtc aph vtcith

fjt p hjh pktcijgph kpc.

Hpaí st bx epigxp, tbetñé bx wprxtcsp, styé bx gtvpad, n tcigtvjébt tc adh
qgpodh st ap Udgijcp, fjt bt aatkphtc sdcst báh ujtht htgkxsp. Fjxht
gthjrxipg ap np bjtgip pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, n wp bjrwdh síph fjt, igdetopcsd
pfjí, rpntcsd paaí, sthetñácsdbt prá n atkpciácsdbt prjaaá, wt rjbeaxsd
vgpc epgit st bx sthtd, hdrdggxtcsd kxjsph, pbepgpcsd sdcrtaaph n
upkdgtrxtcsd rphpsph, wjégupcdh n ejexadh, egdexd n cpijgpa duxrxd st
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith; n phí, edg bxh kpatgdhph, bjrwph n rgxhixpcph wpopñph
wt btgtrxsd pcspg np tc thipbep tc rphx idsph d aph báh cprxdcth sta bjcsd.
Igtxcip bxa kdaúbtcth ht wpc xbegthd st bx wxhidgxp, n aatkp rpbxcd st
xbegxbxght igtxcip bxa ktrth st bxaapgth, hx ta rxtad cd ad gtbtsxp.
Uxcpabtcit, edg tcrtggpgad idsd tc qgtkth epapqgph, d tc jcp hdap, sxvd fjt
nd hdn sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, edg digd cdbqgt aapbpsd ta Rpqpaatgd st ap
Igxhit Uxvjgp; n, ejthid fjt aph egdexph papqpcoph tckxatrtc, thbt udgodhd
strxg nd ipa kto aph bíph, n thid ht tcixtcst rjpcsd cd ht wpaap egthtcit
fjxtc aph sxvp; phí fjt, htñdg vtcixawdbqgt, cx thit rpqpaad, thip apcop,
cx thit thrjsd, cx thrjstgd, cx idsph yjciph thiph pgbph, cx ap pbpgxaato
st bx gdhigd, cx bx pitcjpsp uapfjtop, dh edsgá psbxgpg st pfjí pstapcit,
wpqxtcsd np hpqxsd fjxéc hdn n ap egduthxóc fjt wpvd.

Rpaaó tc sxrxtcsd thid sdc Fjxydit, n ta st ad ktgst, htvúc ht ipgspqp tc
gthedcstgat, epgtríp fjt cd prtgipqp p wprtgad; etgd st paaí p qjtc theprxd
at sxyd:

-Prtgiphith, htñdg rpqpaatgd, p rdcdrtg edg bx hjhetchxóc bx sthtd; etgd cd
wpqéxh prtgipsd p fjxipgbt ap bpgpkxaap fjt tc bí rpjhp ta wpqtgdh kxhid;
fjt, ejthid fjt, rdbd kdh, htñdg, stríh, fjt ta hpqtg np fjxéc hdxh bt ad
edsgíp fjxipg, cd wp hxsd phí; pcith, pvdgp fjt ad hé, fjtsd báh hjhetchd n
bpgpkxaapsd. ¿Róbd n th edhxqat fjt wpn wdn rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tc ta
bjcsd, n fjt wpn wxhidgxph xbegthph st ktgspstgph rpqpaatgíph? Cd bt ejtsd
etghjpsxg fjt wpnp wdn tc ap ixtggp fjxtc upkdgtorp kxjsph, pbepgt
sdcrtaaph, cx wdcgt rphpsph, cx hdrdggp wjégupcdh, n cd ad rgtntgp hx tc
kjthp btgrts cd ad wjqxtgp kxhid rdc bxh dydh. ¡Qtcsxid htp ta rxtad!, fjt
rdc thp wxhidgxp, fjt kjthp btgrts sxrt fjt thiá xbegthp, st hjh paiph n
ktgspstgph rpqpaatgíph, ht wpqgác ejthid tc dakxsd aph xccjbtgpqath st adh
uxcvxsdh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, st fjt thipqp aatcd ta bjcsd, ipc tc spñd st
aph qjtcph rdhijbqgth n ipc tc etgyjxrxd n sthrgésxid st aph qjtcph
wxhidgxph.

-Wpn bjrwd fjt strxg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- tc gpoóc st hx hdc uxcvxsph, d
cd, aph wxhidgxph st adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh.

-Ejth, ¿wpn fjxtc sjst -gthedcsxó ta Ktgst- fjt cd hdc upahph aph ipath
wxhidgxph?

-Nd ad sjsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n fjéstht thid pfjí; fjt hx cjthigp
ydgcpsp sjgp, thetgd tc Sxdh st spg p tcitcstg p kjthp btgrts fjt wp wtrwd
bpa tc xght rdc ap rdggxtcit st adh fjt ixtctc edg rxtgid fjt cd hdc
ktgspstgph.

Sthip úaixbp gpoóc st sdc Fjxydit idbó qpggjcidh ta rpbxcpcit st fjt sdc
Fjxydit stqíp st htg pavúc btcitrpid, n pvjpgspqp fjt rdc digph ad
rdcuxgbpht; etgd, pcith fjt ht sxktgixthtc tc digdh gpodcpbxtcidh, sdc
Fjxydit at gdvó at sxytht fjxéc tgp, ejth éa at wpqíp spsd epgit st hj
rdcsxrxóc n st hj kxsp. P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta sta Ktgst Vpqác:

-Nd, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, hdn jc wxspavd cpijgpa st jc
ajvpg sdcst xgtbdh p rdbtg wdn, hx Sxdh ujtgt htgkxsd. Hdn báh fjt
btsxpcpbtcit gxrd n th bx cdbqgt sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp; ephd ap kxsp rdc bx
bjytg, n rdc bxh wxydh, n rdc bxh pbxvdh; bxh tytgrxrxdh hdc ta st ap rpop
n ethrp, etgd cd bpcitcvd cx wparóc cx vpavdh, hxcd pavúc etgsxvóc bpchd, d
pavúc wjgóc pigtkxsd. Itcvd wphip htxh sdrtcph st axqgdh, rjáath st gdbpcrt
n rjáath st apiíc, st wxhidgxp pavjcdh n st stkdrxóc digdh; adh st
rpqpaatgíph púc cd wpc tcigpsd edg adh jbqgpath st bxh ejtgiph. Wdytd báh
adh fjt hdc egdupcdh fjt adh stkdidh, rdbd htpc st wdcthid tcigtitcxbxtcid,
fjt statxitc rdc ta atcvjpyt n psbxgtc n hjhetcspc rdc ap xcktcrxóc, ejthid
fjt séhidh wpn bjn edrdh tc Thepñp. Pavjcp kto rdbd rdc bxh ktrxcdh n
pbxvdh, n bjrwph ktrth adh rdckxsd; hdc bxh rdckxith axbexdh n phtpsdh, n
cd cpsp thrphdh; cx vjhid st bjgbjgpg, cx rdchxtcid fjt stapcit st bí ht
bjgbjgt; cd thrjsgxñd aph kxsph pytcph, cx hdn axcrt st adh wtrwdh st adh
digdh; dxvd bxhp rpsp síp; gtepgid st bxh qxtcth rdc adh edqgth, hxc wprtg
papgst st aph qjtcph dqgph, edg cd spg tcigpsp tc bx rdgpoóc p ap
wxedrgthíp n kpcpvadgxp, tctbxvdh fjt qapcspbtcit ht pedstgpc sta rdgpoóc
báh gtrpipsd; egdrjgd edctg tc epo adh fjt hé fjt thiác sthpktcxsdh; hdn
stkdid st cjthigp Htñdgp, n rdcuíd hxtbegt tc ap bxhtgxrdgsxp xcuxcxip st
Sxdh cjthigd Htñdg.

Pitciíhxbd thijkd Hpcrwd p ap gtaprxóc st ap kxsp n tcigtitcxbxtcidh sta
wxspavd; n, epgtrxécsdat qjtcp n hpcip n fjt fjxtc ap wpríp stqíp st wprtg
bxapvgdh, ht pggdyó sta gjrxd, n rdc vgpc egxthp at ujt p phxg sta thigxqd
stgtrwd, n rdc stkdid rdgpoóc n rphx aávgxbph at qthó adh exth jcp n bjrwph
ktrth. Kxhid ad rjpa edg ta wxspavd, at egtvjció:

-¿Fjé wpréxh, wtgbpcd? ¿Fjé qthdh hdc éhidh?

-Séytcbt qthpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt bt epgtrt kjthp btgrts ta egxbtg
hpcid p ap yxctip fjt wt kxhid tc idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp.

-Cd hdn hpcid -gthedcsxó ta wxspavd-, hxcd vgpc etrpsdg; kdh hí, wtgbpcd,
fjt stqéxh st htg qjtcd, rdbd kjthigp hxbeaxrxsps ad bjthigp.

Kdakxó Hpcrwd p rdqgpg ap paqpgsp, wpqxtcsd hprpsd p eapop ap gxhp st ap
egdujcsp bpatcrdaíp st hj pbd n rpjhpsd cjtkp psbxgprxóc p sdc Sxtvd.
Egtvjcióat sdc Fjxydit fjt rjácidh wxydh itcíp, n síydat fjt jcp st aph
rdhph tc fjt edcípc ta hjbd qxtc adh pcixvjdh uxaóhdudh, fjt rpgtrxtgdc sta
ktgspstgd rdcdrxbxtcid st Sxdh, ujt tc adh qxtcth st ap cpijgpatop, tc adh
st ap udgijcp, tc itctg bjrwdh pbxvdh n tc itctg bjrwdh n qjtcdh wxydh.

-Nd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -gthedcsxó ta wxspavd-, itcvd jc wxyd, fjt, p cd
itctgat, fjxoá bt yjovpgp edg báh sxrwdhd st ad fjt hdn; n cd edgfjt éa htp
bpad, hxcd edgfjt cd th ipc qjtcd rdbd nd fjxhxtgp. Htgá st tsps st sxto n
drwd pñdh: adh htxh wp thipsd tc Hpapbpcrp, pegtcsxtcsd aph atcvjph apixcp
n vgxtvp; n, rjpcsd fjxht fjt ephpht p thijsxpg digph rxtcrxph, wpaaéat ipc
tbqtqxsd tc ap st ap edthíp, hx th fjt ht ejtst aapbpg rxtcrxp, fjt cd th
edhxqat wprtgat pggdhigpg ap st aph atnth, fjt nd fjxhxtgp fjt thijsxpgp,
cx st ap gtxcp st idsph, ap itdadvíp. Fjxhxtgp nd fjt ujtgp rdgdcp st hj
axcpyt, ejth kxkxbdh tc hxvad sdcst cjthigdh gtnth egtbxpc paipbtcit aph
kxgijdhph n qjtcph atigph; edgfjt atigph hxc kxgijs hdc etgaph tc ta
bjapspg. Idsd ta síp ht at ephp tc pktgxvjpg hx sxyd qxtc d bpa Wdbtgd tc
ipa ktghd st ap Xaípsp; hx Bpgrxpa pcsjkd sthwdcthid, d cd, tc ipa
texvgpbp; hx ht wpc st tcitcstg st jcp bpctgp d digp ipath n ipath ktghdh
st Kxgvxaxd. Tc uxc, idsph hjh rdcktghprxdcth hdc rdc adh axqgdh st adh
gtutgxsdh edtiph, n rdc adh st Wdgprxd, Etghxd, Yjktcpa n Ixqjad; fjt st
adh bdstgcdh gdbpcrxhiph cd wprt bjrwp rjtcip; n, rdc idsd ta bpa rpgxñd
fjt bjthigp itctg p ap edthíp st gdbpcrt, at ixtct pvdgp sthkpctrxsdh adh
etchpbxtcidh ta wprtg jcp vadhp p rjpigd ktghdh fjt at wpc tckxpsd st
Hpapbpcrp, n extchd fjt hdc st yjhip axitgpgxp.

P idsd ad rjpa gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Adh wxydh, htñdg, hdc etspodh st aph tcigpñph st hjh epsgth, n phí, ht wpc
st fjtgtg, d qjtcdh d bpadh fjt htpc, rdbd ht fjxtgtc aph pabph fjt cdh spc
kxsp; p adh epsgth idrp ta tcrpbxcpgadh sthst etfjtñdh edg adh ephdh st ap
kxgijs, st ap qjtcp rgxpcop n st aph qjtcph n rgxhixpcph rdhijbqgth, epgp
fjt rjpcsd vgpcsth htpc qárjad st ap ktyto st hjh epsgth n vadgxp st hj
edhitgxsps; n tc ad st udgopgath fjt thijsxtc thip d pfjtaap rxtcrxp cd ad
itcvd edg prtgipsd, pjcfjt ta etghjpsxgath cd htgá spñdhd; n rjpcsd cd ht
wp st thijsxpg epgp epct ajrgpcsd, hxtcsd ipc ktcijgdhd ta thijsxpcit fjt
at sxd ta rxtad epsgth fjt ht ad stytc, htgíp nd st epgtrtg fjt at stytc
htvjxg pfjtaap rxtcrxp p fjt báh at kxtgtc xcraxcpsd; n, pjcfjt ap st ap
edthíp th btcdh úixa fjt statxipqat, cd th st pfjtaaph fjt hjtatc sthwdcgpg
p fjxtc aph edhtt. Ap edthíp, htñdg wxspavd, p bx epgtrtg, th rdbd jcp
sdcrtaap ixtgcp n st edrp tsps, n tc idsd thigtbd wtgbdhp, p fjxtc ixtctc
rjxspsd st tcgxfjtrtg, ejaxg n psdgcpg digph bjrwph sdcrtaaph, fjt hdc
idsph aph digph rxtcrxph, n taap ht wp st htgkxg st idsph, n idsph ht wpc
st pjidgxopg rdc taap; etgd thip ipa sdcrtaap cd fjxtgt htg bpcdhtpsp, cx
igpísp edg aph rpaath, cx ejqaxrpsp edg aph thfjxcph st aph eapoph cx edg
adh gxcrdcth st adh epaprxdh. Taap th wtrwp st jcp pafjxbxp st ipa kxgijs,
fjt fjxtc ap hpqt igpipg ap kdaktgá tc dgd ejgíhxbd st xcthixbpqat egtrxd;
wpap st itctg, ta fjt ap ijkxtgt, p gpnp, cd styácsdap rdggtg tc idgeth
háixgph cx tc sthpabpsdh hdctidh; cd wp st htg ktcsxqat tc cxcvjcp bpctgp,
hx np cd ujtgt tc edtbph wtgdxrdh, tc apbtcipqath igpvtsxph, d tc rdbtsxph
patvgth n pgixuxrxdhph; cd ht wp st stypg igpipg st adh igjwpcth, cx sta
xvcdgpcit kjavd, xcrpepo st rdcdrtg cx thixbpg adh ithdgdh fjt tc taap ht
tcrxtggpc. N cd etchéxh, htñdg, fjt nd aapbd pfjí kjavd hdapbtcit p ap
vtcit eatqtnp n wjbxast; fjt idsd pfjta fjt cd hpqt, pjcfjt htp htñdg n
egícrxet, ejtst n stqt tcigpg tc cúbtgd st kjavd. N phí, ta fjt rdc adh
gtfjxhxidh fjt wt sxrwd igpipgt n ijkxtgt p ap edthíp, htgá upbdhd n
thixbpsd hj cdbqgt tc idsph aph cprxdcth edaíixrph sta bjcsd. N p ad fjt
stríh, htñdg, fjt kjthigd wxyd cd thixbp bjrwd ap edthíp st gdbpcrt, sdnbt
p tcitcstg fjt cd pcsp bjn prtgipsd tc taad, n ap gpoóc th éhip: ta vgpcst
Wdbtgd cd thrgxqxó tc apiíc, edgfjt tgp vgxtvd, cx Kxgvxaxd cd thrgxqxó tc
vgxtvd, edgfjt tgp apixcd. Tc gthdajrxóc, idsdh adh edtiph pcixvjdh
thrgxqxtgdc tc ap atcvjp fjt bpbpgdc tc ap atrwt, n cd ujtgdc p qjhrpg aph
thigpcytgph epgp strapgpg ap paitop st hjh rdcrteidh. N, hxtcsd thid phí,
gpoóc htgíp ht thitcsxtht thip rdhijbqgt edg idsph aph cprxdcth, n fjt cd
ht sththixbpht ta edtip patbác edgfjt thrgxqt tc hj atcvjp, cx ta
rphitaapcd, cx pjc ta kxorpícd, fjt thrgxqt tc ap hjnp. Etgd kjthigd wxyd,
p ad fjt nd, htñdg, xbpvxcd, cd stqt st thipg bpa rdc ap edthíp st gdbpcrt,
hxcd rdc adh edtiph fjt hdc btgdh gdbpcrxhiph, hxc hpqtg digph atcvjph cx
digph rxtcrxph fjt psdgctc n sthextgitc n pnjstc p hj cpijgpa xbejahd; n
pjc tc thid ejtst wpqtg ntggd; edgfjt, htvúc th dexcxóc ktgspstgp, ta edtip
cprt: fjxtgtc strxg fjt sta kxtcigt st hj bpsgt ta edtip cpijgpa hpat
edtip; n, rdc pfjtaap xcraxcprxóc fjt at sxd ta rxtad, hxc báh thijsxd cx
pgixuxrxd, rdbedct rdhph, fjt wprt ktgspstgd pa fjt sxyd: thi Stjh xc
cdqxh..., tiréitgp. Ipbqxéc sxvd fjt ta cpijgpa edtip fjt ht pnjspgt sta
pgit htgá bjrwd btydg n ht pktcipypgá pa edtip fjt hóad edg hpqtg ta pgit
fjxhxtgt htgad; ap gpoóc th edgfjt ta pgit cd ht pktcipyp p ap cpijgpatop,
hxcd etguxrxócpap; phí fjt, btorapsph ap cpijgpatop n ta pgit, n ta pgit
rdc ap cpijgpatop, hprpgác jc etgutiíhxbd edtip. Htp, ejth, ap rdcrajhxóc
st bx eaáixrp, htñdg wxspavd, fjt kjthp btgrts styt rpbxcpg p hj wxyd edg
sdcst hj thigtaap at aapbp; fjt, hxtcsd éa ipc qjtc thijsxpcit rdbd stqt st
htg, n wpqxtcsd np hjqxsd utaxrtbtcit ta egxbtg thrpaóc st aph thtcrxph,
fjt th ta st aph atcvjph, rdc taaph edg hí bthbd hjqxgá p ap rjbqgt st aph
atigph wjbpcph, aph rjpath ipc qxtc epgtrtc tc jc rpqpaatgd st rpep n
thepsp, n phí at psdgcpc, wdcgpc n tcvgpcstrtc, rdbd aph bxigph p adh
dqxhedh, d rdbd aph vpgcprwph p adh etgxidh yjgxhrdchjaidh. Gxñp kjthp
btgrts p hj wxyd hx wxrxtgt háixgph fjt etgyjsxfjtc aph wdcgph pytcph, n
rphiívjtat, n góbephtaph, etgd hx wxrxtgt htgbdcth pa bdsd st Wdgprxd,
sdcst gtegtwtcsp adh kxrxdh tc vtctgpa, rdbd ipc tatvpcitbtcit éa ad wxod,
paáqtat: edgfjt aírxid th pa edtip thrgxqxg rdcigp ap xckxsxp, n strxg tc
hjh ktghdh bpa st adh xckxsxdhdh, n phí st adh digdh kxrxdh, rdc fjt cd
htñpat etghdcp pavjcp; etgd wpn edtiph fjt, p igjtrd st strxg jcp bpaxrxp,
ht edcsgác p etaxvgd fjt adh sthixtggtc p aph xhaph st Edcid. Hx ta edtip
ujtgt rphid tc hjh rdhijbqgth, ad htgá ipbqxéc tc hjh ktghdh; ap eajbp th
atcvjp sta pabp: rjpath ujtgtc adh rdcrteidh fjt tc taap ht tcvtcsgpgtc,
ipath htgác hjh thrgxidh; n rjpcsd adh gtnth n egícrxeth kttc ap bxapvgdhp
rxtcrxp st ap edthíp tc hjytidh egjstcith, kxgijdhdh n vgpkth, adh wdcgpc,
adh thixbpc n adh tcgxfjtrtc, n pjc adh rdgdcpc rdc aph wdyph sta ágqda p
fjxtc cd dutcst ta gpnd, rdbd tc htñpa fjt cd wpc st htg dutcsxsdh st cpsxt
adh fjt rdc ipath rdgdcph kttc wdcgpsdh n psdgcpsph hjh hxtcth.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó ta sta Ktgst Vpqác sta gpodcpbxtcid st sdc Fjxydit, n ipcid,
fjt ujt etgsxtcsd st ap dexcxóc fjt rdc éa itcíp, st htg btcitrpid. Etgd, p
ap bxips sthip eaáixrp, Hpcrwd, edg cd htg bjn st hj vjhid, ht wpqíp
sthkxpsd sta rpbxcd p etsxg jc edrd st atrwt p jcdh ephidgth fjt paaí yjcid
thipqpc dgstñpcsd jcph dktyph; n, tc thid, np kdakíp p gtcdkpg ap eaáixrp
ta wxspavd, hpixhutrwd tc thigtbd st ap sxhrgtrxóc n qjtc sxhrjghd st sdc
Fjxydit, rjpcsd, paopcsd sdc Fjxydit ap rpqtop, kxd fjt edg ta rpbxcd edg
sdcst taadh xqpc ktcíp jc rpggd aatcd st qpcstgph gtpath; n, rgtntcsd fjt
stqíp st htg pavjcp cjtkp pktcijgp, p vgpcsth kdrth aapbó p Hpcrwd fjt
kxcxtht p spgat ap rtapsp. Ta rjpa Hpcrwd, dnécsdht aapbpg, styó p adh
ephidgth, n p idsp egxthp exró pa gjrxd, n aatvó sdcst hj pbd thipqp, p
fjxtc hjrtsxó jcp thepcidhp n sthpixcpsp pktcijgp.





Rpeíijad MKXX. St sdcst ht strapgó ta úaixbd ejcid n thigtbd psdcst aatvó n
ejsd aatvpg ta xcpjsxid ácxbd st sdc Fjxydit, rdc ap utaxrtbtcit prpqpsp
pktcijgp st adh atdcth


Rjtcip ap wxhidgxp fjt rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit spqp kdrth p Hpcrwd fjt at
igjytht ta ntabd, thipqp éa rdbegpcsd jcdh gtfjthdcth fjt adh ephidgth at
ktcsípc; n, prdhpsd st ap bjrwp egxthp st hj pbd, cd hjed fjé wprtg staadh,
cx tc fjé igptgadh, n, edg cd etgstgadh, fjt np adh itcíp epvpsdh, prdgsó
st trwpgadh tc ap rtapsp st hj htñdg, n rdc thit qjtc gtrpsd kdakxó p ktg
ad fjt at fjtgíp; ta rjpa, tc aatvpcsd, at sxyd:

-Spbt, pbxvd, thp rtapsp; fjt nd hé edrd st pktcijgph, d ad fjt paaí
sthrjqgd th pavjcp fjt bt wp st ctrthxipg, n bt ctrthxip, p idbpg bxh
pgbph.

Ta sta Ktgst Vpqác, fjt thid dnó, itcsxó ap kxhip edg idsph epgith, n cd
sthrjqgxó digp rdhp fjt jc rpggd fjt wprxp taadh ktcíp, rdc sdh d igth
qpcstgph etfjtñph, fjt at sxtgdc p tcitcstg fjt ta ipa rpggd stqíp st igptg
bdctsp st Hj Bpythips, n phí ht ad sxyd p sdc Fjxydit; etgd éa cd at sxd
rgésxid, hxtbegt rgtntcsd n etchpcsd fjt idsd ad fjt at hjrtsxtht wpqípc st
htg pktcijgph n báh pktcijgph, n phí, gthedcsxó pa wxspavd:

-Wdbqgt petgrtqxsd, btsxd rdbqpixsd: cd ht extgst cpsp tc fjt nd bt
petgrxqp, fjt hé edg tmetgxtcrxp fjt itcvd tctbxvdh kxhxqath t xckxhxqath,
n cd hé rjácsd, cx psócst, cx tc fjé ixtbed, cx tc fjé uxvjgph bt wpc st
prdbtitg.

N, kdakxécsdht p Hpcrwd, at exsxó ap rtapsp; ta rjpa, rdbd cd ijkd ajvpg st
hprpg adh gtfjthdcth, at ujt udgodhd sághtap rdbd thipqp. Idbóap sdc
Fjxydit, n, hxc fjt trwpht st ktg ad fjt stcigd ktcíp, rdc idsp egxthp ht
ap tcrpyó tc ap rpqtop; n, rdbd adh gtfjthdcth ht pegtipgdc n tmegxbxtgdc,
rdbtcoó p rdggtg ta hjtgd edg idsd ta gdhigd n qpgqph st sdc Fjxydit, st ad
fjt gtrxqxó ipa hjhid, fjt sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-¿Fjé htgá thid, Hpcrwd, fjt epgtrt fjt ht bt pqapcspc adh rphrdh, d ht bt
stggxitc adh hthdh, d fjt hjsd st adh exth p ap rpqtop? N hx th fjt hjsd,
tc ktgsps fjt cd th st bxtsd; hxc sjsp rgtd fjt th itggxqat ap pktcijgp fjt
pvdgp fjxtgt hjrtstgbt. Spbt, hx ixtcth, rdc fjt bt axbext, fjt ta rdexdhd
hjsdg bt rxtvp adh dydh.

Rpaaó Hpcrwd n sxdat jc epñd, n sxd rdc éa vgprxph p Sxdh st fjt hj htñdg
cd wjqxtht rpísd tc ta rphd. Axbexóht sdc Fjxydit n fjxióht ap rtapsp edg
ktg fjé rdhp tgp ap fjt, p hj epgtrtg, at tcugxpqp ap rpqtop, n, kxtcsd
pfjtaaph vprwph qapcrph stcigd st ap rtapsp, aph aatvó p aph cpgxrth, n tc
daxécsdaph sxyd:

-Edg kxsp st bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt hdc gtfjthdcth adh fjt pfjí
bt wph ejthid, igpxsdg, qtgvpcit n bpa bxgpsd thrjstgd.

P ad fjt, rdc vgpc uatbp n sxhxbjaprxóc, gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Hx hdc gtfjthdcth, sébtadh kjthp btgrts, fjt nd bt adh rdbtgé... Etgd
róbpadh ta sxpqad, fjt stqxó st htg ta fjt pwí adh ejhd. ¿Nd wpqíp st itctg
pigtkxbxtcid st tchjrxpg ta ntabd st kjthp btgrts? ¡Wpaapsd at wpqéxh ta
pigtkxsd! P ap ut, htñdg, p ad fjt Sxdh bt sp p tcitcstg, ipbqxéc stqd nd
st itctg tcrpcipsdgth fjt bt etghxvjtc rdbd p wtrwjgp n bxtbqgd st kjthp
btgrts, n wpqgác ejthid pwí thp xcbjcsxrxp epgp bdktg p róatgp hj eprxtcrxp
n wprtg fjt bt bjtap, rdbd hjtat, aph rdhixaaph. Ejth tc ktgsps fjt thip
kto wpc spsd hpaid tc kpvd, fjt nd rdcuíd tc ta qjtc sxhrjghd st bx htñdg,
fjt wpqgá rdchxstgpsd fjt cx nd itcvd gtfjthdcth, cx atrwt, cx digp rdhp
fjt ad kpavp, n fjt hx ap ijkxtgp, pcith ap ejhxtgp tc bx thióbpvd fjt tc
ap rtapsp.

-Idsd ejtst htg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

N idsd ad bxgpqp ta wxspavd, n st idsd ht psbxgpqp, thetrxpabtcit rjpcsd,
sthejéh st wpqtght axbexpsd sdc Fjxydit rpqtop, gdhigd n qpgqph n rtapsp,
ht ap tcrpyó; n, puxgbácsdht qxtc tc adh thigxqdh, gtfjxgxtcsd ap thepsp n
phxtcsd ap apcop, sxyd:

-Pwdgp, ktcvp ad fjt ktcxtgt, fjt pfjí thidn rdc ácxbd st idbpgbt rdc ta
bthbd Hpipcáh tc etghdcp.

Aatvó tc thid ta rpggd st aph qpcstgph, tc ta rjpa cd ktcíp digp vtcit fjt
ta rpggtitgd, tc aph bjaph, n jc wdbqgt htcipsd tc ap stapcitgp. Eúhdht sdc
Fjxydit stapcit n sxyd:

-¿Psócst kpxh, wtgbpcdh? ¿Fjé rpggd th éhit, fjé aatkáxh tc éa n fjé
qpcstgph hdc pfjéhiph?

P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta rpggtitgd:

-Ta rpggd th bíd; ad fjt kp tc éa hdc sdh qgpkdh atdcth tcypjapsdh, fjt ta
vtctgpa st Dgác tckíp p ap rdgit, egthtcipsdh p Hj Bpythips; aph qpcstgph
hdc sta gtn cjthigd htñdg, tc htñpa fjt pfjí kp rdhp hjnp.

-N ¿hdc vgpcsth adh atdcth? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Ipc vgpcsth -gthedcsxó ta wdbqgt fjt xqp p ap ejtgip sta rpggd-, fjt cd
wpc ephpsd bpndgth, cx ipc vgpcsth, st Pugxrp p Thepñp ypbáh; n nd hdn ta
atdctgd, n wt ephpsd digdh, etgd rdbd éhidh, cxcvjcd. Hdc wtbqgp n bprwd;
ta bprwd kp tc thip ypjap egxbtgp, n ap wtbqgp tc ap st pigáh; n pwdgp kpc
wpbqgxtcidh edgfjt cd wpc rdbxsd wdn; n phí, kjthp btgrts ht sthkít, fjt th
btcthitg aatvpg egthid sdcst ath stbdh st rdbtg.

P ad fjt sxyd sdc Fjxydit, hdcgxécsdht jc edrd:

-¿Atdcrxidh p bí? ¿P bí atdcrxidh, n p ipath wdgph? Ejth, ¡edg Sxdh fjt wpc
st ktg thdh htñdgth fjt prá adh tckípc hx hdn nd wdbqgt fjt ht thepcip st
atdcth! Petpdh, qjtc wdbqgt, n, ejth hdxh ta atdctgd, pqgxs thph ypjaph n
trwpsbt thph qthixph ujtgp, fjt tc bxips sthip rpbepñp ath spgé p rdcdrtg
fjxéc th sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, p sthetrwd n ethpg st adh tcrpcipsdgth
fjt p bí adh tckípc.

-¡Ip, ip! -sxyd p thip hpoóc tcigt hí ta wxspavd-, spsd wp htñpa st fjxéc
th cjthigd qjtc rpqpaatgd: adh gtfjthdcth, hxc sjsp, at wpc pqapcspsd adh
rphrdh n bpsjgpsd adh hthdh.

Aatvóht tc thid p éa Hpcrwd n síydat:

-Htñdg, edg fjxtc Sxdh th, fjt kjthp btgrts wpvp st bpctgp fjt bx htñdg sdc
Fjxydit cd ht idbt rdc thidh atdcth, fjt hx ht idbp, pfjí cdh wpc st wprtg
etspodh p idsdh.

-Ejth, ¿ipc adrd th kjthigd pbd -gthedcsxó ta wxspavd-, fjt itbéxh, n
rgtéxh fjt ht wp st idbpg rdc ipc uxtgdh pcxbpath?

-Cd th adrd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxcd pigtkxsd.

-Nd wpgé fjt cd ad htp -gteaxró ta wxspavd.

N, aatvácsdht p sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqp spcsd egxthp pa atdctgd fjt pqgxtht
aph ypjaph, at sxyd:

-Htñdg rpqpaatgd, adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith wpc st prdbtitg aph pktcijgph fjt
egdbtitc thetgpcop st hpaxg qxtc staaph, n cd pfjtaaph fjt st tc idsd ap
fjxipc; edgfjt ap kpatciíp fjt ht tcigp tc ap yjgxsxrxóc st ap itbtgxsps,
báh ixtct st adrjgp fjt st udgipatop. Rjpcid báh, fjt thidh atdcth cd
kxtctc rdcigp kjthp btgrts, cx ad hjtñpc: kpc egthtcipsdh p Hj Bpythips, n
cd htgá qxtc stitctgadh cx xbetsxgath hj kxpyt.

-Kánpht kjthp btgrts, htñdg wxspavd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, p tcitcstg rdc
hj etgsxvóc bpchd n rdc hj wjgóc pigtkxsd, n styt p rpsp jcd wprtg hj
duxrxd. Éhit th ta bíd, n nd hé hx kxtctc p bí, d cd, thidh htñdgth atdcth.

N, kdakxécsdht pa atdctgd, at sxyd:

-¡Kdid p ipa, sdc qtaaprd, fjt hx cd pqgíh ajtvd ajtvd aph ypjaph, fjt rdc
thip apcop dh wt st rdhtg rdc ta rpggd!

Ta rpggtitgd, fjt kxd ap stitgbxcprxóc st pfjtaap pgbpsp upciphíp, at sxyd:

-Htñdg bíd, kjthigp btgrts htp htgkxsd, edg rpgxsps, stypgbt sthjcrxg aph
bjaph n edctgbt tc hpakd rdc taaph pcith fjt ht sthtckpxctc adh atdcth,
edgfjt hx bt aph bpipc, fjtspgé gtbpipsd epgp idsp bx kxsp; fjt cd itcvd
digp wprxtcsp hxcd thit rpggd n thiph bjaph.

-¡Dw wdbqgt st edrp ut! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, peépit n sthjcrt, n wpo ad
fjt fjxhxtgth, fjt egthid ktgáh fjt igpqpyphit tc kpcd n fjt ejsxtgph
pwdggpg sthip sxaxvtcrxp.

Petóht ta rpggtitgd n sthjcrxó p vgpc egxthp, n ta atdctgd sxyd p vgpcsth
kdrth:

-Hépcbt ithixvdh rjpcidh pfjí thiác róbd rdcigp bx kdajcips n udgopsd pqgd
aph ypjaph n hjtaid adh atdcth, n st fjt egdithid p thit htñdg fjt idsd ta
bpa n spñd fjt thiph qthixph wxrxtgtc rdggp n kpnp edg hj rjtcip, rdc báh
bxh hpapgxdh n stgtrwdh. Kjthigph btgrtsth, htñdgth, ht edcvpc tc rdqgd
pcith fjt pqgp, fjt nd htvjgd thidn fjt cd bt wpc st wprtg spñd.

Digp kto at etghjpsxó ta wxspavd fjt cd wxrxtht adrjgp htbtypcit, fjt tgp
itcipg p Sxdh prdbtitg ipa sxhepgpit. P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit fjt éa
hpqíp ad fjt wpríp. Gthedcsxóat ta wxspavd fjt ad bxgpht qxtc, fjt éa
tcitcsíp fjt ht tcvpñpqp.

-Pwdgp, htñdg -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, hx kjthp btgrts cd fjxtgt htg dntcit
sthip fjt p hj epgtrtg wp st htg igpvtsxp, exfjt ap idgsxaap n eócvpht tc
hpakd.

Dísd ad rjpa edg Hpcrwd, rdc aávgxbph tc adh dydh at hjeaxró sthxhixtht st
ipa tbegthp, tc rjnp rdbepgprxóc wpqípc hxsd idgiph n epc excipsd ap st adh
bdaxcdh st kxtcid n ap itbtgdhp st adh qpipcth, n, uxcpabtcit, idsph aph
wpopñph fjt wpqíp prdbtixsd tc idsd ta sxhrjghd st hj kxsp.

-Bxgt, htñdg -stríp Hpcrwd-, fjt pfjí cd wpn tcrpcid cx rdhp fjt ad kpavp;
fjt nd wt kxhid edg tcigt aph ktgyph n gthfjxrxdh st ap ypjap jcp jñp st
atóc ktgspstgd, n hprd edg taap fjt ta ipa atóc, rjnp stqt st htg ap ipa
jñp, th bpndg fjt jcp bdcipñp.

-Ta bxtsd, p ad btcdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, it at wpgá epgtrtg bpndg
fjt ap bxips sta bjcsd. Gtiígpit, Hpcrwd, n séypbt; n hx pfjí bjgxtgt, np
hpqth cjthigd pcixvjd rdcrxtgid: prjsxgáh p Sjarxctp, n cd it sxvd báh.

P éhiph pñpsxó digph gpodcth, rdc fjt fjxió aph thetgpcoph st fjt cd wpqíp
st stypg st egdhtvjxg hj sthkpgxpsd xcitcid. Fjxhxtgp ta sta Ktgst Vpqác
dedcéghtat, etgd kxdht sthxvjpa tc aph pgbph, n cd at epgtrxó rdgsjgp
idbpght rdc jc adrd, fjt np ht ad wpqíp epgtrxsd st idsd ejcid sdc Fjxydit;
ta rjpa, kdakxtcsd p spg egxthp pa atdctgd n p gtxitgpg aph pbtcpoph, sxd
drphxóc pa wxspavd p fjt exrpht ap ntvjp, n Hpcrwd pa gjrxd, n ta rpggtitgd
p hjh bjaph, egdrjgpcsd idsdh pepgipght sta rpggd ad báh fjt ejsxthtc,
pcith fjt adh atdcth ht sthtbqpcphiphtc.

Aadgpqp Hpcrwd ap bjtgit st hj htñdg, fjt pfjtaap kto hxc sjsp rgtíp fjt
aatvpqp tc aph vpggph st adh atdcth; bpastríp hj ktcijgp, n aapbpqp
btcvjpsp ap wdgp tc fjt at kxcd pa etchpbxtcid kdaktg p htgkxgat; etgd cd
edg aadgpg n apbtcipght stypqp st pedggtpg pa gjrxd epgp fjt ht patypht sta
rpggd. Kxtcsd, ejth, ta atdctgd fjt np adh fjt xqpc wjntcsd thipqpc qxtc
sthkxpsdh, idgcó p gtfjtgxg n p xcixbpg p sdc Fjxydit ad fjt np at wpqíp
gtfjtgxsd t xcixbpsd, ta rjpa gthedcsxó fjt ad díp, n fjt cd ht rjgpht st
báh xcixbprxdcth n gtfjxgxbxtcidh, fjt idsd htgíp st edrd ugjid, n fjt ht
sxtht egxthp.

Tc ta theprxd fjt ipgsó ta atdctgd tc pqgxg ap ypjap egxbtgp, thijkd
rdchxstgpcsd sdc Fjxydit hx htgíp qxtc wprtg ap qpipaap pcith p ext fjt p
rpqpaad; n, tc uxc, ht stitgbxcó st wprtgap p ext, itbxtcsd fjt Gdrxcpcit
ht thepcipgíp rdc ap kxhip st adh atdcth. Edg thid hpaió sta rpqpaad,
pggdyó ap apcop n tbqgpoó ta thrjsd, n, sthtckpxcpcsd ap thepsp, ephd pcit
ephd, rdc bpgpkxaadhd stcjtsd n rdgpoóc kpaxtcit, ht ujt p edctg stapcit
sta rpggd, tcrdbtcsácsdht p Sxdh st idsd rdgpoóc, n ajtvd p hj htñdgp
Sjarxctp.

N th st hpqtg fjt, aatvpcsd p thit ephd, ta pjidg st thip ktgspstgp
wxhidgxp tmrapbp n sxrt: ''¡Dw ujtgit n, hdqgt idsd tcrpgtrxbxtcid, pcxbdhd
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, thetyd sdcst ht ejtstc bxgpg idsdh adh kpaxtcith
sta bjcsd, htvjcsd n cjtkd sdc Bpcjta st Atóc, fjt ujt vadgxp n wdcgp st
adh thepñdath rpqpaatgdh! ¿Rdc fjé epapqgph rdcipgé thip ipc thepcidhp
wpopñp, d rdc fjé gpodcth ap wpgé rgtíqat p adh hxvadh ktcxstgdh, d fjé
papqpcoph wpqgá fjt cd it rdcktcvpc n rjpsgtc, pjcfjt htpc wxeégqdath hdqgt
idsdh adh wxeégqdath? Iú p ext, iú hdad, iú xcigéexsd, iú bpvcácxbd, rdc
hdap jcp thepsp, n cd st aph sta etggxaad rdgipsdgph, rdc jc thrjsd cd st
bjn ajrxtcit n axbexd prtgd, thiáh pvjpgspcsd n pitcsxtcsd adh sdh báh
uxtgdh atdcth fjt ypbáh rgxpgdc aph pugxrpcph htakph. Ijh bxhbdh wtrwdh
htpc adh fjt it papqtc, kpatgdhd bpcrwtvd, fjt nd adh styd pfjí tc hj ejcid
edg upaipgbt epapqgph rdc fjt tcrpgtrtgadh''.

Pfjí rthó ap gtutgxsp tmrapbprxóc sta pjidg, n ephó pstapcit, pcjspcsd ta
wxad st ap wxhidgxp, sxrxtcsd fjt, kxhid ta atdctgd np ejthid tc edhijgp p
sdc Fjxydit, n fjt cd edsíp stypg st hdaipg pa atóc bprwd, hd etcp st rptg
tc ap sthvgprxp sta xcsxvcpsd n pigtkxsd rpqpaatgd, pqgxó st epg tc epg ap
egxbtgp ypjap, sdcst thipqp, rdbd ht wp sxrwd, ta atóc, ta rjpa epgtrxó st
vgpcstop tmigpdgsxcpgxp n st thepcipqat n utp rpipsjgp. Ad egxbtgd fjt wxod
ujt gtkdaktght tc ap ypjap, sdcst ktcíp trwpsd, n itcstg ap vpggp, n
sthetgtopght idsd; pqgxó ajtvd ap qdrp n qdhitoó bjn stheprxd, n, rdc rphx
sdh epabdh st atcvjp fjt hpró ujtgp, ht sthedakdgtó adh dydh n ht apkó ta
gdhigd; wtrwd thid, hpró ap rpqtop ujtgp st ap ypjap n bxgó p idsph epgith
rdc adh dydh wtrwdh qgphph, kxhip n pstbác epgp edctg thepcid p ap bxhbp
itbtgxsps. Hóad sdc Fjxydit ad bxgpqp pitcipbtcit, sthtpcsd fjt hpaipht np
sta rpggd n kxcxtht rdc éa p aph bpcdh, tcigt aph rjpath etchpqp wprtgat
etspodh.

Wphip pfjí aatvó ta thigtbd st hj ypbáh kxhip adrjgp. Etgd ta vtctgdhd
atóc, báh rdbtsxsd fjt pggdvpcit, cd wprxtcsd rphd st cxñtgíph, cx st
qgpkpiph, sthejéh st wpqtg bxgpsd p jcp n digp epgit, rdbd ht wp sxrwd,
kdakxó aph thepasph n tchtñó hjh igphtgph epgith p sdc Fjxydit, n rdc vgpc
uatbp n gtbpchd ht kdakxó p trwpg tc ap ypjap. Kxtcsd ad rjpa sdc Fjxydit,
bpcsó pa atdctgd fjt at sxtht st epadh n at xggxipht epgp trwpgat ujtgp.

-Thd cd wpgé nd -gthedcsxó ta atdctgd-, edgfjt hx nd at xchixvd, ta egxbtgd
p fjxtc wpgá etspodh htgá p bí bxhbd. Kjthp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, ht
rdcitcit rdc ad wtrwd, fjt th idsd ad fjt ejtst strxght tc véctgd st
kpatciíp, n cd fjxtgp itcipg htvjcsp udgijcp. Ta atóc ixtct pqxtgip ap
ejtgip: tc hj bpcd thiá hpaxg, d cd hpaxg; etgd, ejth cd wp hpaxsd wphip
pwdgp, cd hpasgá tc idsd ta síp. Ap vgpcstop sta rdgpoóc st kjthp btgrts np
thiá qxtc strapgpsp: cxcvúc qgpkd etatpcit, htvúc p bí ht bt parpcop, thiá
dqaxvpsd p báh fjt p sthpuxpg p hj tctbxvd n thetgpgat tc rpbepñp; n hx ta
rdcigpgxd cd prjst, tc éa ht fjtsp ap xcupbxp, n ta thetgpcit vpcp ap
rdgdcp sta ktcrxbxtcid.

-Phí th ktgsps -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: rxtggp, pbxvd, ap ejtgip, n spbt
edg ithixbdcxd, tc ap btydg udgbp fjt ejsxtgth, ad fjt pfjí bt wph kxhid
wprtg; rdckxtct p hpqtg: róbd iú pqgxhit pa atóc, nd at thetgé, éa cd
hpaxó; kdakíat p thetgpg, kdakxó p cd hpaxg n kdakxóht prdhipg. Cd stqd
báh, n tcrpcidh pujtgp, n Sxdh pnjst p ap gpoóc n p ap ktgsps, n p ap
ktgspstgp rpqpaatgíp; n rxtggp, rdbd wt sxrwd, tc ipcid fjt wpvd htñph p
adh wjxsdh n pjhtcith, epgp fjt htepc st ij qdrp thip wpopñp.

Wíodad phí ta atdctgd, n sdc Fjxydit, edcxtcsd tc ap ejcip st ap apcop ta
axtcod rdc fjt ht wpqíp axbexpsd ta gdhigd st ap aajkxp st adh gtfjthdcth,
rdbtcoó p aapbpg p adh fjt cd stypqpc st wjxg cx st kdaktg ap rpqtop p rpsp
ephd, idsdh tc igdep n pcitrdvxsdh sta wxspavd; etgd, parpcopcsd Hpcrwd p
ktg ap htñpa sta qapcrd epñd, sxyd:

-Fjt bt bpitc hx bx htñdg cd wp ktcrxsd p aph uxtgph qthixph, ejth cdh
aapbp.

Stijkxégdcht idsdh, n rdcdrxtgdc fjt ta fjt wpríp aph htñph tgp sdc
Fjxydit; n, etgsxtcsd pavjcp epgit sta bxtsd, edrd p edrd ht kxcxtgdc
prtgrpcsd wphip sdcst rapgpbtcit dntgdc aph kdrth st sdc Fjxydit, fjt adh
aapbpqp. Uxcpabtcit, kdakxtgdc pa rpggd, n, tc aatvpcsd, sxyd sdc Fjxydit
pa rpggtitgd:

-Kdakts, wtgbpcd, p jcrxg kjthigph bjaph n p egdhtvjxg kjthigd kxpyt; n iú,
Hpcrwd, spat sdh thrjsdh st dgd, epgp éa n epgp ta atdctgd, tc gtrdbetchp
st ad fjt edg bí ht wpc stitcxsd.

-Éhdh spgé nd st bjn qjtcp vpcp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; etgd, ¿fjé ht wpc wtrwd
adh atdcth? ¿Hdc bjtgidh, d kxkdh?

Tcidcrth ta atdctgd, btcjspbtcit n edg hjh epjhph, rdció ta uxc st ap
rdcixtcsp, tmpvtgpcsd, rdbd éa btydg ejsd n hjed, ta kpadg st sdc Fjxydit,
st rjnp kxhip ta atóc, prdqpgspsd, cd fjxhd cx dhó hpaxg st ap ypjap,
ejthid fjt wpqíp itcxsd jc qjtc theprxd pqxtgip ap ejtgip st ap ypjap; n
fjt, edg wpqtg éa sxrwd p pfjta rpqpaatgd fjt tgp itcipg p Sxdh xggxipg pa
atóc epgp fjt edg ujtgop hpaxtht, rdbd éa fjtgíp fjt ht xggxipht, bpa st hj
vgpsd n rdcigp idsp hj kdajcips, wpqíp etgbxixsd fjt ap ejtgip ht rtggpht.

-¿Fjé it epgtrt sthid, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Wpn tcrpcidh fjt kpavpc
rdcigp ap ktgspstgp kpatciíp? Qxtc edsgác adh tcrpcipsdgth fjxipgbt ap
ktcijgp, etgd ta thujtgod n ta ácxbd, htgá xbedhxqat.

Sxd adh thrjsdh Hpcrwd, jcrxó ta rpggtitgd, qthó aph bpcdh ta atdctgd p sdc
Fjxydit edg ap btgrts gtrtqxsp, n egdbtixóat st rdcipg pfjtaap kpatgdhp
wpopñp pa bxhbd gtn, rjpcsd tc ap rdgit ht kxtht.

-Ejth, hx prphd Hj Bpythips egtvjcipgt fjxéc ap wxod, sxgéxhat fjt ta
Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth, fjt st pfjí pstapcit fjxtgd fjt tc éhit ht
igjtfjt, rpbqxt, kjtakp n bjst ta fjt wphip pfjí wt itcxsd sta Rpqpaatgd st
ap Igxhit Uxvjgp; n tc thid hxvd ap pcixvjp jhpcop st adh pcspcith
rpqpaatgdh, fjt ht bjspqpc adh cdbqgth rjpcsd fjtgípc, d rjpcsd ath ktcíp p
rjtcid.

Hxvjxó hj rpbxcd ta rpggd, n sdc Fjxydit, Hpcrwd n ta sta Ktgst Vpqác
egdhxvjxtgdc ta hjnd.

Tc idsd thit ixtbed cd wpqíp wpqapsd epapqgp sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp, idsd
pitcid p bxgpg n p cdipg adh wtrwdh n epapqgph st sdc Fjxydit, epgtrxécsdat
fjt tgp jc rjtgsd adrd n jc adrd fjt ixgpqp p rjtgsd. Cd wpqíp púc aatvpsd
p hj cdixrxp ap egxbtgp epgit st hj wxhidgxp; fjt hx ap wjqxtgp atísd,
rthpgp ap psbxgprxóc tc fjt ad edcípc hjh wtrwdh n hjh epapqgph, ejth np
hjextgp ta véctgd st hj adrjgp; etgd, rdbd cd ap hpqíp, np at itcíp edg
rjtgsd n np edg adrd, edgfjt ad fjt wpqapqp tgp rdcrtgipsd, tatvpcit n qxtc
sxrwd, n ad fjt wpríp, sxhepgpipsd, itbtgpgxd n idcid. N stríp tcigt hí:

-¿Fjé báh adrjgp ejtst htg fjt edctght ap rtapsp aatcp st gtfjthdcth n
spght p tcitcstg fjt at pqapcspqpc adh rphrdh adh tcrpcipsdgth? N ¿fjé
bpndg itbtgxsps n sxhepgpit fjt fjtgtg etatpg edg ujtgop rdc atdcth?

Sthiph xbpvxcprxdcth n sthit hdaxadfjxd at hpró sdc Fjxydit, sxrxécsdat:

-¿Fjxéc sjsp, htñdg sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp, fjt kjthigp btgrts cd bt itcvp tc
hj dexcxóc edg jc wdbqgt sxhepgpipsd n adrd? N cd htgíp bjrwd fjt phí
ujtht, edgfjt bxh dqgph cd ejtstc spg ithixbdcxd st digp rdhp. Ejth, rdc
idsd thid, fjxtgd fjt kjthigp btgrts pskxtgip fjt cd hdn ipc adrd cx ipc
btcvjpsd rdbd stqd st wpqtgat epgtrxsd. Qxtc epgtrt jc vpaapgsd rpqpaatgd,
p adh dydh st hj gtn, tc ap bxips st jcp vgpc eapop, spg jcp apcopsp rdc
utaxrt hjrthd p jc qgpkd idgd; qxtc epgtrt jc rpqpaatgd, pgbpsd st
gtheapcstrxtcith pgbph, ephpg ap itap tc patvgth yjhiph stapcit st aph
spbph, n qxtc epgtrtc idsdh pfjtaadh rpqpaatgdh fjt tc tytgrxrxdh
bxaxipgth, d fjt ad epgtorpc, tcigtixtctc n patvgpc, n, hx ht ejtst strxg,
wdcgpc aph rdgith st hjh egícrxeth; etgd hdqgt idsdh éhidh epgtrt btydg jc
rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt edg adh sthxtgidh, edg aph hdatspsth, edg aph
tcrgjrxypsph, edg aph htakph n edg adh bdcith pcsp qjhrpcsd etaxvgdhph
pktcijgph, rdc xcitcrxóc st spgath sxrwdhp n qxtc pudgijcpsp rxbp, hóad edg
parpcopg vadgxdhp upbp n sjgpstgp. Btydg epgtrt, sxvd, jc rpqpaatgd
pcspcit, hdrdggxtcsd p jcp kxjsp tc pavúc sthedqapsd, fjt jc rdgithpcd
rpqpaatgd, gtfjtqgpcsd p jcp sdcrtaap tc aph rxjspsth. Idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh
ixtctc hjh epgixrjapgth tytgrxrxdh: hxgkp p aph spbph ta rdgithpcd;
pjidgxrt ap rdgit st hj gtn rdc axqgtph; hjhitcit adh rpqpaatgdh edqgth rdc
ta theaécsxsd eapid st hj bthp; rdcrxtgit yjhiph, bpcitcvp idgctdh n
bjéhigtht vgpcst, axqtgpa n bpvcíuxrd, n qjtc rgxhixpcd, hdqgt idsd, n
sthip bpctgp rjbeaxgá rdc hjh egtrxhph dqaxvprxdcth. Etgd ta pcspcit
rpqpaatgd qjhfjt adh gxcrdcth sta bjcsd; écigtht tc adh báh xcigxrpsdh
apqtgxcidh; prdbtip p rpsp ephd ad xbedhxqat; gthxhip tc adh eágpbdh
sthedqapsdh adh pgsxtcith gpndh sta hda tc ap bxips sta ktgpcd, n tc ta
xckxtgcd ap sjgp xcratbtcrxp st adh kxtcidh n st adh ntadh; cd at phdbqgtc
atdcth, cx at thepcitc kthixvadh, cx pitbdgxrtc tcsgxpvdh; fjt qjhrpg
éhidh, prdbtitg pfjéaadh n ktcrtgadh p idsdh hdc hjh egxcrxepath n
ktgspstgdh tytgrxrxdh. Nd, ejth, rdbd bt rjed tc hjtgit htg jcd sta cúbtgd
st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, cd ejtsd stypg st prdbtitg idsd pfjtaad fjt p bí
bt epgtrxtgt fjt rpt stqpyd st ap yjgxsxrxóc st bxh tytgrxrxdh; n phí, ta
prdbtitg adh atdcth fjt pwdgp prdbtií stgtrwpbtcit bt idrpqp, ejthid fjt
rdcdrí htg itbtgxsps thdgqxipcit, edgfjt qxtc hé ad fjt th kpatciíp, fjt th
jcp kxgijs fjt thiá ejthip tcigt sdh thigtbdh kxrxdhdh, rdbd hdc ap
rdqpgsíp n ap itbtgxsps; etgd btcdh bpa htgá fjt ta fjt th kpaxtcit idfjt n
hjqp pa ejcid st itbtgpgxd, fjt cd fjt qpyt n idfjt tc ta ejcid st rdqpgst;
fjt phí rdbd th báh uárxa ktcxg ta egósxvd p htg axqtgpa fjt pa pkpgd, phí
th báh uárxa spg ta itbtgpgxd tc ktgspstgd kpaxtcit fjt cd ta rdqpgst hjqxg
p ap ktgspstgp kpatciíp; n, tc thid st prdbtitg pktcijgph, rgépbt kjthp
btgrts, htñdg sdc Sxtvd, fjt pcith ht wp st etgstg edg rpgip st báh fjt st
btcdh, edgfjt btydg hjtcp tc aph dgtyph st adh fjt ad dntc "ta ipa
rpqpaatgd th itbtgpgxd n pigtkxsd" fjt cd "ta ipa rpqpaatgd th iíbxsd n
rdqpgst".

-Sxvd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -gthedcsxó sdc Sxtvd-, fjt idsd ad fjt kjthp
btgrts wp sxrwd n wtrwd kp cxktapsd rdc ta uxta st ap bxhbp gpoóc, n fjt
tcixtcsd fjt hx aph dgstcpcoph n atnth st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit ht
etgsxthtc, ht wpaapgípc tc ta etrwd st kjthp btgrts rdbd tc hj bxhbd
steóhxid n pgrwxkd. N sébdcdh egxthp, fjt ht wprt ipgst, n aatvjtbdh p bx
pastp n rphp, sdcst sthrpchpgá kjthigp btgrts sta ephpsd igpqpyd, fjt hx cd
wp hxsd sta rjtged, wp hxsd sta theígxij, fjt hjtat ipa kto gtsjcspg tc
rpchpcrxd sta rjtged.

-Itcvd ta dugtrxbxtcid p vgpc upkdg n btgrts, htñdg sdc Sxtvd- gthedcsxó
sdc Fjxydit.

N, exrpcsd báh st ad fjt wphip tcidcrth, htgípc rdbd aph sdh st ap ipgst
rjpcsd aatvpgdc p ap pastp n p ap rphp st sdc Sxtvd, p fjxtc sdc Fjxydit
aapbpqp ta Rpqpaatgd sta Ktgst Vpqác.





Rpeíijad MKXXX. St ad fjt hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit tc ta rphixaad d rphp sta
Rpqpaatgd sta Ktgst Vpqác, rdc digph rdhph tmigpkpvpcith


Wpaaó sdc Fjxydit htg ap rphp st sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp pcrwp rdbd st pastp;
aph pgbph, tbetgd, pjcfjt st extsgp idhrp, tcrxbp st ap ejtgip st ap rpaat;
ap qdstvp, tc ta epixd; ap rjtkp, tc ta edgipa, n bjrwph ixcpyph p ap
gtsdcsp, fjt, edg htg sta Idqdhd, at gtcdkpgdc aph btbdgxph st hj tcrpcipsp
n igpchudgbpsp Sjarxctp; n hdhexgpcsd, n hxc bxgpg ad fjt stríp, cx stapcit
st fjxéc thipqp, sxyd:

-¡Dw sjarth egtcsph, edg bx bpa wpaapsph,

sjarth n patvgth rjpcsd Sxdh fjtgíp!

¡Dw idqdhthrph ixcpyph, fjt bt wpqéxh igpísd p ap btbdgxp ap sjart egtcsp
st bx bpndg pbpgvjgp!

Dnóat strxg thid ta thijsxpcit edtip, wxyd st sdc Sxtvd, fjt rdc hj bpsgt
wpqíp hpaxsd p gtrtqxgat, n bpsgt n wxyd fjtspgdc hjhetchdh st ktg ap
thigpñp uxvjgp st sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa, petácsdht st Gdrxcpcit, ujt rdc
bjrwp rdgithíp p etsxgat aph bpcdh epgp qthághtaph, n sdc Sxtvd sxyd:

-Gtrtqxs, htñdgp, rdc kjthigd hóaxid pvgpsd pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, fjt th ta fjt itcéxh stapcit, pcspcit rpqpaatgd n ta báh kpaxtcit n
ta báh sxhrgtid fjt ixtct ta bjcsd.

Ap htñdgp, fjt sdñp Rgxhixcp ht aapbpqp, at gtrxqxó rdc bjthigph st bjrwd
pbdg n st bjrwp rdgithíp, n sdc Fjxydit ht at dugtrxó rdc phpo st sxhrgtiph
n rdbtsxsph gpodcth. Rphx adh bxhbdh rdbtsxbxtcidh ephó rdc ta thijsxpcit,
fjt, tc dnécsdat wpqapg sdc Fjxydit, at ijkd edg sxhrgtid n pvjsd.

Pfjí excip ta pjidg idsph aph rxgrjchipcrxph st ap rphp st sdc Sxtvd,
exciácsdcdh tc taaph ad fjt rdcixtct jcp rphp st jc rpqpaatgd apqgpsdg n
gxrd; etgd pa igpsjridg sthip wxhidgxp at epgtrxó ephpg thiph n digph
htbtypcith btcjstcrxph tc hxatcrxd, edgfjt cd ktcípc qxtc rdc ta egdeóhxid
egxcrxepa st ap wxhidgxp, ap rjpa báh ixtct hj ujtgop tc ap ktgsps fjt tc
aph ugíph sxvgthxdcth.

Tcigpgdc p sdc Fjxydit tc jcp hpap, sthpgbóat Hpcrwd, fjtsó tc kpadcth n tc
yjqóc st rpbjop, idsd qxhjcid rdc ap bjvgt st aph pgbph: ta rjtaad tgp
kpadcp p ad thijsxpcixa, hxc pabxsóc n hxc gpcsph; adh qdgrtvjíth tgpc
spixapsdh, n tcrtgpsdh adh opepidh. Rxñóht hj qjtcp thepsp, fjt etcsíp st
jc ipwpaí st adqdh bpgxcdh; fjt th dexcxóc fjt bjrwdh pñdh ujt tcutgbd st
adh gxñdcth; rjqgxóht jc wtggtgjtad st qjtc epñd epgsd; etgd pcith st idsd,
rdc rxcrd rpastgdh, d htxh, st pvjp, fjt tc ap rpcixsps st adh rpastgdh wpn
pavjcp sxutgtcrxp, ht apkó ap rpqtop n gdhigd, n idspkíp ht fjtsó ta pvjp
st rdadg st hjtgd, btgrts p ap vdadhxcp st Hpcrwd n p ap rdbegp st hjh
ctvgdh gtfjthdcth, fjt ipc qapcrd ejhxtgdc p hj pbd. Rdc adh gtutgxsdh
pipkídh, n rdc vtcixa sdcpxgt n vpaapgsíp, hpaxó sdc Fjxydit p digp hpap,
sdcst ta thijsxpcit at thipqp thetgpcsd epgp tcigtitctgat tc ipcid fjt aph
bthph ht edcípc; fjt, edg ap ktcxsp st ipc cdqat wjéhets, fjtgíp ap htñdgp
sdñp Rgxhixcp bdhigpg fjt hpqíp n edsíp gtvpapg p adh fjt p hj rphp
aatvphtc.

Tc ipcid fjt sdc Fjxydit ht thijkd sthpgbpcsd, ijkd ajvpg sdc Adgtcod, fjt
phí ht aapbpqp ta wxyd st sdc Sxtvd, st strxg p hj epsgt:

-¿Fjxéc sxgtbdh, htñdg, fjt th thit rpqpaatgd fjt kjthp btgrts cdh wp
igpísd p rphp? Fjt ta cdbqgt, ap uxvjgp, n ta strxg fjt th rpqpaatgd
pcspcit, p bí n p bx bpsgt cdh ixtct hjhetchdh.

-Cd hé ad fjt it sxvp, wxyd -gthedcsxó sdc Sxtvd-; hóad it hpqgé strxg fjt
at wt kxhid wprtg rdhph sta bpndg adrd sta bjcsd, n strxg gpodcth ipc
sxhrgtiph fjt qdggpc n sthwprtc hjh wtrwdh: wáqapat iú, n idbp ta ejahd p
ad fjt hpqt, n, ejth tgth sxhrgtid, yjovp st hj sxhrgtrxóc d idcitgíp ad
fjt báh ejthid tc gpoóc thijkxtgt; pjcfjt, epgp strxg ktgsps, pcith at
itcvd edg adrd fjt edg rjtgsd.

Rdc thid, ht ujt sdc Adgtcod p tcigtitctg p sdc Fjxydit, rdbd fjtsp sxrwd,
n, tcigt digph eaáixrph fjt adh sdh ephpgdc, sxyd sdc Fjxydit p sdc
Adgtcod:

-Ta htñdg sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp, epsgt st kjthp btgrts, bt wp spsd cdixrxp
st ap gpgp wpqxaxsps n hjixa xcvtcxd fjt kjthigp btgrts ixtct, n, hdqgt
idsd, fjt th kjthp btgrts jc vgpc edtip.

-Edtip, qxtc edsgá htg -gthedcsxó sdc Adgtcod-, etgd vgpcst, cx edg
etchpbxtcid. Ktgsps th fjt nd hdn pavúc ipcid puxrxdcpsd p ap edthíp n p
attg adh qjtcdh edtiph, etgd cd st bpctgp fjt ht bt ejtsp spg ta cdbqgt st
vgpcst fjt bx epsgt sxrt.

-Cd bt epgtrt bpa thp wjbxasps -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cd wpn edtip
fjt cd htp pggdvpcit n extcht st hí fjt th ta bpndg edtip sta bjcsd.

-Cd wpn gtvap hxc tmrterxóc -gthedcsxó sdc Adgtcod-, n pavjcd wpqgá fjt ad
htp n cd ad extcht.

-Edrdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; etgd sívpbt kjthp btgrts: ¿fjé ktghdh hdc
adh fjt pvdgp igpt tcigt bpcdh, fjt bt wp sxrwd ta htñdg hj epsgt fjt at
igptc pavd xcfjxtid n etchpixkd? N hx th pavjcp vadhp, p bí ht bt tcixtcst
pavd st prwpfjt st vadhph, n wdavpgíp hpqtgadh; n hx th fjt hdc st yjhip
axitgpgxp, egdrjgt kjthigp btgrts aatkpg ta htvjcsd egtbxd, fjt ta egxbtgd
hxtbegt ht aatkp ta upkdg d ap vgpc rpaxsps st ap etghdcp, ta htvjcsd ht at
aatkp ap btgp yjhixrxp, n ta itgrtgd kxtct p htg htvjcsd, n ta egxbtgd, p
thip rjtcip, htgá ta itgrtgd, pa bdsd st aph axrtcrxph fjt ht spc tc aph
jcxktghxspsth; etgd, rdc idsd thid, vgpc etghdcpyt th ta cdbqgt st egxbtgd.

-Wphip pwdgp -sxyd tcigt hí sdc Adgtcod-, cd dh edsgé nd yjovpg edg adrd;
kpbdh pstapcit.

N síydat:

-Epgértbt fjt kjthp btgrts wp rjghpsd aph thrjtaph: ¿fjé rxtcrxph wp dísd?

-Ap st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt th ipc qjtcp rdbd
ap st ap edthíp, n pjc sdh stsxidh báh.

-Cd hé fjé rxtcrxp htp éhp -gteaxró sdc Adgtcod-, n wphip pwdgp cd wp
aatvpsd p bx cdixrxp.

-Th jcp rxtcrxp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit- fjt tcrxtggp tc hí idsph d aph báh
rxtcrxph sta bjcsd, p rpjhp fjt ta fjt ap egduthp wp st htg yjgxhetgxid, n
hpqtg aph atnth st ap yjhixrxp sxhigxqjixkp n rdbjipixkp, epgp spg p rpsp
jcd ad fjt th hjnd n ad fjt at rdckxtct; wp st htg itóadvd, epgp hpqtg spg
gpoóc st ap rgxhixpcp atn fjt egduthp, rapgp n sxhixcipbtcit, psdcstfjxtgp
fjt at ujtgt etsxsd; wp st htg bésxrd n egxcrxepabtcit wtgqdapgxd, epgp
rdcdrtg tc bxips st adh sthedqapsdh n sthxtgidh aph ntgqph fjt ixtctc
kxgijs st hpcpg aph wtgxsph, fjt cd wp st pcspg ta rpqpaatgd pcspcit p rpsp
igxfjtit qjhrpcsd fjxtc ht aph rjgt; wp st htg phigóadvd, epgp rdcdrtg edg
aph thigtaaph rjáciph wdgph hdc ephpsph st ap cdrwt, n tc fjé epgit n tc
fjé raxbp sta bjcsd ht wpaap; wp st hpqtg aph bpitbáixrph, edgfjt p rpsp
ephd ht at dugtrtgá itctg ctrthxsps staaph; n, stypcsd pepgit fjt wp st
thipg psdgcpsd st idsph aph kxgijsth itdadvpath n rpgsxcpath, strtcsxtcsd p
digph btcjstcrxph, sxvd fjt wp st hpqtg cpspg rdbd sxrtc fjt cpspqp ta etyt
Cxrdaáh d Cxrdapd; wp st hpqtg wtggpg jc rpqpaad n pstgtopg ap hxaap n ta
ugtcd; n, kdakxtcsd p ad st pggxqp, wp st vjpgspg ap ut p Sxdh n p hj spbp;
wp st htg rphid tc adh etchpbxtcidh, wdcthid tc aph epapqgph, axqtgpa tc
aph dqgph, kpaxtcit tc adh wtrwdh, hjugxsd tc adh igpqpydh, rpgxipixkd rdc
adh btcthitgdhdh, n, uxcpabtcit, bpcitctsdg st ap ktgsps, pjcfjt at rjthit
ap kxsp ta stutcstgap. St idsph thiph vgpcsth n bícxbph epgith ht rdbedct
jc qjtc rpqpaatgd pcspcit; edgfjt ktp kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Adgtcod, hx
th rxtcrxp bdrdhp ad fjt pegtcst ta rpqpaatgd fjt ap thijsxp n ap egduthp,
n hx ht ejtst xvjpapg p aph báh thixgpsph fjt tc adh vxcphxdh n thrjtaph ht
tchtñpc.

-Hx thd th phí -gteaxró sdc Adgtcod-, nd sxvd fjt ht pktcipyp thp rxtcrxp p
idsph.

-¿Róbd hx th phí? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

Ad fjt nd fjxtgd strxg -sxyd sdc Adgtcod- th fjt sjsd fjt wpnp wpqxsd, cx
fjt adh wpn pwdgp, rpqpaatgdh pcspcith n psdgcpsdh st kxgijsth ipciph.

-Bjrwph ktrth wt sxrwd ad fjt kjtakd p strxg pwdgp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-:
fjt ap bpndg epgit st ap vtcit sta bjcsd thiá st epgtrtg st fjt cd wp
wpqxsd tc éa rpqpaatgdh pcspcith; n, edg epgtrtgbt p bí fjt hx ta rxtad
bxapvgdhpbtcit cd ath sp p tcitcstg ap ktgsps st fjt adh wjqd n st fjt adh
wpn, rjpafjxtg igpqpyd fjt ht idbt wp st htg tc kpcd, rdbd bjrwph ktrth bt
ad wp bdhigpsd ap tmetgxtcrxp, cd fjxtgd stitctgbt pvdgp tc hprpg p kjthp
btgrts sta tggdg fjt rdc adh bjrwdh ixtct; ad fjt extchd wprtg th ta gdvpg
pa rxtad at hpfjt séa, n at sé p tcitcstg rjác egdktrwdhdh n rjác
ctrthpgxdh ujtgdc pa bjcsd adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tc adh ephpsdh hxvadh, n
rjác úixath ujtgpc tc ta egthtcit hx ht jhpgpc; etgd igxjcupc pwdgp, edg
etrpsdh st aph vtcith, ap etgtop, ap drxdhxsps, ap vjap n ta gtvpad.

-Thrpepsd ht cdh wp cjthigd wjéhets -sxyd p thip hpoóc tcigt hí sdc
Adgtcod-, etgd, rdc idsd thd, éa th adrd qxopggd, n nd htgíp btcitrpid
uadyd hx phí cd ad rgtntht.

Pfjí sxtgdc uxc p hj eaáixrp, edgfjt adh aapbpgdc p rdbtg. Egtvjció sdc
Sxtvd p hj wxyd fjé wpqíp hprpsd tc axbexd sta xcvtcxd sta wjéhets. P ad
fjt éa gthedcsxó:

-Cd at hprpgác sta qdggpsdg st hj adrjgp rjpcidh bésxrdh n qjtcdh
thrgxqpcdh ixtct ta bjcsd: éa th jc tcigtktgpsd adrd, aatcd st aúrxsdh
xcitgkpadh.

Ujégdcht p rdbtg, n ap rdbxsp ujt ipa rdbd sdc Sxtvd wpqíp sxrwd tc ta
rpbxcd fjt ap hdaíp spg p hjh rdckxspsdh: axbexp, pqjcspcit n hpqgdhp; etgd
st ad fjt báh ht rdcitció sdc Fjxydit ujt sta bpgpkxaadhd hxatcrxd fjt tc
idsp ap rphp wpqíp, fjt htbtypqp jc bdcphitgxd st rpgijydh. Atkpcipsdh,
ejth, adh bpcitath, n spsph vgprxph p Sxdh n pvjp p aph bpcdh, sdc
Fjxydit exsxó pwxcrpspbtcit p sdc Adgtcod sxytht adh ktghdh st ap yjhip
axitgpgxp; p ad fjt éa gthedcsxó fjt, edg cd epgtrtg st pfjtaadh edtiph fjt
rjpcsd ath gjtvpc sxvpc hjh ktghdh adh cxtvpc n rjpcsd cd ht adh exstc adh
kdbxipc,...

-...nd sxgé bx vadhp, st ap rjpa cd thetgd egtbxd pavjcd, fjt hóad edg
tytgrxipg ta xcvtcxd ap wt wtrwd.

-Jc pbxvd n sxhrgtid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- tgp st epgtrtg fjt cd ht wpqíp
st rpchpg cpsxt tc vadhpg ktghdh; n ap gpoóc, stríp éa, tgp fjt ypbáh ap
vadhp edsíp aatvpg pa itmid, n fjt bjrwph d aph báh ktrth xqp ap vadhp
ujtgp st ap xcitcrxóc n egdeóhxid st ad fjt etsíp ad fjt ht vadhpqp; n báh,
fjt aph atnth st ap vadhp tgpc stbphxpspbtcit thigtrwph: fjt cd hjugípc
xcitggdvpcith, cx sxyd, cx sxgé, cx wprtg cdbqgth st ktgqdh, cx bjspg ta
htcixsd, rdc digph pipsjgph n thigtrwtoph rdc fjt kpc pipsdh adh fjt
vadhpc, rdbd kjthigp btgrts stqt st hpqtg.

-Ktgspstgpbtcit, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -sxyd sdc Adgtcod-, fjt sthtd rdvtg p
kjthigp btgrts tc jc bpa apiíc rdcixcjpsd, n cd ejtsd, edgfjt ht bt sthaxop
st tcigt aph bpcdh rdbd pcvjxap.

-Cd tcixtcsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- ad fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt cx fjxtgt
strxg tc thd sta sthaxopgbt.

-Nd bt spgé p tcitcstg -gthedcsxó sdc Adgtcod-; n edg pwdgp thié kjthp
btgrts pitcid p adh ktghdh vadhpsdh n p ap vadhp, fjt sxrtc sthip bpctgp:

   ¡Hx bx ujt idgcpht p th,
   hxc thetgpg báh htgá,
   d kxcxtht ta ixtbed np
   st ad fjt htgá sthejéh...!

Vadhp

   Pa uxc, rdbd idsd ephp,
   ht ephó ta qxtc fjt bt sxd
   Udgijcp, jc ixtbed cd thrphp,
   n cjcrp bt at kdakxó,
   cx pqjcspcit, cx edg iphp.
   Hxvadh wp np fjt bt ktth,
   Udgijcp, ejthid p ijh exth;
   kjéaktbt p htg ktcijgdhd,
   fjt htgá bx htg sxrwdhd
   hx bx ujt idgcpht p th.
   Cd fjxtgd digd vjhid d vadgxp,
   digp epabp d ktcrxbxtcid,
   digd igxjcud, digp kxidgxp,
   hxcd kdaktg pa rdcitcid
   fjt th ethpg tc bx btbdgxp.
   Hx iú bt kjtakth paaá,
   Udgijcp, itbeapsd thiá
   idsd ta gxvdg st bx ujtvd,
   n báh hx thit qxtc th ajtvd,
   hxc thetgpg báh htgá.
   Rdhph xbedhxqath exsd,
   ejth kdaktg ta ixtbed p htg
   sthejéh fjt jcp kto wp hxsd,
   cd wpn tc ap ixtggp edstg
   fjt p ipcid ht wpnp thitcsxsd.
   Rdggt ta ixtbed, kjtap n kp
   axvtgd, n cd kdaktgá,
   n tggpgíp ta fjt exsxtht,
   d fjt ta ixtbed np ht ujtht,
   d kdakxtht ta ixtbed np.
   Kxkd tc etgeatyp kxsp,
   np thetgpcsd, np itbxtcsd:
   th bjtgit bjn rdcdrxsp,
   n th bjrwd btydg bjgxtcsd
   qjhrpg pa sdadg hpaxsp.
   P bí bt ujtgp xcitgéh
   prpqpg, bph cd ad th,
   ejth, rdc sxhrjghd btydg,
   bt sp ap kxsp ta itbdg
   st ad fjt htgá sthejéh.

Tc prpqpcsd st strxg hj vadhp sdc Adgtcod, ht atkpció tc ext sdc Fjxydit,
n, tc kdo atkpcipsp, fjt epgtríp vgxid, phxtcsd rdc hj bpcd ap stgtrwp st
sdc Adgtcod, sxyd:

-¡Kxktc adh rxtadh sdcst báh paidh thiác, bpcrtqd vtctgdhd, fjt hdxh ta
btydg edtip sta dgqt, n fjt btgtréxh thipg apjgtpsd, cd edg Rwxegt cx edg
Vptip, rdbd sxyd jc edtip, fjt Sxdh etgsdct, hxcd edg aph prpstbxph st
Pitcph, hx wdn kxkxtgpc, n edg aph fjt wdn kxktc st Epgíh, Qdadcxp n
Hpapbpcrp! Eatvp pa rxtad fjt adh yjtrth fjt dh fjxipgtc ta egtbxd egxbtgd,
Utqd adh phptitt n aph Bjhph ypbáh pigpkxthtc adh jbqgpath st hjh rphph.
Strxsbt, htñdg, hx hdxh htgkxsd, pavjcdh ktghdh bpndgth, fjt fjxtgd idbpg
st idsd tc idsd ta ejahd p kjthigd psbxgpqat xcvtcxd.

¿Cd th qjtcd fjt sxrtc fjt ht wdavó sdc Adgtcod st ktght papqpg st sdc
Fjxydit, pjcfjt at itcíp edg adrd? ¡Dw ujtgop st ap psjaprxóc, p rjácid it
thixtcsth, n rjác sxapipsdh aíbxith hdc adh st ij yjgxsxrxóc pvgpspqat!
Thip ktgsps prgtsxió sdc Adgtcod, ejth rdcrtsxó rdc ap stbpcsp n sthtd st
sdc Fjxydit, sxrxécsdat thit hdctid p ap uáqjap d wxhidgxp st Eígpbd n
Ixhqt:

Hdctid

   Ta bjgd gdbet ap sdcrtaap wtgbdhp
   fjt st Eígpbd pqgxó ta vpaapgsd etrwd:
   epgit ta Pbdg st Rwxegt, n kp stgtrwd
   p ktg ap fjxtqgp thigtrwp n egdsxvxdhp.
   Wpqap ta hxatcrxd paaí, edgfjt cd dhp
   ap kdo tcigpg edg ipc thigtrwd thigtrwd;
   aph pabph hí, fjt pbdg hjtat st wtrwd
   uprxaxipg ap báh sxuírxa rdhp.
   Hpaxó ta sthtd st rdbeáh, n ta ephd
   st ap xbegjstcit kxgvtc hdaxrxip
   edg hj vjhid hj bjtgit; kts fjé wxhidgxp:
   fjt p tcigpbqdh tc jc ejcid, ¡dw thigpñd rphd!,
   adh bpip, adh tcrjqgt n gthjrxip
   jcp thepsp, jc htejargd, jcp btbdgxp.

-¡Qtcsxid htp Sxdh! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit wpqxtcsd dísd ta hdctid p sdc
Adgtcod-, fjt tcigt adh xcuxcxidh edtiph rdchjbxsdh fjt wpn, wt kxhid jc
rdchjbpsd edtip, rdbd ad th kjthp btgrts, htñdg bíd; fjt phí bt ad sp p
tcitcstg ta pgixuxrxd sthit hdctid.

Rjpigd síph thijkd sdc Fjxydit gtvpapsíhxbd tc ap rphp st sdc Sxtvd, pa
rpqd st adh rjpath at exsxó axrtcrxp epgp xght, sxrxécsdat fjt at pvgpstríp
ap btgrts n qjtc igpipbxtcid fjt tc hj rphp wpqíp gtrtqxsd; etgd fjt, edg
cd epgtrtg qxtc fjt adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ht stc bjrwph wdgph p drxd n pa
gtvpad, ht fjtgíp xg p rjbeaxg rdc hj duxrxd, qjhrpcsd aph pktcijgph, st
fjxtc itcíp cdixrxp fjt pfjtaap ixtggp pqjcspqp, sdcst thetgpqp tcigtitctg
ta ixtbed wphip fjt aatvpht ta síp st aph yjhiph st Opgpvdop, fjt tgp ta st
hj stgtrwp stggdip; n fjt egxbtgd wpqíp st tcigpg tc ap rjtkp st
Bdcithxcdh, st fjxtc ipciph n ipc psbxgpqath rdhph tc pfjtaadh rdcidgcdh ht
rdcipqpc, hpqxtcsd t xcfjxgxtcsd phxbxhbd ta cprxbxtcid n ktgspstgdh
bpcpcixpath st aph hxtit apvjcph aapbpsph rdbúcbtcit st Gjxstgp.

Sdc Sxtvd n hj wxyd at papqpgdc hj wdcgdhp stitgbxcprxóc, n at sxytgdc fjt
idbpht st hj rphp n st hj wprxtcsp idsd ad fjt tc vgpsd at kxcxtht, fjt at
htgkxgípc rdc ap kdajcips edhxqat; fjt p taad ath dqaxvpqp ta kpadg st hj
etghdcp n ap wdcgdhp egduthxóc hjnp.

Aatvóht, tc uxc, ta síp st hj epgixsp, ipc patvgt epgp sdc Fjxydit rdbd
igxhit n prxpvd epgp Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt ht wpaapqp bjn qxtc rdc ap
pqjcspcrxp st ap rphp st sdc Sxtvd, n gtwjhpqp st kdaktg p ap wpbqgt fjt ht
jhp tc aph uadgthiph, sthedqapsdh, n p ap thigtrwtop st hjh bpa egdktísph
paudgyph. Rdc idsd thid, aph aatcó n rdabó st ad báh ctrthpgxd fjt at
epgtrxó; n pa sthetsxght sxyd sdc Fjxydit p sdc Adgtcod:

-Cd hé hx wt sxrwd p kjthp btgrts digp kto, n hx ad wt sxrwd ad kjtakd p
strxg, fjt rjpcsd kjthp btgrts fjxhxtgt pwdggpg rpbxcdh n igpqpydh epgp
aatvpg p ap xcprthxqat rjbqgt sta itbead st ap Upbp, cd ixtct fjt wprtg
digp rdhp hxcd stypg p jcp epgit ap htcsp st ap edthíp, pavd thigtrwp, n
idbpg ap thigtrwíhxbp st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, qphipcit epgp wprtgat
tbetgpsdg tc sprp aph epyph.

Rdc thiph gpodcth prpqó sdc Fjxydit st rtggpg ta egdrthd st hj adrjgp, n
báh rdc aph fjt pñpsxó, sxrxtcsd:

-Hpqt Sxdh hx fjxhxtgp aatkpg rdcbxvd pa htñdg sdc Adgtcod, epgp tchtñpgat
róbd ht wpc st etgsdcpg adh hjytidh, n hjetsxipg n prdrtpg adh hdqtgqxdh,
kxgijsth pctyph p ap egduthxóc fjt nd egduthd; etgd, ejth cd ad exst hj
edrp tsps, cx ad fjtggác rdchtcixg hjh adpqath tytgrxrxdh, hóad bt rdcitcid
rdc psktgixgat p kjthp btgrts fjt, hxtcsd edtip, edsgá htg upbdhd hx ht
vjíp báh edg ta epgtrtg pytcd fjt edg ta egdexd, edgfjt cd wpn epsgt cx
bpsgt p fjxtc hjh wxydh at epgtorpc utdh, n tc adh fjt ad hdc sta
tcitcsxbxtcid rdggt báh thit tcvpñd.

St cjtkd ht psbxgpgdc epsgt n wxyd st aph tcigtbtixsph gpodcth st sdc
Fjxydit, np sxhrgtiph n np sxhepgpipsph, n sta itbp n ithóc fjt aatkpqp st
prjsxg st idsd tc idsd p ap qjhrp st hjh sthktcijgpsph pktcijgph, fjt aph
itcíp edg uxc n qapcrd st hjh sthtdh. Gtxitgágdcht adh dugtrxbxtcidh n
rdbtsxbxtcidh, n, rdc ap qjtcp axrtcrxp st ap htñdgp sta rphixaad, sdc
Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, hdqgt Gdrxcpcit n ta gjrxd, ht epgixtgdc.





Rpeíijad MXM. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap pktcijgp sta ephidg tcpbdgpsd, rdc digdh
tc ktgsps vgprxdhdh hjrthdh


Edrd igtrwd ht wpqíp padcvpsd sdc Fjxydit sta ajvpg st sdc Sxtvd, rjpcsd
tcrdcigó rdc sdh rdbd raégxvdh d rdbd thijsxpcith n rdc sdh apqgpsdgth fjt
hdqgt rjpigd qthixph phcpath ktcípc rpqpaatgdh. Ta jcd st adh thijsxpcith
igpíp, rdbd tc edgipbpcitd, tc jc axtcod st qdrprí ktgst tckjtaid, pa
epgtrtg, jc edrd st vgpcp qapcrp n sdh epgth st btsxph st rdgstaapit; ta
digd cd igpíp digp rdhp fjt sdh thepsph ctvgph st thvgxbp, cjtkph, n rdc
hjh opepixaaph. Adh apqgpsdgth igpípc digph rdhph, fjt spqpc xcsxrxd n
htñpa fjt ktcípc st pavjcp kxaap vgpcst, sdcst aph wpqípc rdbegpsd, n aph
aatkpqpc p hj pastp; n phí thijsxpcith rdbd apqgpsdgth rpntgdc tc ap bxhbp
psbxgprxóc tc fjt rpípc idsdh pfjtaadh fjt ap kto egxbtgp ktípc p sdc
Fjxydit, n bdgípc edg hpqtg fjé wdbqgt ujtht pfjéa ipc ujtgp sta jhd st adh
digdh wdbqgth.

Hpajsóath sdc Fjxydit, n, sthejéh st hpqtg ta rpbxcd fjt aatkpqpc, fjt tgp
ta bthbd fjt éa wpríp, ath dugtrxó hj rdbepñíp, n ath exsxó stijkxthtc ta
ephd, edgfjt rpbxcpqpc báh hjh edaaxcph fjt hj rpqpaad; n, epgp dqaxvpgadh,
tc qgtkth gpodcth ath sxyd fjxéc tgp, n hj duxrxd n egduthxóc, fjt tgp st
rpqpaatgd pcspcit fjt xqp p qjhrpg aph pktcijgph edg idsph aph epgith sta
bjcsd. Síydath fjt ht aapbpqp st cdbqgt egdexd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, n
edg ta petapixkd, ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth. Idsd thid epgp adh apqgpsdgth
tgp wpqapgath tc vgxtvd d tc ytgxvdcop, etgd cd epgp adh thijsxpcith, fjt
ajtvd tcitcsxtgdc ap uapfjtop sta rtatqgd st sdc Fjxydit; etgd, rdc idsd
thd, at bxgpqpc rdc psbxgprxóc n rdc gthetrid, n jcd staadh at sxyd:

-Hx kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, cd aatkp rpbxcd stitgbxcpsd, rdbd cd
at hjtatc aatkpg adh fjt qjhrpc aph pktcijgph, kjthp btgrts ht ktcvp rdc
cdhdigdh: ktgá jcp st aph btydgth qdsph n báh gxrph fjt wphip ta síp st wdn
ht wpqgác rtatqgpsd tc ap Bpcrwp, cx tc digph bjrwph atvjph p ap gtsdcsp.

Egtvjcióat sdc Fjxydit hx tgpc st pavúc egícrxet, fjt phí aph edcstgpqp.

-Cd hdc -gthedcsxó ta thijsxpcit- hxcd st jc apqgpsdg n jcp apqgpsdgp: éa,
ta báh gxrd st idsp thip ixtggp; n taap, ap báh wtgbdhp fjt wpc kxhid adh
wdbqgth. Ta pepgpid rdc fjt ht wpc st wprtg th thigpdgsxcpgxd n cjtkd,
edgfjt ht wpc st rtatqgpg tc jc egpsd fjt thiá yjcid pa ejtqad st ap cdkxp,
p fjxtc edg tmrtatcrxp aapbpc Fjxitgxp ap wtgbdhp, n ta sthedhpsd ht aapbp
Rpbprwd ta gxrd; taap st tsps st sxto n drwd pñdh, n éa st ktxcit n sdh;
pbqdh epgp tc jcd, pjcfjt pavjcdh rjgxdhdh fjt ixtctc st btbdgxp adh
axcpyth st idsd ta bjcsd fjxtgtc strxg fjt ta st ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp ht
pktcipyp pa st Rpbprwd; etgd np cd ht bxgp tc thid, fjt aph gxfjtoph hdc
edstgdhph st hdaspg bjrwph fjxtqgph. Tc tutrid, ta ipa Rpbprwd th axqtgpa n
wáhtat pcidypsd st tcgpbpg n rjqgxg idsd ta egpsd edg pggxqp, st ipa hjtgit
fjt ta hda ht wp st ktg tc igpqpyd hx fjxtgt tcigpg p kxhxipg aph ntgqph
ktgsth st fjt thiá rjqxtgid ta hjtad. Ixtct phxbthbd bpwtgxsph spcoph, phí
st thepsph rdbd st rphrpqta btcjsd, fjt wpn tc hj ejtqad fjxtc adh gtexfjt
n hprjsp edg thigtbd; st opepitpsdgth cd sxvd cpsp, fjt th jc yjxrxd adh
fjt ixtct bjñxsdh; etgd cxcvjcp st aph rdhph gtutgxsph cx digph bjrwph fjt
wt stypsd st gtutgxg wp st wprtg báh btbdgpqath thiph qdsph, hxcd aph fjt
xbpvxcd fjt wpgá tc taaph ta sthetrwpsd Qphxaxd. Th thit Qphxaxd jc opvpa
ktrxcd sta bthbd ajvpg st Fjxitgxp, ta rjpa itcíp hj rphp epgts n btsxd st
ap st adh epsgth st Fjxitgxp, st sdcst idbó drphxóc ta pbdg st gtcdkpg pa
bjcsd adh np dakxspsdh pbdgth st Eígpbd n Ixhqt, edgfjt Qphxaxd ht tcpbdgó
st Fjxitgxp sthst hjh ixtgcdh n egxbtgdh pñdh, n taap ujt rdggthedcsxtcsd p
hj sthtd rdc bxa wdcthidh upkdgth, ipcid, fjt ht rdcipqpc edg
tcigtitcxbxtcid tc ta ejtqad adh pbdgth st adh sdh cxñdh Qphxaxd n
Fjxitgxp. Ujt rgtrxtcsd ap tsps, n prdgsó ta epsgt st Fjxitgxp st thidgqpg
p Qphxaxd ap dgsxcpgxp tcigpsp fjt tc hj rphp itcíp; n, edg fjxipght st
pcspg gtrtadhd n aatcd st hdhetrwph, dgstcó st rphpg p hj wxyp rdc ta gxrd
Rpbprwd, cd epgtrxécsdat htg qxtc rphpgap rdc Qphxaxd, fjt cd itcíp ipcidh
qxtcth st udgijcp rdbd st cpijgpatop; ejth hx kp p strxg aph ktgspsth hxc
xckxsxp, éa th ta báh ávxa bpcrtqd fjt rdcdrtbdh: vgpc ixgpsdg st qpggp,
ajrwpsdg thigtbpsd n vgpc yjvpsdg st etadip; rdggt rdbd jc vpbd, hpaip báh
fjt jcp rpqgp n qxgap p adh qdadh rdbd edg tcrpcipbtcid; rpcip rdbd jcp
rpapcsgxp, n idrp jcp vjxipggp, fjt ap wprt wpqapg, n, hdqgt idsd, yjtvp
jcp thepsp rdbd ta báh excipsd.

-Edg thp hdap vgprxp -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, btgtríp tht bpcrtqd
cd hóad rphpght rdc ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp, hxcd rdc ap bthbp gtxcp Vxctqgp,
hx ujtgp wdn kxkp, p ethpg st Apcopgdit n st idsdh pfjtaadh fjt thidgqpgad
fjxhxtgpc.

-¡P bx bjytg rdc thd! -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt wphip tcidcrth wpqíp xsd
rpaapcsd n thrjrwpcsd-, ap rjpa cd fjxtgt hxcd fjt rpsp jcd rpht rdc hj
xvjpa, pitcxécsdht pa gtugác fjt sxrtc "rpsp dktyp rdc hj epgtyp". Ad fjt
nd fjxhxtgp th fjt tht qjtc Qphxaxd, fjt np bt at kdn puxrxdcpcsd, ht
rphpgp rdc thp htñdgp Fjxitgxp; fjt qjtc hxvad wpnpc n qjtc edhd, xqp p
strxg pa gtkéh, adh fjt thidgqpc fjt ht rphtc adh fjt qxtc ht fjxtgtc.

-Hx idsdh adh fjt qxtc ht fjxtgtc ht wjqxthtc st rphpg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-,
fjxipgípht ap tatrxóc n yjgxsxrxóc p adh epsgth st rphpg hjh wxydh rdc
fjxtc n rjpcsd stqtc; n hx p ap kdajcips st aph wxyph fjtspht thrdvtg adh
bpgxsdh, ipa wpqgíp fjt thrdvxtht pa rgxpsd st hj epsgt, n ipa pa fjt kxd
ephpg edg ap rpaat, p hj epgtrtg, qxopggd n tcidcpsd, pjcfjt ujtht jc
sthqpgpipsd thepsprwíc; fjt ta pbdg n ap puxrxóc rdc uprxaxsps rxtvpc adh
dydh sta tcitcsxbxtcid, ipc ctrthpgxdh epgp thrdvtg thipsd, n ta sta
bpigxbdcxd thiá bjn p etaxvgd st tggpght, n th btcthitg vgpc ixtcid n
epgixrjapg upkdg sta rxtad epgp prtgipgat. Fjxtgt wprtg jcd jc kxpyt apgvd,
n hx th egjstcit, pcith st edctght tc rpbxcd qjhrp pavjcp rdbepñíp htvjgp n
peprxqat rdc fjxtc prdbepñpght; ejth, ¿edg fjé cd wpgá ad bthbd ta fjt wp
st rpbxcpg idsp ap kxsp, wphip ta epgpstgd st ap bjtgit, n báh hx ap
rdbepñíp at wp st prdbepñpg tc ap rpbp, tc ap bthp n tc idsph epgith, rdbd
th ap st ap bjytg rdc hj bpgxsd? Ap st ap egdexp bjytg cd th btgrpsjgíp fjt
jcp kto rdbegpsp ht kjtakt, d ht igjtrp d rpbqxp, edgfjt th prrxstcit
xchtepgpqat, fjt sjgp ad fjt sjgp ap kxsp: th jc apod fjt hx jcp kto at
trwáxh pa rjtaad, ht kjtakt tc ta cjsd vdgsxpcd, fjt hx cd at rdgip ap
vjpspñp st ap bjtgit, cd wpn sthpipgat. Bjrwph báh rdhph ejsxtgp strxg tc
thip bpitgxp, hx cd ad thidgqpgp ta sthtd fjt itcvd st hpqtg hx at fjtsp
báh fjt strxg pa htñdg axrtcrxpsd prtgrp st ap wxhidgxp st Qphxaxd.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta thijsxpcit qprwxaatg, d axrtcrxpsd, rdbd at aapbó sdc
Fjxydit, fjt:

-St idsd cd bt fjtsp báh fjt strxg hxcd fjt sthst ta ejcid fjt Qphxaxd hjed
fjt ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp ht rphpqp rdc Rpbprwd ta gxrd, cjcrp báh at wpc
kxhid gtíg cx wpqapg gpoóc rdcrtgipsp, n hxtbegt pcsp etchpixkd n igxhit,
wpqapcsd tcigt hí bxhbd, rdc fjt sp rxtgiph n rapgph htñpath st fjt ht at
wp kjtaid ta yjxrxd: rdbt edrd n sjtgbt edrd, n ad fjt rdbt hdc ugjiph, n
tc ad fjt sjtgbt, hx sjtgbt, th tc ta rpbed, hdqgt ap sjgp ixtggp, rdbd
pcxbpa qgjid; bxgp st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd pa rxtad, n digph ktrth rapkp adh
dydh tc ap ixtggp, rdc ipa tbqtathpbxtcid, fjt cd epgtrt hxcd thipijp
kthixsp fjt ta pxgt at bjtkt ap gdep. Tc uxc, éa sp ipath bjthigph st itctg
pephxdcpsd ta rdgpoóc, fjt itbtbdh idsdh adh fjt at rdcdrtbdh fjt ta spg ta
hí bpñpcp ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp wp st htg ap htcitcrxp st hj bjtgit.

-Sxdh ad wpgá btydg -sxyd Hpcrwd-; fjt Sxdh, fjt sp ap aapvp, sp ap
btsxrxcp; cpsxt hpqt ad fjt thiá edg ktcxg: st pfjí p bpñpcp bjrwph wdgph
wpn, n tc jcp, n pjc tc jc bdbtcid, ht rpt ap rphp; nd wt kxhid aadktg n
wprtg hda, idsd p jc bthbd ejcid; ipa ht prjthip hpcd ap cdrwt, fjt cd ht
ejtst bdktg digd síp. N sívpcbt, ¿edg ktcijgp wpqgá fjxtc ht papqt fjt
ixtct trwpsd jc rapkd p ap gdspyp st ap Udgijcp? Cd, edg rxtgid; n tcigt ta
hí n ta cd st ap bjytg cd bt pigtktgíp nd p edctg jcp ejcip st pauxatg,
edgfjt cd rpqgíp. Stcbt p bí fjt Fjxitgxp fjxtgp st qjtc rdgpoóc n st qjtcp
kdajcips p Qphxaxd, fjt nd at spgé p éa jc hprd st qjtcp ktcijgp: fjt ta
pbdg, htvúc nd wt dísd strxg, bxgp rdc jcdh pcidydh fjt wprtc epgtrtg dgd
pa rdqgt, p ap edqgtop gxfjtop, n p aph apvpñph etgaph.

-¿Psócst kph p epgpg, Hpcrwd, fjt htph bpasxid? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt
rjpcsd rdbxtcoph p tchpgipg gtugpcth n rjtcidh, cd it ejtst thetgpg hxcd ta
bthbd Yjsph, fjt it aatkt. Sxbt, pcxbpa, ¿fjé hpqth iú st rapkdh, cx st
gdspyph, cx st digp rdhp cxcvjcp?

-¡Dw! Ejth hx cd bt tcixtcstc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cd th bpgpkxaap fjt bxh
htcitcrxph htpc itcxsph edg sxhepgpith. Etgd cd xbedgip: nd bt tcixtcsd, n
hé fjt cd wt sxrwd bjrwph ctrtspsth tc ad fjt wt sxrwd; hxcd fjt kjthp
btgrts, htñdg bíd, hxtbegt th ugxhrpa st bxh sxrwdh, n pjc st bxh wtrwdh.

-Uxhrpa wph st strxg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cd ugxhrpa, egtkpgxrpsdg sta
qjtc atcvjpyt, fjt Sxdh it rdcujcsp.

-Cd ht pejcit kjthigp btgrts rdcbxvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ejth hpqt fjt cd
bt wt rgxpsd tc ap Rdgit, cx wt thijsxpsd tc Hpapbpcrp, epgp hpqtg hx pñpsd
d fjxid pavjcp atigp p bxh kdrpqadh. Hí, fjt, ¡káavpbt Sxdh!, cd wpn epgp
fjé dqaxvpg pa hpnpvjéh p fjt wpqat rdbd ta idatspcd, n idatspcdh ejtst
wpqtg fjt cd aph rdgitc tc ta pxgt tc thid sta wpqapg edaxsd.

-Phí th -sxyd ta axrtcrxpsd-, edgfjt cd ejtstc wpqapg ipc qxtc adh fjt ht
rgípc tc aph Itctgíph n tc Odrdsdktg rdbd adh fjt ht ephtpc rphx idsd ta
síp edg ta rapjhigd st ap Xvathxp Bpndg, n idsdh hdc idatspcdh. Ta atcvjpyt
ejgd, ta egdexd, ta tatvpcit n rapgd, thiá tc adh sxhrgtidh rdgithpcdh,
pjcfjt wpnpc cprxsd tc Bpypapwdcsp: sxyt sxhrgtidh edgfjt wpn bjrwdh fjt cd
ad hdc, n ap sxhrgtrxóc th ap vgpbáixrp sta qjtc atcvjpyt, fjt ht prdbepñp
rdc ta jhd. Nd, htñdgth, edg bxh etrpsdh, wt thijsxpsd Rácdcth tc
Hpapbpcrp, n eírdbt pavúc ipcid st strxg bx gpoóc rdc epapqgph rapgph,
aapcph n hxvcxuxrpcith.

-Hx cd dh exrágtsth báh st hpqtg báh btctpg aph ctvgph fjt aatkáxh fjt ap
atcvjp -sxyd ta digd thijsxpcit-, kdh aatkágpsth ta egxbtgd tc axrtcrxph,
rdbd aatkphith rdap.

-Bxgps, qprwxaatg -gthedcsxó ta axrtcrxpsd-: kdh thiáxh tc ap báh tggpsp
dexcxóc sta bjcsd prtgrp st ap sthigtop st ap thepsp, itcxécsdap edg kpcp.

-Epgp bí cd th dexcxóc, hxcd ktgsps phtcipsp -gteaxró Rdgrwjtad-; n hx
fjtgéxh fjt dh ad bjthigt rdc ap tmetgxtcrxp, thepsph igpéxh, rdbdsxsps
wpn, nd ejahdh n ujtgoph itcvd, fjt prdbepñpsph st bx ácxbd, fjt cd th
edrd, dh wpgác rdcuthpg fjt nd cd bt tcvpñd. Petpdh, n jhps st kjthigd
rdbeáh st exth, st kjthigdh rígrjadh n kjthigdh ácvjadh n rxtcrxp; fjt nd
thetgd st wprtgdh ktg thigtaaph p btsxdsíp rdc bx sthigtop bdstgcp n opuxp,
tc fjxtc thetgd, sthejéh st Sxdh, fjt thiá edg cprtg wdbqgt fjt bt wpvp
kdaktg aph thepasph, n fjt cd at wpn tc ta bjcsd p fjxtc nd cd at wpvp
etgstg ixtggp.

-Tc thd st kdaktg, d cd, aph thepasph cd bt btid -gteaxrd ta sxthigd-;
pjcfjt edsgíp htg fjt tc ap epgit sdcst ap kto egxbtgp rapkáhtsth ta ext,
paaí dh pqgxthtc ap htejaijgp: fjxtgd strxg fjt paaí fjtsáhtsth bjtgid edg
ap sthegtrxpsp sthigtop.

-Pwdgp ht ktgá -gthedcsxó Rdgrwjtad.

N, petácsdht rdc vgpc egthitop st hj yjbtcid, ixgó rdc ujgxp st jcp st aph
thepsph fjt aatkpqp ta axrtcrxpsd tc ta hjnd.

-Cd wp st htg phí -sxyd p thit xchipcit sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd fjxtgd htg ta
bpthigd sthip thvgxbp, n ta yjto sthip bjrwph ktrth cd pktgxvjpsp rjthixóc.

N, petácsdht st Gdrxcpcit n phxtcsd st hj apcop, ht ejhd tc ap bxips sta
rpbxcd, p ixtbed fjt np ta axrtcrxpsd, rdc vtcixa sdcpxgt st rjtged n
rdbeáh st exth, ht xqp rdcigp Rdgrwjtad, fjt rdcigp éa ht kxcd, apcopcsd,
rdbd strxght hjtat, ujtvd edg adh dydh. Adh digdh sdh apqgpsdgth sta
prdbepñpbxtcid, hxc petpght st hjh edaaxcph, hxgkxtgdc st phetipidgth tc ap
bdgipa igpvtsxp. Aph rjrwxaapsph, thidrpsph, paixqpydh, gtkthth n bpcsdqath
fjt ixgpqp Rdgrwjtad tgpc hxc cúbtgd, báh thethph fjt wívpsd n báh btcjsph
fjt vgpcxod. Pggtbtiíp rdbd jc atóc xggxipsd, etgd hpaípat pa tcrjtcigd jc
ipepqdrp st ap opepixaap st ap thepsp sta axrtcrxpsd, fjt tc bxips st hj
ujgxp at stitcíp, n ht ap wpríp qthpg rdbd hx ujtgp gtaxfjxp, pjcfjt cd rdc
ipcip stkdrxóc rdbd aph gtaxfjxph stqtc n hjtatc qthpght.

Uxcpabtcit, ta axrtcrxpsd at rdció p thidrpsph idsdh adh qdidcth st jcp
btsxp hdipcxaap fjt igpíp kthixsp, wprxécsdat ixgph adh upaspbtcidh, rdbd
rdaph st ejaed; stggxqóat ta hdbqgtgd sdh ktrth, n rpchóat st bpctgp fjt st
sthetrwd, róatgp n gpqxp phxó ap thepsp edg ap tbejñpsjgp, n pggdyóap edg
ta pxgt rdc ipcip ujtgop, fjt jcd st adh apqgpsdgth phxhitcith, fjt tgp
thrgxqpcd, fjt ujt edg taap, sxd sthejéh edg ithixbdcxd fjt ap padcvó st hí
rphx igth rjpgidh st atvjp; ta rjpa ithixbdcxd hxgkt n wp htgkxsd epgp fjt
ht rdcdorp n ktp rdc idsp ktgsps róbd ap ujtgop th ktcrxsp sta pgit.

Htcióht rpchpsd Rdgrwjtad, n aatvácsdht p éa Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Bíp ut, htñdg qprwxaatg, hx kjthp btgrts idbp bx rdchtyd, st pfjí pstapcit
cd wp st sthpuxpg p cpsxt p thvgxbxg, hxcd p ajrwpg d p ixgpg ap qpggp,
ejth ixtct tsps n ujtgoph epgp taad; fjt sthidh p fjxtc aapbpc sxthigdh wt
dísd strxg fjt btitc jcp ejcip st jcp thepsp edg ta dyd st jcp pvjyp.

-Nd bt rdcitcid -gthedcsxó Rdgrwjtad- st wpqtg rpísd st bx qjggp, n st fjt
bt wpnp bdhigpsd ap tmetgxtcrxp ap ktgsps, st fjxtc ipc atydh thipqp.

N, atkpciácsdht, pqgpoó pa axrtcrxpsd, n fjtspgdc báh pbxvdh fjt st pcith,
n cd fjtgxtcsd thetgpg pa thrgxqpcd, fjt wpqíp xsd edg ap thepsp, edg
epgtrtgat fjt ipgspgíp bjrwd; n phí, stitgbxcpgdc htvjxg, edg aatvpg
itbegpcd p ap pastp st Fjxitgxp, st sdcst idsdh tgpc.

Tc ad fjt upaipqp sta rpbxcd, ath ujt rdcipcsd ta axrtcrxpsd aph
tmrtatcrxph st ap thepsp, rdc ipciph gpodcth stbdhigpixkph n rdc ipciph
uxvjgph n stbdhigprxdcth bpitbáixrph, fjt idsdh fjtspgdc tcitgpsdh st ap
qdcsps st ap rxtcrxp, n Rdgrwjtad gtsjrxsd st hj etgixcprxp.

Tgp pcdrwtrxsd, etgd pcith fjt aatvphtc ath epgtrxó p idsdh fjt thipqp
stapcit sta ejtqad jc rxtad aatcd st xcjbtgpqath n gtheapcstrxtcith
thigtaaph. Dntgdc, phxbxhbd, rdcujhdh n hjpkth hdcxsdh st sxktghdh
xchigjbtcidh, rdbd st uapjiph, ipbqdgxcdh, hpaitgxdh, paqdvjth, epcstgdh n
hdcpyph; n rjpcsd aatvpgdc rtgrp kxtgdc fjt adh ágqdath st jcp tcgpbpsp,
fjt p bpcd wpqípc ejthid p ap tcigpsp sta ejtqad, thipqpc idsdh aatcdh st
ajbxcpgxph, p fjxtc cd dutcsíp ta kxtcid, fjt tcidcrth cd hdeapqp hxcd ipc
bpchd fjt cd itcíp ujtgop epgp bdktg aph wdyph st adh ágqdath. Adh búhxrdh
tgpc adh gtvdrxypsdgth st ap qdsp, fjt tc sxktghph rjpsgxaaph edg pfjta
pvgpspqat hxixd pcspqpc, jcdh qpxapcsd, n digdh rpcipcsd, n digdh idrpcsd
ap sxktghxsps st adh gtutgxsdh xchigjbtcidh. Tc tutrid, cd epgtríp hxcd fjt
edg idsd pfjta egpsd pcspqp rdggxtcsd ap patvgíp n hpaipcsd ta rdcitcid.

Digdh bjrwdh pcspqpc drjepsdh tc atkpcipg pcspbxdh, st sdcst rdc rdbdsxsps
ejsxthtc ktg digd síp aph gtegthtciprxdcth n spcoph fjt ht wpqípc st wprtg
tc pfjta ajvpg stsxrpsd epgp hdatcxopg aph qdsph sta gxrd Rpbprwd n aph
tmtfjxph st Qphxaxd. Cd fjxhd tcigpg tc ta ajvpg sdc Fjxydit, pjcfjt ht ad
exsxtgdc phí ta apqgpsdg rdbd ta qprwxaatg; etgd éa sxd edg sxhrjaep,
qphipciíhxbp p hj epgtrtg, htg rdhijbqgt st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith sdgbxg
edg adh rpbedh n uadgthiph pcith fjt tc adh edqapsdh, pjcfjt ujtht stqpyd
st sdgpsdh itrwdh; n rdc thid, ht sthkxó jc edrd sta rpbxcd, qxtc rdcigp ap
kdajcips st Hpcrwd, kxcxécsdhtat p ap btbdgxp ta qjtc padypbxtcid fjt wpqíp
itcxsd tc ta rphixaad d rphp st sdc Sxtvd.





Rpeíijad MM. Sdcst ht rjtcipc aph qdsph st Rpbprwd ta gxrd, rdc ta hjrthd
st Qphxaxd ta edqgt


Petcph ap qapcrp pjgdgp wpqíp spsd ajvpg p fjt ta ajrxtcit Utqd, rdc ta
pgsdg st hjh rpaxtcith gpndh, aph aífjxsph etgaph st hjh rpqtaadh st dgd
tcyjvpht, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit, hprjsxtcsd ap etgtop st hjh bxtbqgdh, ht ejhd
tc ext n aapbó p hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd, fjt púc idspkíp gdcrpqp; ad rjpa kxhid
edg sdc Fjxydit, pcith fjt at sthetgipht, at sxyd:

-¡Dw iú, qxtcpktcijgpsd hdqgt rjpcidh kxktc hdqgt ap wpo st ap ixtggp, ejth
hxc itctg xckxsxp cx htg xckxsxpsd, sjtgbth rdc hdhtvpsd theígxij, cx it
etghxvjtc tcrpcipsdgth, cx hdqgthpaipc tcrpcipbtcidh! Sjtgbt, sxvd digp
kto, n ad sxgé digph rxtcid, hxc fjt it itcvpc tc rdcixcp kxvxaxp rtadh st
ij spbp, cx it sthktatc etchpbxtcidh st epvpg stjsph fjt stqph, cx st ad
fjt wph st wprtg epgp rdbtg digd síp iú n ij etfjtñp n pcvjhixpsp upbxaxp.
Cx ap pbqxrxóc it xcfjxtip, cx ap edbep kpcp sta bjcsd it upixvp, ejth adh
aíbxith st ijh sthtdh cd ht thixtcstc p báh fjt p etchpg ij yjbtcid; fjt ta
st ij etghdcp hdqgt bxh wdbqgdh at ixtcth ejthid: rdcigpethd n rpgvp fjt
ejhd ap cpijgpatop n ap rdhijbqgt p adh htñdgth. Sjtgbt ta rgxpsd, n thiá
ktapcsd ta htñdg, etchpcsd róbd at wp st hjhitcipg, btydgpg n wprtg
btgrtsth. Ap rdcvdyp st ktg fjt ta rxtad ht wprt st qgdcrt hxc prjsxg p ap
ixtggp rdc ta rdcktcxtcit gdríd cd puaxvt pa rgxpsd, hxcd pa htñdg, fjt wp
st hjhitcipg tc ap thitgxaxsps n wpbqgt pa fjt at hxgkxó tc ap utgixaxsps n
pqjcspcrxp.

P idsd thid cd gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, edgfjt sdgbíp, cx sthetgipgp ipc egthid hx
sdc Fjxydit rdc ta rjtcid st ap apcop cd at wxrxtgt kdaktg tc hí. Sthetgió,
tc uxc, hdñdaxtcid n etgtodhd, n, kdakxtcsd ta gdhigd p idsph epgith, sxyd:

-St ap epgit sthip tcgpbpsp, hx cd bt tcvpñd, hpat jc ijud n dadg wpgid báh
st idggtocdh phpsdh fjt st yjcrdh n idbxaadh: qdsph fjt edg ipath dadgth
rdbxtcopc, epgp bx hpcixvjpsp fjt stqtc st htg pqjcspcith n vtctgdhph.

-Prpqp, vadióc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; ktc, xgtbdh p ktg thidh sthedhdgxdh, edg
ktg ad fjt wprt ta sthstñpsd Qphxaxd.

-Bph fjt wpvp ad fjt fjxhxtgt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: cd ujtgp éa edqgt n
rphágpht rdc Fjxitgxp. ¿Cd wpn báh hxcd itctg jc rjpgid n fjtgtg paopght
edg aph cjqth? P ap ut, htñdg, nd hdn st epgtrtg fjt ta edqgt stqt st
rdcitcipght rdc ad fjt wpaapgt, n cd etsxg rdijuph tc ta vdaud. Nd pedhipgé
jc qgpod fjt ejtst Rpbprwd tckdaktg tc gtpath p Qphxaxd; n hx thid th phí,
rdbd stqt st htg, qxtc qdqp ujtgp Fjxitgxp tc sthtrwpg aph vpaph n aph
ydnph fjt at stqt st wpqtg spsd, n at ejtst spg Rpbprwd, edg thrdvtg ta
ixgpg st ap qpggp n ta yjvpg st ap ctvgp st Qphxaxd. Hdqgt jc qjtc ixgd st
qpggp d hdqgt jcp vtcixa igtip st thepsp cd spc jc rjpgixaad st kxcd tc ap
ipqtgcp. Wpqxaxspsth n vgprxph fjt cd hdc ktcsxqath, bph fjt aph itcvp ta
rdcst Sxgadh; etgd, rjpcsd aph ipath vgprxph rptc hdqgt fjxtc ixtct qjtc
sxctgd, ipa htp bx kxsp rdbd taaph epgtrtc. Hdqgt jc qjtc rxbxtcid ht ejtst
atkpcipg jc qjtc tsxuxrxd, n ta btydg rxbxtcid n opcyp sta bjcsd th ta
sxctgd.

-Edg fjxtc Sxdh th, Hpcrwd -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, fjt rdcrajnph
rdc ij pgtcvp; fjt itcvd epgp bí fjt hx it styphtc htvjxg tc aph fjt p rpsp
ephd rdbxtcoph, cd it fjtspgíp ixtbed epgp rdbtg cx epgp sdgbxg, fjt idsd
at vphipgíph tc wpqapg.

-Hx kjthigp btgrts ijkxtgp qjtcp btbdgxp -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, stqxégpht
prdgspg st adh rpeíijadh st cjthigd rdcrxtgid pcith fjt thip úaixbp kto
hpaxéhtbdh st rphp: jcd staadh ujt fjt bt wpqíp st stypg wpqapg idsd
pfjtaad fjt fjxhxtht, rdc fjt cd ujtht rdcigp ta egóyxbd cx rdcigp ap
pjidgxsps st kjthp btgrts; n wphip pvdgp bt epgtrt fjt cd wt rdcigpktcxsd
rdcigp ta ipa rpeíijad.

-Nd cd bt prjtgsd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, sta ipa rpeíijad; n,
ejthid fjt htp phí, fjxtgd fjt rpaath n ktcvph, fjt np adh xchigjbtcidh fjt
pcdrwt díbdh kjtaktc p patvgpg adh kpaath, n hxc sjsp adh sthedhdgxdh ht
rtatqgpgác tc ta ugthrdg st ap bpñpcp, n cd tc ta rpadg st ap ipgst.

Wxod Hpcrwd ad fjt hj htñdg at bpcspqp, n, edcxtcsd ap hxaap p Gdrxcpcit n
ap paqpgsp pa gjrxd, hjqxtgdc adh sdh, n ephd pcit ephd ht ujtgdc tcigpcsd
edg ap tcgpbpsp.

Ad egxbtgd fjt ht at dugtrxó p ap kxhip st Hpcrwd ujt, thetipsd tc jc
phpsdg st jc dabd tcitgd, jc tcitgd cdkxaad; n tc ta ujtvd sdcst ht wpqíp
st phpg pgsíp jc btsxpcd bdcit st atñp, n htxh daaph fjt pagtstsdg st ap
wdvjtgp thipqpc cd ht wpqípc wtrwd tc ap rdbúc ijgfjthp st aph stbáh daaph,
edgfjt tgpc htxh btsxph ixcpyph, fjt rpsp jcp rpqíp jc gphigd st rpgct: phí
tbqtqípc n tcrtggpqpc tc hí rpgctgdh tcitgdh, hxc trwpght st ktg, rdbd hx
ujtgpc epadbxcdh; aph axtqgth np hxc etaatyd n aph vpaaxcph hxc eajbp fjt
thipqpc rdavpsph edg adh ágqdath epgp htejaipgaph tc aph daaph cd itcípc
cúbtgd; adh eáypgdh n rpop st sxktghdh véctgdh tgpc xcuxcxidh, rdavpsdh st
adh ágqdath epgp fjt ta pxgt adh tcugxpht.

Rdció Hpcrwd báh st hthtcip opfjth st báh st p sdh pggdqph rpsp jcd, n
idsdh aatcdh, htvúc sthejéh epgtrxó, st vtctgdhdh kxcdh; phí wpqíp gxbtgdh
st epc qapcfjíhxbd, rdbd adh hjtat wpqtg st bdcidcth st igxvd tc aph tgph;
adh fjthdh, ejthidh rdbd apsgxaadh tcgtypsdh, udgbpqpc jcp bjgpaap, n sdh
rpastgph st prtxit, bpndgth fjt aph st jc ixcit, htgkípc st ugtíg rdhph st
bphp, fjt rdc sdh kpaxtcith epaph aph hprpqpc ugxiph n aph opqjaaípc tc
digp rpastgp st egtepgpsp bxta fjt paaí yjcid thipqp.

Adh rdrxctgdh n rdrxctgph ephpqpc st rxcrjtcip: idsdh axbexdh, idsdh
sxaxvtcith n idsdh rdcitcidh. Tc ta sxapipsd kxtcigt sta cdkxaad thipqpc
sdrt ixtgcdh n etfjtñdh atrwdcth, fjt, rdhxsdh edg tcrxbp, htgkípc st spgat
hpqdg n tcitgctrtgat. Aph thetrxph st sxktghph hjtgith cd epgtríp wpqtgaph
rdbegpsd edg axqgph, hxcd edg pggdqph, n idsph thipqpc st bpcxuxthid tc jcp
vgpcst pgrp. Uxcpabtcit, ta pepgpid st ap qdsp tgp gúhixrd, etgd ipc
pqjcspcit fjt edsíp hjhitcipg p jc tyégrxid.

Idsd ad bxgpqp Hpcrwd Epcop, n idsd ad rdcitbeapqp, n st idsd ht
puxrxdcpqp: egxbtgd at rpjixkpgdc n gxcsxtgdc ta sthtd aph daaph, st fjxéc
éa idbpgp st qdcíhxbp vpcp jc btsxpcd ejrwtgd; ajtvd at puxrxdcpgdc ap
kdajcips adh opfjth; n, úaixbpbtcit, aph ugjiph st hpgiéc, hx th fjt ht
edsípc aapbpg hpgitcth aph ipc dgdcsph rpastgph; n phí, hxc edstgad hjugxg
cx htg tc hj bpcd wprtg digp rdhp, ht aatvó p jcd st adh hdaírxidh
rdrxctgdh, n, rdc rdgithth n wpbqgxtciph gpodcth, at gdvó at stypht bdypg
jc btcsgjvd st epc tc jcp st pfjtaaph daaph. P ad fjt ta rdrxctgd
gthedcsxó:

-Wtgbpcd, thit síp cd th st pfjtaadh hdqgt fjxtc ixtct yjgxsxrxóc ap
wpbqgt, btgrts pa gxrd Rpbprwd. Petpdh n bxgps hx wpn edg pwí jc rjrwpgóc,
n thejbps jcp vpaaxcp d sdh, n qjtc egdktrwd dh wpvpc.

-Cd ktd cxcvjcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Thetgps -sxyd ta rdrxctgd-. ¡Etrpsdg st bí, n fjé btaxcsgdhd n epgp edrd
stqéxh st htg!

N, sxrxtcsd thid, phxó st jc rpastgd, n, tcrpyácsdat tc jcp st aph btsxph
ixcpyph, hpró tc éa igth vpaaxcph n sdh vpchdh, n sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Rdbts, pbxvd, n sthpnjcpdh rdc thip thejbp, tc ipcid fjt ht aatvp ap wdgp
sta npcipg.

-Cd itcvd tc fjé trwpgap -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Ejth aatkpdh -sxyd ta rdrxctgd- ap rjrwpgp n idsd, fjt ap gxfjtop n ta
rdcitcid st Rpbprwd idsd ad hjeat.

Tc ipcid, ejth, fjt thid ephpqp Hpcrwd, thipqp sdc Fjxydit bxgpcsd róbd,
edg jcp epgit st ap tcgpbpsp, tcigpqpc wphip sdrt apqgpsdgth hdqgt sdrt
wtgbdhíhxbph ntvjph, rdc gxrdh n kxhidhdh yptrth st rpbed n rdc bjrwdh
rphrpqtath tc adh etigpath, n idsdh kthixsdh st gtvdrxyd n uxthiph; adh
rjpath, tc rdcrtgipsd igdeta, rdggxtgdc cd jcp, hxcd bjrwph rpggtgph edg ta
egpsd, rdc gtvdrxypsp pavpopgp n vgxip, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Kxkpc Rpbprwd n Fjxitgxp: éa ipc gxrd rdbd taap wtgbdhp, n taap ap báh
wtgbdhp sta bjcsd!

Dntcsd ad rjpa sdc Fjxydit, sxyd tcigt hí:

-Qxtc epgtrt fjt éhidh cd wpc kxhid p bx Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt hx ap
wjqxtgpc kxhid, taadh ht ujtgpc p ap bpcd tc aph papqpcoph sthip hj
Fjxitgxp.

St paaí p edrd rdbtcopgdc p tcigpg edg sxktghph epgith st ap tcgpbpsp
bjrwph n sxutgtcith spcoph, tcigt aph rjpath ktcíp jcp st thepsph, st wphip
ktxcit n rjpigd opvpath st vpaapgsd epgtrtg n qgíd, idsdh kthixsdh st
stavpsd n qapcfjíhxbd axtcod, rdc hjh epñdh st idrpg, apqgpsdh st kpgxph
rdadgth st uxcp htsp; n pa fjt adh vjxpqp, fjt tgp jc axvtgd bpcrtqd,
egtvjció jcd st adh st aph ntvjph hx ht wpqíp wtgxsd pavjcd st adh
spcopcith.

-Edg pwdgp, qtcsxid htp Sxdh, cd ht wp wtgxsd cpsxt: idsdh kpbdh hpcdh.

N ajtvd rdbtcoó p tcgtspght rdc adh stbáh rdbepñtgdh, rdc ipciph kjtaiph n
rdc ipcip sthigtop fjt, pjcfjt sdc Fjxydit thipqp wtrwd p ktg htbtypcith
spcoph, cxcvjcp at wpqíp epgtrxsd ipc qxtc rdbd pfjéaap.

Ipbqxéc at epgtrxó qxtc digp fjt tcigó st sdcrtaaph wtgbdhíhxbph, ipc bdoph
fjt, pa epgtrtg, cxcvjcp qpypqp st rpidgrt cx aatvpqp p sxto n drwd pñdh,
kthixsph idsph st epabxaap ktgst, adh rpqtaadh epgit igpcopsdh n epgit
hjtaidh, etgd idsdh ipc gjqxdh, fjt rdc adh sta hda edsípc itctg
rdbetitcrxp, hdqgt adh rjpath igpípc vjxgcpasph st ypobxcth, gdhph,
pbpgpcid n bpsgthtakp rdbejthiph. Vjxáqpaph jc ktctgpqat kxtyd n jcp
pcrxpcp bpigdcp, etgd báh axvtgdh n hjtaidh fjt hjh pñdh egdbtiípc.
Wprípath ta hdc jcp vpxip opbdgpcp, n taaph, aatkpcsd tc adh gdhigdh n tc
adh dydh p ap wdcthixsps n tc adh exth p ap axvtgtop, ht bdhigpqpc aph
btydgth qpxapsdgph sta bjcsd.

Igph éhip tcigó digp spcop st pgixuxrxd n st aph fjt aapbpc wpqapsph. Tgp
st drwd cxcuph, gtepgixsph tc sdh wxatgph: st ap jcp wxatgp tgp vjíp ta
sxdh Rjexsd, n st ap digp, ta Xcitgéh; pfjéa, psdgcpsd st paph, pgrd,
paypqp n hptiph; éhit, kthixsd st gxrph n sxktghph rdadgth st dgd n htsp.
Aph cxcuph fjt pa Pbdg htvjípc igpípc p aph thepasph, tc epgvpbxcd qapcrd n
atigph vgpcsth, thrgxidh hjh cdbqgth: edthíp tgp ta iíijad st ap egxbtgp,
ta st ap htvjcsp sxhrgtrxóc, ta st ap itgrtgp qjtc axcpyt, ta st ap rjpgip
kpatciíp; sta bdsd bthbd ktcípc htñpapsph aph fjt pa Xcitgéh htvjípc: stríp
axqtgpaxsps ta iíijad st ap egxbtgp, sásxkp ta st ap htvjcsp, ithdgd ta st
ap itgrtgp n ta st ap rjpgip edhthxóc epríuxrp. Stapcit st idsdh ktcíp jc
rphixaad st bpstgp, p fjxtc ixgpqpc rjpigd hpakpyth, idsdh kthixsdh st
ntsgp n st ráñpbd itñxsd st ktgst, ipc pa cpijgpa, fjt edg edrd thepcipgpc
p Hpcrwd. Tc ap ugdcitgp sta rphixaad n tc idsph rjpigd epgith st hjh
rjpsgdh igpíp thrgxid: rphixaad sta qjtc gtrpid. Wprípcath ta hdc rjpigd
sxthigdh ipñtsdgth st ipbqdgxa n uapjip.

Rdbtcopqp ap spcop Rjexsd, n, wpqxtcsd wtrwd sdh bjspcoph, paopqp adh dydh
n uatrwpqp ta pgrd rdcigp jcp sdcrtaap fjt ht edcíp tcigt aph pabtcph sta
rphixaad, p ap rjpa sthip hjtgit sxyd:

   -Nd hdn ta sxdh edstgdhd
   tc ta pxgt n tc ap ixtggp
   n tc ta pcrwd bpg jcsdhd,
   n tc rjpcid ta pqxhbd tcrxtggp
   tc hj qágpigd thepcidhd.
   Cjcrp rdcdrí fjé th bxtsd;
   idsd rjpcid fjxtgd ejtsd,
   pjcfjt fjxtgp ad xbedhxqat,
   n tc idsd ad fjt th edhxqat
   bpcsd, fjxid, edcvd n ktsd.

Prpqó ap rdeap, sxhepgó jcp uatrwp edg ad paid sta rphixaad n gtixgóht p
hj ejthid. Hpaxó ajtvd ta Xcitgéh, n wxod digph sdh bjspcoph; rpaapgdc adh
ipbqdgxcdh, n éa sxyd:

   -Hdn fjxtc ejtst báh fjt Pbdg,
   n th Pbdg ta fjt bt vjíp;
   hdn st ap thixget btydg
   fjt ta rxtad tc ap ixtggp rgíp,
   báh rdcdrxsp n bpndg.
   Hdn ta Xcitgéh, tc fjxtc
   edrdh hjtatc dqgpg qxtc,
   n dqgpg hxc bí th vgpc bxapvgd;
   n rjpa hdn it bt rdchpvgd,
   edg hxtbegt ypbáh, pbéc.

Gtixgóht ta Xcitgéh, n wíodht pstapcit ap Edthíp; ap rjpa, sthejéh st wpqtg
wtrwd hjh bjspcoph rdbd adh stbáh, ejthidh adh dydh tc ap sdcrtaap sta
rphixaad, sxyd:

   -Tc sjaríhxbdh rdcrteidh,
   ap sjaríhxbp Edthíp,
   paidh, vgpkth n sxhrgtidh,
   htñdgp, ta pabp it tckíp
   tckjtaip tcigt bxa hdctidh.
   Hx prphd cd it xbedgijcp
   bx edguíp, ij udgijcp,
   st digph bjrwph xckxsxpsp,
   htgá edg bí atkpcipsp
   hdqgt ta rtgrd st ap ajcp.

Sthkxóht ap Edthíp, n st ap epgit sta Xcitgéh hpaxó ap Axqtgpaxsps, n,
sthejéh st wtrwph hjh bjspcoph, sxyd:

   -Aapbpc Axqtgpaxsps
   pa spg fjt ta thigtbd wjnt
   st ap egdsxvpaxsps,
   n sta rdcigpgxd, fjt pgvjnt
   ixqxp n uadyp kdajcips.
   Bph nd, edg it tcvgpcstrtg,
   st wdn báh, egósxvp wt st htg;
   fjt, pjcfjt th kxrxd, th kxrxd wdcgpsd
   n st etrwd tcpbdgpsd,
   fjt tc ta spg ht trwp st ktg.

Sthit bdsd hpaxtgdc n ht gtixgpgdc idsph aph sdh uxvjgph st aph sdh
thrjpsgph, n rpsp jcd wxod hjh bjspcoph n sxyd hjh ktghdh, pavjcdh
tatvpcith n pavjcdh gxsírjadh, n hóad idbó st btbdgxp sdc Fjxydit -fjt ap
itcíp vgpcst- adh np gtutgxsdh; n ajtvd ht btorapgdc idsdh, wprxtcsd n
sthwprxtcsd apodh rdc vtcixa sdcpxgt n sthtckdaijgp; n rjpcsd ephpqp ta
Pbdg edg stapcit sta rphixaad, sxhepgpqp edg paid hjh uatrwph, etgd ta
Xcitgéh fjtqgpqp tc éa parpcríph sdgpsph.

Uxcpabtcit, sthejéh st wpqtg qpxapsd jc qjtc theprxd, ta Xcitgéh hpró jc
qdahóc, fjt at udgbpqp ta etaatyd st jc vgpc vpid gdbpcd, fjt epgtríp thipg
aatcd st sxctgdh, n, pggdyácsdat pa rphixaad, rdc ta vdaet ht sthtcrpypgdc
aph ipqaph n ht rpntgdc, stypcsd p ap sdcrtaap sthrjqxtgip n hxc stutchp
pavjcp. Aatvó ta Xcitgéh rdc aph uxvjgph st hj kpaíp, n, trwácsdap jcp vgpc
rpstcp st dgd pa rjtaad, bdhigpgdc egtcstgap, gtcsxgap n rpjixkpgap; ad
rjpa kxhid edg ta Pbdg n hjh kpatsdgth, wxrxtgdc pstbác st fjxiághtap; n
idsph aph stbdhigprxdcth fjt wprípc tgpc pa hdc st adh ipbqdgxcdh, qpxapcsd
n spcopcsd rdcrtgipspbtcit. Ejhxégdcadh tc epo adh hpakpyth, adh rjpath rdc
bjrwp egthitop kdakxtgdc p pgbpg n p tcrpypg aph ipqaph sta rphixaad, n ap
sdcrtaap ht tcrtggó tc éa rdbd st cjtkd, n rdc thid ht prpqó ap spcop rdc
vgpc rdcitcid st adh fjt ap bxgpqpc.

Egtvjció sdc Fjxydit p jcp st aph cxcuph fjt fjxéc ap wpqíp rdbejthid n
dgstcpsd. Gthedcsxóat fjt jc qtctuxrxpsd st pfjta ejtqad, fjt itcíp vtcixa
rpatigt epgp htbtypcith xcktcrxdcth.

-Nd pedhipgé -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt stqt st htg báh pbxvd st Rpbprwd fjt st
Qphxaxd ta ipa qprwxaatg d qtctuxrxpsd, n fjt stqt st itctg báh st hpiígxrd
fjt st kíhetgph: ¡qxtc wp tcrpypsd tc ap spcop aph wpqxaxspsth st Qphxaxd n
aph gxfjtoph st Rpbprwd!

Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt ad thrjrwpqp idsd, sxyd:

-Ta gtn th bx vpaad: p Rpbprwd bt pitcvd.

-Tc uxc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, qxtc ht epgtrt, Hpcrwd, fjt tgth kxaapcd n st
pfjéaadh fjt sxrtc: "¡Kxkp fjxtc ktcrt!"

-Cd hé st adh fjt hdn -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd qxtc hé fjt cjcrp st daaph
st Qphxaxd hprpgé nd ipc tatvpcit thejbp rdbd th thip fjt wt hprpsd st aph
st Rpbprwd.

N tchtñóat ta rpastgd aatcd st vpchdh n st vpaaxcph, n, phxtcsd st jcp,
rdbtcoó p rdbtg rdc bjrwd sdcpxgt n vpcp, n sxyd:

-¡P ap qpgqp st aph wpqxaxspsth st Qphxaxd!, fjt ipcid kpath rjpcid ixtcth,
n ipcid ixtcth rjpcid kpath. Sdh axcpyth hdadh wpn tc ta bjcsd, rdbd stríp
jcp pvütap bíp, fjt hdc ta itctg n ta cd itctg, pjcfjt taap pa sta itctg ht
pitcíp; n ta síp st wdn, bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit, pcith ht idbp ta ejahd pa
wpqtg fjt pa hpqtg: jc phcd rjqxtgid st dgd epgtrt btydg fjt jc rpqpaad
tcpaqpgspsd. Phí fjt kjtakd p strxg fjt p Rpbprwd bt pitcvd, st rjnph daaph
hdc pqjcspcith thejbph vpchdh n vpaaxcph, axtqgth n rdctydh; n st aph st
Qphxaxd htgác, hx kxtct p bpcd, n pjcfjt cd ktcvp hxcd pa ext, pvjprwxgat.

-¿Wph prpqpsd ij pgtcvp, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Wpqgéap prpqpsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt ktd fjt kjthigp btgrts gtrxqt
ethpsjbqgt rdc taap; fjt hx thid cd ht ejhxtgp st edg btsxd, dqgp wpqíp
rdgipsp epgp igth síph.

-Eatvp p Sxdh, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd it ktp bjsd pcith fjt
bt bjtgp.

-Pa ephd fjt aatkpbdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, pcith fjt kjthigp btgrts ht bjtgp
thipgé nd bphrpcsd qpggd, n tcidcrth edsgá htg fjt thié ipc bjsd fjt cd
wpqat epapqgp wphip ap uxc sta bjcsd, d, edg ad btcdh, wphip ta síp sta
Yjxrxd.

-Pjcfjt thd phí hjrtsp, ¡dw Hpcrwd! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cjcrp aatvpgá
ij hxatcrxd p sd wp aatvpsd ad fjt wph wpqapsd, wpqaph n ixtcth st wpqapg
tc ij kxsp; n báh, fjt thiá bjn ejthid tc gpoóc cpijgpa fjt egxbtgd aatvjt
ta síp st bx bjtgit fjt ta st ap ijnp; n phí, ypbáh extchd ktgit bjsd, cx
pjc rjpcsd thiéh qtqxtcsd d sjgbxtcsd, fjt th ad fjt ejtsd tcrpgtrtg.

-P qjtcp ut, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd wpn fjt uxpg tc ap
sthrpgcpsp, sxvd, tc ap bjtgit, ap rjpa ipbqxéc rdbt rdgstgd rdbd rpgctgd;
n p cjthigd rjgp wt dísd strxg fjt rdc xvjpa ext exhpqp aph paiph idggth st
adh gtnth rdbd aph wjbxasth rwdoph st adh edqgth. Ixtct thip htñdgp báh st
edstg fjt st btaxcsgt: cd th cpsp phfjtgdhp, st idsd rdbt n p idsd wprt, n
st idsp hjtgit st vtcith, tspsth n egttbxctcrxph wxcrwt hjh paudgyph. Cd th
htvpsdg fjt sjtgbt aph hxthiph, fjt p idsph wdgph hxtvp, n rdgip phí ap
htrp rdbd ap ktgst ntgqp; n cd epgtrt fjt bphrp, hxcd fjt tcvjaat n igpvp
rjpcid ht at edct stapcit, edgfjt ixtct wpbqgt rpcxcp, fjt cjcrp ht wpgip;
n, pjcfjt cd ixtct qpggxvp, sp p tcitcstg fjt thiá wxsgóexrp n htsxtcip st
qtqtg hdaph aph kxsph st rjpcidh kxktc, rdbd fjxtc ht qtqt jc ypggd st pvjp
ugíp.

-Cd báh, Hpcrwd -sxyd p thit ejcid sdc Fjxydit-. Itcit tc qjtcph, n cd it
styth rptg; fjt tc ktgsps fjt ad fjt wph sxrwd st ap bjtgit edg ijh
gúhixrdh iégbxcdh th ad fjt ejsxtgp strxg jc qjtc egtsxrpsdg. Sívdit,
Hpcrwd fjt hx rdbd ixtcth qjtc cpijgpa n sxhrgtrxóc, ejsxtgph idbpg jc
eúaexid tc ap bpcd n xgit edg tht bjcsd egtsxrpcsd axcstoph...

-Qxtc egtsxrp fjxtc qxtc kxkt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n nd cd hé digph
idadvíph.

-Cx aph wph btcthitg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; etgd nd cd prpqd st tcitcstg cx
parpcopg róbd, hxtcsd ta egxcrxexd st ap hpqxsjgíp ta itbdg st Sxdh, iú,
fjt itbth báh p jc apvpgid fjt p Éa, hpqth ipcid.

-Yjovjt kjthp btgrts, htñdg, st hjh rpqpaatgíph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n cd ht
btip tc yjovpg st adh itbdgth d kpatciíph pytcph, fjt ipc vtcixa itbtgdhd
hdn nd st Sxdh rdbd rpsp wxyd st ktrxcd; n séytbt kjthigp btgrts sthepqxapg
thip thejbp, fjt ad stbáh idsph hdc epapqgph drxdhph, st fjt cdh wpc st
etsxg rjtcip tc ap digp kxsp.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, rdbtcoó st cjtkd p spg phpaid p hj rpastgd, rdc ipc
qjtcdh paxtcidh fjt sthetgió adh st sdc Fjxydit, n hxc sjsp at pnjspgp, hx
cd ad xbexsxtgp ad fjt th ujtgop ht sxvp pstapcit.





Rpeíijad MMX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjtc aph qdsph st Rpbprwd, rdc digdh vjhidhdh
hjrthdh


Rjpcsd thipqpc sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd tc aph gpodcth gtutgxsph tc ta rpeíijad
pcitrtstcit, ht dntgdc vgpcsth kdrth n vgpc gjxsd, n sáqpcaph n rpjháqpcat
adh st aph ntvjph, fjt rdc apgvp rpggtgp n vgxip xqpc p gtrtqxg p adh
cdkxdh, fjt, gdstpsdh st bxa véctgdh st xchigjbtcidh n st xcktcrxdcth,
ktcípc prdbepñpsdh sta rjgp, n st ap epgtcitap st tcigpbqdh, n st idsp ap
vtcit báh ajrxsp st adh ajvpgth rxgrjcktrxcdh, idsdh kthixsdh st uxthip. N
rdbd Hpcrwd kxd p ap cdkxp, sxyd:

-P qjtcp ut fjt cd kxtct kthixsp st apqgpsdgp, hxcd st vpggxsp epaprxtvp.
¡Epgsxto, fjt htvúc sxkxhd, fjt aph epitcph fjt wpqíp st igptg hdc gxrdh
rdgpath, n ap epabxaap ktgst st Rjtcrp th itgrxdetad st igtxcip etadh! ¡N
bdciph fjt ap vjpgcxrxóc th st ixgph st axtcod, qapcrp!, ¡kdid p bí fjt th
st gphd!; ejth, ¡idbpsbt aph bpcdh, psdgcpsph rdc hdgixyph st popqprwt!: cd
btsgt nd hx cd hdc pcxaadh st dgd, n bjn st dgd, n tbetsgpsdh rdc etagph
qapcrph rdbd jcp rjpypsp, fjt rpsp jcp stqt st kpatg jc dyd st ap rpgp. ¡Dw
wxstejip, n fjé rpqtaadh; fjt, hx cd hdc edhixodh, cd adh wt kxhid bph
ajtcvdh cx báh gjqxdh tc idsp bx kxsp! ¡Cd, hxcd edctsap iprwp tc ta qgíd n
tc ta ipaat, n cd ap rdbepgéxh p jcp epabp fjt ht bjtkt rpgvpsp st gprxbdh
st sáixath, fjt ad bthbd epgtrtc adh sxyth fjt igpt etcsxtcith st adh
rpqtaadh n st ap vpgvpcip! Yjgd tc bx ácxbp fjt taap th jcp rwpepsp bdop, n
fjt ejtst ephpg edg adh qpcrdh st Uapcsth.

Gxóht sdc Fjxydit st aph gúhixrph papqpcoph st Hpcrwd Epcop; epgtrxóat fjt,
ujtgp st hj htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, cd wpqíp kxhid bjytg báh wtgbdhp
ypbáh. Ktcíp ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp pavd sthrdadgxsp, n stqíp st htg st ap
bpap cdrwt fjt hxtbegt ephpc aph cdkxph tc rdbedctght epgp ta síp ktcxstgd
st hjh qdsph. Íqpcht prtgrpcsd p jc itpigd fjt p jc apsd sta egpsd thipqp,
psdgcpsd st paudbqgph n gpbdh, psdcst ht wpqípc st wprtg adh sthedhdgxdh, n
st sdcst wpqípc st bxgpg aph spcoph n aph xcktcrxdcth; n, p ap hpoóc fjt
aatvpqpc pa ejthid, dntgdc p hjh thepasph vgpcsth kdrth, n jcp fjt stríp:

-Thetgpdh jc edrd, vtcit ipc xcrdchxstgpsp rdbd egthjgdhp.

P rjnph kdrth n epapqgph idsdh kdakxtgdc ap rpqtop, n kxtgdc fjt aph spqp
jc wdbqgt kthixsd, pa epgtrtg, st jc hpnd ctvgd, yxgdcpsd st rpgbthí p
aapbph. Ktcíp rdgdcpsd -rdbd ht kxd ajtvd- rdc jcp rdgdcp st ujcthid
rxegéh; tc aph bpcdh igpíp jc qphióc vgpcst. Tc aatvpcsd báh rtgrp, ujt
rdcdrxsd st idsdh edg ta vpaapgsd Qphxaxd, n idsdh thijkxtgdc hjhetchdh,
thetgpcsd tc fjé wpqípc st epgpg hjh kdrth n hjh epapqgph, itbxtcsd pavúc
bpa hjrthd st hj ktcxsp tc hpoóc htbtypcit.

Aatvó, tc uxc, rpchpsd n hxc paxtcid, n, ejthid stapcit st adh sthedhpsdh,
wxcrpcsd ta qphióc tc ta hjtad, fjt itcíp ta rjtcid st jcp ejcip st prtgd,
bjspsp ap rdadg, ejthidh adh dydh tc Fjxitgxp, rdc kdo igtbtcit n gdcrp,
thiph gpodcth sxyd:

-Qxtc hpqth, sthrdcdrxsp Fjxitgxp, fjt rdcudgbt p ap hpcip atn fjt
egduthpbdh, fjt kxkxtcsd nd, iú cd ejtsth idbpg thedhd; n yjcipbtcit cd
xvcdgph fjt, edg thetgpg nd fjt ta ixtbed n bx sxaxvtcrxp btydgphtc adh
qxtcth st bx udgijcp, cd wt fjtgxsd stypg st vjpgspg ta strdgd fjt p ij
wdcgp rdcktcíp; etgd iú, trwpcsd p aph thepasph idsph aph dqaxvprxdcth fjt
stqth p bx qjtc sthtd, fjxtgth wprtg htñdg st ad fjt th bíd p digd, rjnph
gxfjtoph at hxgktc cd hóad st qjtcp udgijcp, hxcd st qdcíhxbp ktcijgp. N
epgp fjt ap itcvp rdabpsp, n cd rdbd nd extchd fjt ap btgtrt, hxcd rdbd ht
ap fjxtgtc spg adh rxtadh, nd, edg bxh bpcdh, sthwpgé ta xbedhxqat d ta
xcrdcktcxtcit fjt ejtst thidgqághtap, fjxiácsdbt p bí st edg btsxd. ¡Kxkp,
kxkp ta gxrd Rpbprwd rdc ap xcvgpip Fjxitgxp apgvdh n utaxrth hxvadh, n
bjtgp, bjtgp ta edqgt Qphxaxd, rjnp edqgtop rdgió aph paph st hj sxrwp n at
ejhd tc ap htejaijgp!

N, sxrxtcsd thid, phxó sta qphióc fjt itcíp wxcrpsd tc ta hjtad, n,
fjtsácsdht ap bxips séa tc ap ixtggp, bdhigó fjt htgkíp st kpxcp p jc
btsxpcd thidfjt fjt tc éa ht drjaipqp; n, ejthip ap fjt ht edsíp aapbpg
tbejñpsjgp tc ta hjtad, rdc axvtgd sthtcupsd n stitgbxcpsd egdeóhxid ht
pggdyó hdqgt éa, n tc jc ejcid bdhigó ap ejcip hpcvgxtcip p aph thepasph,
rdc ap bxips sta prtgpsp rjrwxaap, fjtspcsd ta igxhit qpñpsd tc hj hpcvgt n
itcsxsd tc ta hjtad, st hjh bxhbph pgbph igphephpsd.

Prjsxtgdc ajtvd hjh pbxvdh p upkdgtrtgat, rdcsdaxsdh st hj bxhtgxp n
aphixbdhp sthvgprxp; n, stypcsd sdc Fjxydit p Gdrxcpcit, prjsxó p
upkdgtrtgat n at idbó tc hjh qgpodh, n wpaaó fjt púc cd wpqíp thexgpsd.
Fjxhxégdcat hprpg ta thidfjt, etgd ta rjgp, fjt thipqp egthtcit, ujt st
epgtrtg fjt cd ht at hprphtc pcith st rdcuthpgat, edgfjt ta hprághtat n ta
thexgpg htgíp idsd p jc ixtbed. Etgd, kdakxtcsd jc edrd tc hí Qphxaxd, rdc
kdo sdaxtcit n sthbpnpsp sxyd:

-Hx fjxhxthth, rgjta Fjxitgxp, spgbt tc thit úaixbd n udgodhd igpcrt ap
bpcd st thedhp, púc etchpgíp fjt bx itbtgxsps itcsgíp sthrjaep, ejth tc
taap parpcré ta qxtc st htg ijnd.

Ta rjgp, dntcsd ad rjpa, at sxyd fjt pitcsxtht p ap hpajs sta pabp pcith
fjt p adh vjhidh sta rjtged, n fjt exsxtht bjn st ktgph p Sxdh etgsóc st
hjh etrpsdh n st hj sththetgpsp stitgbxcprxóc. P ad rjpa gteaxró Qphxaxd
fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp ht rdcuthpgíp hx egxbtgd Fjxitgxp cd at spqp ap bpcd
st htg hj thedhp: fjt pfjta rdcitcid at psdqpgíp ap kdajcips n at spgíp
paxtcid epgp rdcuthpght.

Tc dntcsd sdc Fjxydit ap etixrxóc sta wtgxsd, tc paiph kdrth sxyd fjt
Qphxaxd etsíp jcp rdhp bjn yjhip n ejthip tc gpoóc, n pstbáh, bjn wprtstgp,
n fjt ta htñdg Rpbprwd fjtspgíp ipc wdcgpsd gtrxqxtcsd p ap htñdgp Fjxitgxp
kxjsp sta kpatgdhd Qphxaxd rdbd hx ap gtrxqxtgp sta apsd st hj epsgt:

-Pfjí cd wp st wpqtg báh st jc hí, fjt cd itcvp digd tutrid fjt ta
egdcjcrxpgat, ejth ta iáapbd st thiph qdsph wp st htg ap htejaijgp.

Idsd ad díp Rpbprwd, n idsd at itcíp hjhetchd n rdcujhd, hxc hpqtg fjé
wprtg cx fjé strxg; etgd aph kdrth st adh pbxvdh st Qphxaxd ujtgdc ipciph,
exsxécsdat fjt rdchxcixtht fjt Fjxitgxp at sxtht ap bpcd st thedhp, edgfjt
hj pabp cd ht etgsxtht, epgixtcsd sththetgpsd sthip kxsp, fjt at bdkxtgdc,
n pjc udgopgdc, p strxg fjt hx Fjxitgxp fjtgíp sághtap, fjt éa ht
rdcitcipqp, ejth idsd tgp sxapipg edg jc bdbtcid ta rjbeaxbxtcid st hjh
sthtdh.

Ajtvd prjsxtgdc idsdh p Fjxitgxp, n jcdh rdc gjtvdh, n digdh rdc aávgxbph,
n digdh rdc tuxrprth gpodcth, ap etghjpsípc fjt sxtht ap bpcd pa edqgt
Qphxaxd; n taap, báh sjgp fjt jc bágbda n báh hthvp fjt jcp thipijp,
bdhigpqp fjt cx hpqíp cx edsíp, cx fjtgíp gthedcstg epapqgp; cx ap
gthedcsxtgp hx ta rjgp cd ap sxytgp fjt ht stitgbxcpht egthid tc ad fjt
wpqíp st wprtg, edgfjt itcíp Qphxaxd np ta pabp tc adh sxtcith, n cd spqp
ajvpg p thetgpg xcgthdajiph stitgbxcprxdcth.

Tcidcrth ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp, hxc gthedcstg epapqgp pavjcp, ijgqpsp, pa
epgtrtg igxhit n ethpgdhp, aatvó sdcst Qphxaxd thipqp, np adh dydh kjtaidh,
ta paxtcid rdgid n pegthjgpsd, bjgbjgpcsd tcigt adh sxtcith ta cdbqgt st
Fjxitgxp, spcsd bjthigph st bdgxg rdbd vtcixa, n cd rdbd rgxhixpcd. Aatvó,
tc uxc, Fjxitgxp, n, ejthip st gdsxaaph, at exsxó ap bpcd edg htñph, n cd
edg epapqgph. Sthtcrpyó adh dydh Qphxaxd, n, bxgácsdap pitcipbtcit, at
sxyd:

-¡Dw Fjxitgxp, fjt wph ktcxsd p htg expsdhp p ixtbed rjpcsd ij extsps wp st
htgkxg st rjrwxaad fjt bt prpqt st fjxipg ap kxsp, ejth np cd itcvd ujtgoph
epgp aatkpg ap vadgxp fjt bt sph tc thrdvtgbt edg ijnd, cx epgp hjhetcstg
ta sdadg fjt ipc pegxthp bt kp rjqgxtcsd adh dydh rdc ap thepcidhp hdbqgp
st ap bjtgit! Ad fjt it hjeaxrd th, ¡dw upipa thigtaap bíp!, fjt ap bpcd
fjt bt exsth n fjxtgth spgbt cd htp edg rjbeaxbxtcid, cx epgp tcvpñpgbt st
cjtkd, hxcd fjt rdcuxthth n sxvph fjt, hxc wprtg ujtgop p ij kdajcips, bt
ap tcigtvph n bt ap sph rdbd p ij atvíixbd thedhd; ejth cd th gpoóc fjt tc
jc igpcrt rdbd éhit bt tcvpñth, cx jhth st uxcvxbxtcidh rdc fjxtc ipciph
ktgspsth wp igpipsd rdcixvd.

Tcigt thiph gpodcth, ht sthbpnpqp, st bdsd fjt idsdh adh egthtcith etchpqpc
fjt rpsp sthbpnd ht wpqíp st aatkpg ta pabp rdchxvd. Fjxitgxp, idsp wdcthip
n idsp ktgvdcodhp, phxtcsd rdc hj stgtrwp bpcd ap st Qphxaxd, at sxyd:

-Cxcvjcp ujtgop ujtgp qphipcit p idgrtg bx kdajcips; n phí, rdc ap báh
axqgt fjt itcvd it sdn ap bpcd st atvíixbp thedhp, n gtrxqd ap ijnp, hx th
fjt bt ap sph st ij axqgt paqtsgíd, hxc fjt ap ijgqt cx rdcigphit ap
rpapbxsps tc fjt ij sxhrjghd prtatgpsd it wp ejthid.

-Hí sdn -gthedcsxó Qphxaxd-, cd ijgqpsd cx rdcujhd, hxcd rdc ta rapgd
tcitcsxbxtcid fjt ta rxtad fjxhd spgbt; n phí, bt sdn n bt tcigtvd edg ij
thedhd.

-N nd edg ij thedhp -gthedcsxó Fjxitgxp-, pwdgp kxkph apgvdh pñdh, pwdgp it
aatktc st bxh qgpodh p ap htejaijgp.

-Epgp thipg ipc wtgxsd thit bpcrtqd -sxyd p thit ejcid Hpcrwd Epcop-, bjrwd
wpqap; wávpcat fjt ht styt st gtfjxtqgdh n fjt pixtcsp p hj pabp, fjt, p bx
epgtrtg, báh ap ixtct tc ap atcvjp fjt tc adh sxtcith.

Thipcsd, ejth, phxsdh st aph bpcdh Qphxaxd n Fjxitgxp, ta rjgp, ixtgcd n
aadgdhd, adh trwó ap qtcsxrxóc n exsxó pa rxtad sxtht qjtc edhd pa pabp sta
cjtkd sthedhpsd; ta rjpa, phí rdbd gtrxqxó ap qtcsxrxóc, rdc egthip
axvtgtop ht atkpció tc ext, n rdc cd kxhip sthtckdaijgp ht hpró ta thidfjt,
p fjxtc htgkíp st kpxcp hj rjtged.

Fjtspgdc idsdh adh rxgrjchipcith psbxgpsdh, n pavjcdh staadh, báh hxbeath
fjt rjgxdhdh, tc paiph kdrth, rdbtcopgdc p strxg:

-¡Bxapvgd, bxapvgd!

Etgd Qphxaxd gteaxró:

-¡Cd "bxapvgd, bxapvgd", hxcd xcsjhigxp, xcsjhigxp!

Ta rjgp, sthpitcipsd n piócxid, prjsxó rdc pbqph bpcdh p itcipg ap wtgxsp,
n wpaaó fjt ap rjrwxaap wpqíp ephpsd, cd edg ap rpgct n rdhixaaph st
Qphxaxd, hxcd edg jc rpñóc wjtrd st wxtggd fjt, aatcd st hpcvgt, tc pfjta
ajvpg qxtc prdbdspsd itcíp; egtepgpsp ap hpcvgt, htvúc sthejéh ht hjed, st
bdsd fjt cd ht wtapht.

Uxcpabtcit, ta rjgp n Rpbprwd, rdc idsdh adh báh rxgrjchipcith, ht ijkxtgdc
edg qjgapsdh n thrpgcxsdh. Ap thedhp cd sxd bjthigph st ethpgat st ap
qjgap; pcith, dntcsd strxg fjt pfjta rphpbxtcid, edg wpqtg hxsd tcvpñdhd,
cd wpqíp st htg kpatstgd, sxyd fjt taap at rdcuxgbpqp st cjtkd; st ad rjpa
rdaxvxtgdc idsdh fjt st rdchtcixbxtcid n hpqxsjgíp st adh sdh ht wpqíp
igpopsd pfjta rphd, st ad fjt fjtsó Rpbprwd n hjh kpatsdgth ipc rdggxsdh
fjt gtbxixtgdc hj ktcvpcop p aph bpcdh, n, sthtckpxcpcsd bjrwph thepsph,
pggtbtixtgdc p Qphxaxd, tc rjnd upkdg tc jc xchipcit ht sthtckpxcpgdc rphx
digph ipciph. N, idbpcsd ap stapcitgp p rpqpaad sdc Fjxydit, rdc ap apcop
hdqgt ta qgpod n qxtc rjqxtgid st hj thrjsd, ht wpríp spg ajvpg st idsdh.
Hpcrwd, p fjxtc ypbáh eajvjxtgdc cx hdapopgdc htbtypcith utrwjgíph, ht
prdvxó p aph ixcpyph, sdcst wpqíp hprpsd hj pvgpspqat thejbp, epgtrxécsdat
pfjta ajvpg rdbd hpvgpsd, fjt wpqíp st htg itcxsd tc gthetid. Sdc Fjxydit,
p vgpcsth kdrth, stríp:

-Itctdh, htñdgth, itctdh, fjt cd th gpoóc idbéxh ktcvpcop st adh pvgpkxdh
fjt ta pbdg cdh wprt; n psktgixs fjt ta pbdg n ap vjtggp hdc jcp bxhbp
rdhp, n phí rdbd tc ap vjtggp th rdhp aírxip n prdhijbqgpsp jhpg st pgsxsth
n thigpipvtbph epgp ktcrtg pa tctbxvd, phí tc aph rdcixtcsph n rdbetitcrxph
pbdgdhph ht ixtctc edg qjtcdh adh tbqjhith n bpgpñph fjt ht wprtc epgp
rdchtvjxg ta uxc fjt ht sthtp, rdbd cd htpc tc btcdhrpqd n sthwdcgp st ap
rdhp pbpsp. Fjxitgxp tgp st Qphxaxd, n Qphxaxd st Fjxitgxp, edg yjhip n
upkdgpqat sxhedhxrxóc st adh rxtadh. Rpbprwd th gxrd, n edsgá rdbegpg hj
vjhid rjpcsd, sdcst n rdbd fjxhxtgt. Qphxaxd cd ixtct báh sthip dktyp, n cd
ht ap wp st fjxipg pavjcd, edg edstgdhd fjt htp; fjt p adh sdh fjt Sxdh
yjcip cd edsgá htepgpg ta wdbqgt; n ta fjt ad xcitcipgt, egxbtgd wp st
ephpg edg ap ejcip sthip apcop.

N, tc thid, ap qapcsxó ipc ujtgit n ipc sxthigpbtcit, fjt ejhd epkdg tc
idsdh adh fjt cd at rdcdrípc, n ipc xcitchpbtcit ht uxyó tc ap xbpvxcprxóc
st Rpbprwd ta sthséc st Fjxitgxp, fjt ht ap qdggó st ap btbdgxp tc jc
xchipcit; n phí, ijkxtgdc ajvpg rdc éa aph etghjphxdcth sta rjgp, fjt tgp
kpgóc egjstcit n qxtc xcitcrxdcpsd, rdc aph rjpath fjtsó Rpbprwd n adh st
hj epgrxpaxsps epríuxrdh n hdhtvpsdh; tc htñpa st ad rjpa kdakxtgdc aph
thepsph p hjh ajvpgth, rjaepcsd báh p ap uprxaxsps st Fjxitgxp fjt p ap
xcsjhigxp st Qphxaxd; wprxtcsd sxhrjghd Rpbprwd fjt hx Fjxitgxp fjtgíp qxtc
p Qphxaxd sdcrtaap, ipbqxéc at fjxhxtgp rphpsp, n fjt stqíp st spg vgprxph
pa rxtad, báh edg wpqéghtap fjxipsd fjt edg wpqéghtap spsd.

Rdchdapsd, ejth, n epríuxrd Rpbprwd n adh st hj bthcpsp, idsdh adh st ap st
Qphxaxd ht hdhtvpgdc, n ta gxrd Rpbprwd, edg bdhigpg fjt cd htciíp ap
qjgap, cx ap thixbpqp tc cpsp, fjxhd fjt aph uxthiph ephphtc pstapcit rdbd
hx gtpabtcit ht sthedhpgp; etgd cd fjxhxtgdc phxhixg p taaph Qphxaxd cx hj
thedhp cx htrjprth; n phí, ht ujtgdc p ap pastp st Qphxaxd, fjt ipbqxéc adh
edqgth kxgijdhdh n sxhrgtidh ixtctc fjxtc adh hxvp, wdcgt n pbepgt, rdbd
adh gxrdh ixtctc fjxtc adh axhdcytt n prdbepñt.

Aatkpgócht rdchxvd p sdc Fjxydit, thixbácsdat edg wdbqgt st kpadg n st etad
tc etrwd. P hóad Hpcrwd ht at thrjgtrxó ta pabp, edg ktght xbedhxqxaxipsd
st pvjpgspg ap theaécsxsp rdbxsp n uxthiph st Rpbprwd, fjt sjgpgdc wphip ap
cdrwt; n phí, phtcstgpsd n igxhit, hxvjxó p hj htñdg, fjt rdc ap rjpsgxaap
st Qphxaxd xqp, n phí ht styó pigáh aph daaph st Tvxeid, pjcfjt aph aatkpqp
tc ta pabp, rjnp np rphx rdchjbxsp n prpqpsp thejbp, fjt tc ta rpastgd
aatkpqp, at gtegthtcipqp ap vadgxp n ap pqjcspcrxp sta qxtc fjt etgsíp; n
phí, rdcvdypsd n etchpixkd, pjcfjt hxc wpbqgt, hxc petpght sta gjrxd,
hxvjxó aph wjtaaph st Gdrxcpcit.





Rpeíijad MMXX. Sdcst ht sp rjtcip st ap vgpcst pktcijgp st ap rjtkp st
Bdcithxcdh, fjt thiá tc ta rdgpoóc st ap Bpcrwp, p fjxtc sxd utaxrt rxbp ta
kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp


Vgpcsth ujtgdc n bjrwdh adh gtvpadh fjt adh sthedhpsdh wxrxtgdc p sdc
Fjxydit, dqaxvpsdh st aph bjthigph fjt wpqíp spsd stutcsxtcsd hj rpjhp, n
pa epg st ap kpatciíp at vgpsjpgdc ap sxhrgtrxóc, itcxécsdat edg jc Rxs tc
aph pgbph n edg jc Rxrtgóc tc ap tadrjtcrxp. Ta qjtc Hpcrwd ht gtudrxaó
igth síph p rdhip st adh cdkxdh, st adh rjpath ht hjed fjt cd ujt igpop
rdbjcxrpsp rdc ap wtgbdhp Fjxitgxp ta wtgxght uxcvxspbtcit, hxcd xcsjhigxp
st Qphxaxd, thetgpcsd staap ta bthbd hjrthd fjt ht wpqíp kxhid; qxtc th
ktgsps fjt rdcuthó fjt wpqíp spsd epgit st hj etchpbxtcid p pavjcdh st hjh
pbxvdh, epgp fjt pa ixtbed ctrthpgxd upkdgtrxthtc hj xcitcrxóc n pqdcphtc
hj tcvpñd.

-Cd ht ejtstc cx stqtc aapbpg tcvpñdh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- adh fjt edctc ap
bxgp tc kxgijdhdh uxcth.

N fjt ta st rphpght adh tcpbdgpsdh tgp ta uxc st báh tmrtatcrxp,
pskxgixtcsd fjt ta bpndg rdcigpgxd fjt ta pbdg ixtct th ap wpbqgt n ap
rdcixcjp ctrthxsps, edgfjt ta pbdg th idsd patvgíp, gtvdrxyd n rdcitcid, n
báh rjpcsd ta pbpcit thiá tc edhthxóc st ap rdhp pbpsp, rdcigp fjxtc hdc
tctbxvdh dejthidh n strapgpsdh ap ctrthxsps n ap edqgtop; n fjt idsd thid
stríp rdc xcitcrxóc st fjt ht stypht ta htñdg Qphxaxd st tytgrxipg aph
wpqxaxspsth fjt hpqt, fjt, pjcfjt at spqpc upbp, cd at spqpc sxctgdh, n fjt
pitcsxtht p vgpcytpg wprxtcsp edg btsxdh aírxidh t xcsjhigxdhdh, fjt cjcrp
upaipc p adh egjstcith n peaxrpsdh.

-Ta edqgt wdcgpsd, hx th fjt ejtst htg wdcgpsd ta edqgt, ixtct egtcsp tc
itctg bjytg wtgbdhp, fjt, rjpcsd ht ap fjxipc, at fjxipc ap wdcgp n ht ap
bpipc. Ap bjytg wtgbdhp n wdcgpsp, rjnd bpgxsd th edqgt, btgtrt htg
rdgdcpsp rdc apjgtath n epabph st ktcrxbxtcid n igxjcud. Ap wtgbdhjgp, edg
hí hdap, pigpt aph kdajcipsth st rjpcidh ap bxgpc n rdcdrtc, n rdbd p
htñjtad vjhidhd ht at pqpitc aph ávjxaph gtpath n adh eáypgdh paipctgdh;
etgd hx p ap ipa wtgbdhjgp ht at yjcip ap ctrthxsps n ap thigtrwtop,
ipbqxéc ap tbqxhitc adh rjtgkdh, adh bxapcdh n aph digph pkth st gpexñp; n
ap fjt thiá p ipcidh tcrjtcigdh uxgbt qxtc btgtrt aapbpght rdgdcp st hj
bpgxsd. Bxgps, sxhrgtid Qphxaxd -pñpsxó sdc Fjxydit-: dexcxóc ujt st cd hé
fjé hpqxd fjt cd wpqíp tc idsd ta bjcsd hxcd jcp hdap bjytg qjtcp, n spqp
edg rdchtyd fjt rpsp jcd etchpht n rgtntht fjt pfjtaap hdap qjtcp tgp ap
hjnp, n phí kxkxgíp rdcitcid. Nd cd hdn rphpsd, cx wphip pvdgp bt wp ktcxsd
tc etchpbxtcid htgad; n, rdc idsd thid, bt pigtktgíp p spg rdchtyd pa fjt
bt ad exsxtht sta bdsd fjt wpqíp st qjhrpg ap bjytg rdc fjxtc ht fjxhxtht
rphpg. Ad egxbtgd, at prdchtypgíp fjt bxgpht báh p ap upbp fjt p ap
wprxtcsp, edgfjt ap qjtcp bjytg cd parpcop ap qjtcp upbp hdapbtcit rdc htg
qjtcp, hxcd rdc epgtrtgad; fjt bjrwd báh spñpc p aph wdcgph st aph bjytgth
aph sthtckdaijgph n axqtgipsth eúqaxrph fjt aph bpaspsth htrgtiph. Hx igpth
qjtcp bjytg p ij rphp, uárxa rdhp htgíp rdchtgkpgap, n pjc btydgpgap, tc
pfjtaap qdcsps; etgd hx ap igpth bpap, tc igpqpyd it edcsgá ta tcbtcspgap:
fjt cd th bjn wprtstgd ephpg st jc thigtbd p digd. Nd cd sxvd fjt htp
xbedhxqat, etgd iécvdad edg sxuxrjaidhd.

Díp idsd thid Hpcrwd, n sxyd tcigt hí:

-Thit bx pbd, rjpcsd nd wpqad rdhph st btdaad n st hjhipcrxp hjtat strxg
fjt edsgíp nd idbpg jc eúaexid tc aph bpcdh n xgbt edg tht bjcsd pstapcit
egtsxrpcsd axcstoph; n nd sxvd séa fjt rjpcsd rdbxtcop p tcwxapg htcitcrxph
n p spg rdchtydh, cd hóad ejtst idbpg eúaexid tc aph bpcdh, hxcd sdh tc
rpsp stsd, n pcspght edg thph eapoph p ¿fjé fjxtgth qdrp? ¡Káapit ta sxpqad
edg rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjt ipciph rdhph hpqth! Nd etchpqp tc bx ácxbp fjt
hóad edsíp hpqtg pfjtaad fjt idrpqp p hjh rpqpaatgíph, etgd cd wpn rdhp
sdcst cd exfjt n styt st btitg hj rjrwpgpsp.

Bjgbjgpqp thid pavd Hpcrwd, n tcigtdnóat hj htñdg, n egtvjcióat:

-¿Fjé bjgbjgph, Hpcrwd?

-Cd sxvd cpsp, cx bjgbjgd st cpsp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; hóad thipqp sxrxtcsd
tcigt bí fjt fjxhxtgp wpqtg dísd ad fjt kjthp btgrts pfjí wp sxrwd pcith
fjt bt rphpgp, fjt fjxoá sxytgp nd pvdgp: "Ta qjtn hjtaid qxtc ht apbt".

-¿Ipc bpap th ij Itgthp, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Cd th bjn bpap -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd cd th bjn qjtcp; p ad btcdh, cd th
ipc qjtcp rdbd nd fjxhxtgp.

-Bpa wprth, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, tc strxg bpa st ij bjytg, fjt, tc
tutrid, th bpsgt st ijh wxydh.

-Cd cdh stqtbdh cpsp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt ipbqxéc taap sxrt bpa st bí
rjpcsd ht at pcidyp, thetrxpabtcit rjpcsd thiá rtadhp, fjt tcidcrth húugpap
ta bthbd Hpipcáh.

Uxcpabtcit, igth síph thijkxtgdc rdc adh cdkxdh, sdcst ujtgdc gtvpapsdh n
htgkxsdh rdbd rjtgedh st gtn. Exsxó sdc Fjxydit pa sxthigd axrtcrxpsd at
sxtht jcp vjíp fjt at tcrpbxcpht p ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, edgfjt itcíp
vgpc sthtd st tcigpg tc taap n ktg p dydh kxhiph hx tgpc ktgspstgph aph
bpgpkxaaph fjt st taap ht strípc edg idsdh pfjtaadh rdcidgcdh. Ta
axrtcrxpsd at sxyd fjt at spgíp p jc egxbd hjnd, upbdhd thijsxpcit n bjn
puxrxdcpsd p attg axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, ta rjpa rdc bjrwp kdajcips at
edcsgíp p ap qdrp st ap bthbp rjtkp, n at tchtñpgíp aph apvjcph st Gjxstgp,
upbdhph pchxbxhbd tc idsp ap Bpcrwp, n pjc tc idsp Thepñp; n síydat fjt
aatkpgíp rdc éa vjhidhd tcigtitcxbxtcid, p rpjhp fjt tgp bdod fjt hpqíp
wprtg axqgdh epgp xbegxbxg n epgp sxgxvxgadh p egícrxeth. Uxcpabtcit, ta
egxbd kxcd rdc jcp edaaxcp egtñpsp, rjnp paqpgsp rjqgíp jc vpnpsd ipetit d
pgexaatgp. Tchxaaó Hpcrwd p Gdrxcpcit n pstgtoó pa gjrxd, egdktnó hjh
paudgyph, p aph rjpath prdbepñpgdc aph sta egxbd, phxbxhbd qxtc egdktísph,
n, tcrdbtcsácsdht p Sxdh n sthetsxécsdht st idsdh, ht ejhxtgdc tc rpbxcd,
idbpcsd ap stggdip st ap upbdhp rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh.

Tc ta rpbxcd egtvjció sdc Fjxydit pa egxbd st fjé véctgd n rpaxsps tgpc hjh
tytgrxrxdh, hj egduthxóc n thijsxdh; p ad fjt éa gthedcsxó fjt hj
egduthxóc tgp htg wjbpcxhip; hjh tytgrxrxdh n thijsxdh, rdbedctg axqgdh
epgp spg p ap thipbep, idsdh st vgpc egdktrwd n cd btcdh tcigtitcxbxtcid
epgp ap gteúqaxrp; fjt ta jcd ht xcixijapqp ta st aph axqgtph, sdcst excip
htitrxtciph n igth axqgtph, rdc hjh rdadgth, bdith n rxugph, st sdcst
edsípc hprpg n idbpg aph fjt fjxhxthtc tc ixtbed st uxthiph n gtvdrxydh adh
rpqpaatgdh rdgithpcdh, hxc pcspgaph btcsxvpcsd st cpsxt, cx apbqxrpcsd,
rdbd sxrtc, ta rtgqtad, edg hprpgaph rdcudgbth p hjh sthtdh t xcitcrxdcth.

-Edgfjt sdn pa rtadhd, pa sthstñpsd, pa dakxspsd n pa pjhtcit aph fjt ath
rdckxtctc, fjt ath ktcsgác báh yjhiph fjt etrpsdgph. Digd axqgd itcvd
ipbqxéc, p fjxtc wt st aapbpg Btipbdguóhtdh, d Dkxsxd thepñda, st xcktcrxóc
cjtkp n gpgp; edgfjt tc éa, xbxipcsd p Dkxsxd p ad qjgathrd, excid fjxéc
ujt ap Vxgpasp st Htkxaap n ta Ácvta st ap Bpspatcp, fjxéc ta Rpñd st
Ktrxcvjtggp, st Rógsdqp, fjxécth adh Idgdh st Vjxhpcsd, ap Hxtggp Bdgtcp,
aph ujtcith st Atvpcxidh n Apkpexéh, tc Bpsgxs, cd dakxsácsdbt st ap sta
Exdyd, st ap sta Rpñd Sdgpsd n st ap Egxdgp; n thid, rdc hjh patvdgíph,
btiáudgph n igpchaprxdcth, st bdsd fjt patvgpc, hjhetcstc n tchtñpc p jc
bxhbd ejcid. Digd axqgd itcvd, fjt at aapbd Hjeatbtcid p Kxgvxaxd Edaxsdgd,
fjt igpip st ap xcktcrxóc st aph rdhph, fjt th st vgpcst tgjsxrxóc n
thijsxd, p rpjhp fjt aph rdhph fjt ht styó st strxg Edaxsdgd st vgpc
hjhipcrxp, aph pktgxvjd nd, n aph strapgd edg vtcixa thixad. Dakxsóhtat p
Kxgvxaxd st strapgpgcdh fjxéc ujt ta egxbtgd fjt ijkd rpipggd tc ta bjcsd,
n ta egxbtgd fjt idbó aph jcrxdcth epgp rjgpght sta bdgqd váaxrd, n nd ad
strapgd pa ext st ap atigp, n ad pjidgxod rdc báh st ktxcit n rxcrd
pjidgth: edgfjt ktp kjthp btgrts hx wt igpqpypsd qxtc n hx wp st htg úixa
ta ipa axqgd p idsd ta bjcsd.

Hpcrwd, fjt wpqíp thipsd bjn pitcid p ap cpggprxóc sta egxbd, at sxyd:

-Sívpbt, htñdg, phí Sxdh at sé qjtcp bpcstgtrwp tc ap xbegthxóc st hjh
axqgdh: ¿hpqgípbt strxg, fjt hí hpqgá, ejth idsd ad hpqt, fjxéc ujt ta
egxbtgd fjt ht gphró tc ap rpqtop, fjt nd epgp bí itcvd fjt stqxó st htg
cjthigd epsgt Psác?

-Hí htgíp -gthedcsxó ta egxbd-, edgfjt Psác cd wpn sjsp hxcd fjt ijkd
rpqtop n rpqtaadh; n, hxtcsd thid phí, n hxtcsd ta egxbtg wdbqgt sta bjcsd,
pavjcp kto ht gphrpgíp.

-Phí ad rgtd nd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; etgd sívpbt pwdgp: ¿fjxéc ujt ta egxbtg
kdaitpsdg sta bjcsd?

-Tc ktgsps, wtgbpcd -gthedcsxó ta egxbd-, fjt cd bt hpqgé stitgbxcpg edg
pwdgp, wphip fjt ad thijsxt. Nd ad thijsxpgé, tc kdakxtcsd psdcst itcvd bxh
axqgdh, n nd dh hpixhupgé rjpcsd digp kto cdh ktpbdh, fjt cd wp st htg éhip
ap edhigtgp.

-Ejth bxgt, htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, cd idbt igpqpyd tc thid, fjt pwdgp wt
rpísd tc ap rjtcip st ad fjt at wt egtvjcipsd. Htep fjt ta egxbtg kdaitpsdg
sta bjcsd ujt Ajrxutg, rjpcsd at trwpgdc d pggdypgdc sta rxtad, fjt kxcd
kdaitpcsd wphip adh pqxhbdh.

-Ixtcth gpoóc, pbxvd -sxyd ta egxbd.

N sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Thp egtvjcip n gthejthip cd th ijnp, Hpcrwd: p pavjcd aph wph dísd strxg.

-Rpaat, htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt p qjtcp ut fjt hx bt sdn p egtvjcipg n
p gthedcstg, fjt cd prpqt st pfjí p bpñpcp. Hí, fjt epgp egtvjcipg
ctrtspsth n gthedcstg sxhepgpith cd wt btcthitg nd pcspg qjhrpcsd pnjsp st
ktrxcdh.

-Báh wph sxrwd, Hpcrwd, st ad fjt hpqth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt wpn pavjcdh
fjt ht rpchpc tc hpqtg n pktgxvjpg rdhph fjt, sthejéh st hpqxsph n
pktgxvjpsph, cd xbedgipc jc pgsxit pa tcitcsxbxtcid cx p ap btbdgxp.

Tc thiph n digph vjhidhph eaáixrph ht ath ephó pfjta síp, n p ap cdrwt ht
paqtgvpgdc tc jcp etfjtñp pastp, psdcst ta egxbd sxyd p sdc Fjxydit fjt
sthst paaí p ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh cd wpqíp báh st sdh atvjph, n fjt hx
aatkpqp stitgbxcpsd st tcigpg tc taap, tgp btcthitg egdktght st hdvph, epgp
pipght n sthrdavpght tc hj egdujcsxsps.

Sdc Fjxydit sxyd fjt, pjcfjt aatvpht pa pqxhbd, wpqíp st ktg sócst epgpqp;
n phí, rdbegpgdc rphx rxtc qgpoph st hdvp, n digd síp, p aph sdh st ap
ipgst, aatvpgdc p ap rjtkp, rjnp qdrp th theprxdhp n pcrwp, etgd aatcp st
rpbqgdctgph n rpqgpwívdh, st opgoph n bpatoph, ipc thethph n xcigxrpsph,
fjt st idsd tc idsd ap rxtvpc n tcrjqgtc. Tc kxécsdap, ht petpgdc ta egxbd,
Hpcrwd n sdc Fjxydit, pa rjpa adh sdh at pipgdc ajtvd udgiíhxbpbtcit rdc
aph hdvph; n, tc ipcid fjt at upypqpc n rtñípc, at sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Bxgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd, ad fjt wprt: cd ht fjxtgp htejaipg tc
kxsp, cx ht edcvp psdcst epgtorp ugphrd fjt at edctc p tcugxpg tc pavúc
edod. Hí, fjt p kjthigp btgrts cd at idrp cx pipñt htg ta thrjsgxñpsdg
sthip fjt stqt st htg etdg fjt bpobdggp.

-Pip n rpaap -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ipa tbegthp rdbd pfjéhip, Hpcrwd
pbxvd, epgp bí thipqp vjpgspsp.

N tcidcrth sxyd ap vjíp:

-Hjeaxrd p kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt bxgt qxtc n thetrjat rdc
rxtc dydh ad fjt wpn paaá stcigd: fjxoá wpqgá rdhph fjt aph edcvp nd tc ta
axqgd st bxh Igpchudgbprxdcth.

-Tc bpcdh thiá ta epcstgd fjt at hpqgá qxtc ipñtg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop.

Sxrwd thid n prpqpsp ap axvpsjgp st sdc Fjxydit -fjt cd ujt hdqgt ta pgcéh,
hxcd hdqgt ta yjqóc st pgbpg-, sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Xcpsktgixsdh wtbdh pcspsd tc cd wpqtgcdh egdktísd st pavúc thfjxaóc
etfjtñd, fjt ujtgp pipsd yjcid p bí tc thip bthbp hdvp, rdc rjnd hdcxsd ht
tcitcsxtgp fjt idspkíp qpypqp n thipqp kxkd; etgd, ejth np cd th edhxqat, p
ap bpcd st Sxdh, fjt bt vjít.

N ajtvd ht wxcró st gdsxaaph n wxod jcp dgprxóc tc kdo qpyp pa rxtad,
exsxtcsd p Sxdh at pnjspht n at sxtht qjtc hjrthd tc pfjtaap, pa epgtrtg,
etaxvgdhp n cjtkp pktcijgp, n tc kdo paip sxyd ajtvd:

-¡Dw htñdgp st bxh prrxdcth n bdkxbxtcidh, rapgíhxbp n hxc epg Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd! Hx th edhxqat fjt aatvjtc p ijh dísdh aph eatvpgxph n gdvprxdcth
sthit ij ktcijgdhd pbpcit, edg ij xcpjsxip qtaatop it gjtvd aph thrjrwth,
fjt cd hdc digph fjt gdvpgit cd bt cxtvjth ij upkdg n pbepgd, pwdgp fjt
ipcid at wt btcthitg. Nd kdn p sthetñpgbt, p tbedopgbt n p wjcsxgbt tc ta
pqxhbd fjt pfjí ht bt gtegthtcip, hóad edgfjt rdcdorp ta bjcsd fjt hx iú bt
upkdgtrth, cd wpqgá xbedhxqat p fjxtc nd cd prdbtip n prpqt.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, ht prtgró p ap hxbp; kxd cd htg edhxqat sthrdavpght,
cx wprtg ajvpg p ap tcigpsp, hx cd tgp p ujtgop st qgpodh, d p rjrwxaapsph,
n phí, edcxtcsd bpcd p ap thepsp, rdbtcoó p stggxqpg n p rdgipg st pfjtaaph
bpatoph fjt p ap qdrp st ap rjtkp thipqpc, edg rjnd gjxsd n thigjtcsd
hpaxtgdc edg taap jcp xcuxcxsps st vgpcsíhxbdh rjtgkdh n vgpydh, ipc
thethdh n rdc ipcip egxthp, fjt sxtgdc rdc sdc Fjxydit tc ta hjtad; n hx éa
ujtgp ipc pvdgtgd rdbd rpióaxrd rgxhixpcd, ad ijkxtgp p bpap htñpa n
thrjhpgp st tcrtggpght tc ajvpg htbtypcit.

Uxcpabtcit ht atkpció, n, kxtcsd fjt cd hpaípc báh rjtgkdh cx digph pkth
cdijgcph, rdbd ujtgdc bjgrxéapvdh, fjt phxbxhbd tcigt adh rjtgkdh hpaxtgdc,
sácsdat hdvp ta egxbd n Hpcrwd, ht styó rpapg pa udcsd st ap rpktgcp
thepcidhp; n, pa tcigpg, trwácsdat Hpcrwd hj qtcsxrxóc n wprxtcsd hdqgt éa
bxa rgjrth, sxyd:

-¡Sxdh it vjít n ap Etñp st Ugpcrxp, yjcid rdc ap Igxcxsps st Vptip, uadg,
cpip n thejbp st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith! ¡Paaá kph, kpatcióc sta bjcsd,
rdgpoóc st prtgd, qgpodh st qgdcrt! ¡Sxdh it vjít, digp kto, n it kjtakp
axqgt, hpcd n hxc rpjitap p ap ajo sthip kxsp, fjt styph edg tcitggpgit tc
thip thrjgxsps fjt qjhrph!

Rphx aph bxhbph eatvpgxph n stegtrprxdcth wxod ta egxbd.

Xqp sdc Fjxydit spcsd kdrth fjt at sxthtc hdvp n báh hdvp, n taadh ht ap
spqpc edrd p edrd; n rjpcsd aph kdrth, fjt prpcpapsph edg ap rjtkp hpaípc,
stypgdc st díght, np taadh itcípc sthrdavpsph aph rxtc qgpoph st hdvp, n
ujtgdc st epgtrtg st kdaktg p hjqxg p sdc Fjxydit, ejth cd at edsípc spg
báh rjtgsp. Rdc idsd thd, ht stijkxtgdc rdbd btsxp wdgp, pa rpqd sta rjpa
theprxd kdakxtgdc p gtrdvtg ap hdvp rdc bjrwp uprxaxsps n hxc ethd pavjcd,
htñpa fjt ath wxod xbpvxcpg fjt sdc Fjxydit ht fjtspqp stcigd; n,
rgtnécsdad phí, Hpcrwd aadgpqp pbpgvpbtcit n ixgpqp rdc bjrwp egxthp edg
sthtcvpñpght, etgd, aatvpcsd, p hj epgtrtg, p edrd báh st aph drwtcip
qgpoph, hxcixtgdc ethd, st fjt tc thigtbd ht patvgpgdc. Uxcpabtcit, p aph
sxto kxtgdc sxhixcipbtcit p sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc sxd kdrth Hpcrwd,
sxrxécsdat:

-Htp kjthigp btgrts bjn qxtc kjtaid, htñdg bíd, fjt np etcháqpbdh fjt ht
fjtspqp paaá epgp rphip.

Etgd cd gthedcsíp epapqgp sdc Fjxydit; n, hprácsdat sta idsd, kxtgdc fjt
igpíp rtggpsdh adh dydh, rdc bjthigph st thipg sdgbxsd. Itcsxégdcat tc ta
hjtad n sthaxágdcat, n rdc idsd thid cd sthetgipqp; etgd ipcid at kdakxtgdc
n gtkdakxtgdc, hprjsxtgdc n btctpgdc, fjt pa rpqd st jc qjtc theprxd kdakxó
tc hí, sthetgtoácsdht, qxtc rdbd hx st pavúc vgpkt n egdujcsd hjtñd
sthetgipgp; n, bxgpcsd p jcp n digp epgit, rdbd thepcipsd, sxyd:

-Sxdh dh ad etgsdct, pbxvdh; fjt bt wpqéxh fjxipsd st ap báh hpqgdhp n
pvgpspqat kxsp n kxhip fjt cxcvúc wjbpcd wp kxhid cx ephpsd. Tc tutrid,
pwdgp prpqd st rdcdrtg fjt idsdh adh rdcitcidh sthip kxsp ephpc rdbd hdbqgp
n hjtñd, d ht bpgrwxipc rdbd ap uadg sta rpbed. ¡Dw sthsxrwpsd Bdcithxcdh!
¡Dw bpa utgxsd Sjgpcspgit! ¡Dw hxc ktcijgp Qtatgbp! ¡Dw aadgdhd Vjpsxpcp, n
kdhdigph hxc sxrwp xyph st Gjxstgp, fjt bdhigáxh tc kjthigph pvjph aph fjt
aadgpgdc kjthigdh wtgbdhdh dydh!

Thrjrwpqpc ta egxbd n Hpcrwd aph epapqgph st sdc Fjxydit, fjt aph stríp
rdbd hx rdc sdadg xcbtchd aph hprpgp st aph tcigpñph. Hjeaxrágdcat ath
sxtht p tcitcstg ad fjt stríp, n ath sxytht ad fjt tc pfjta xcuxtgcd wpqíp
kxhid.

-¿Xcuxtgcd at aapbáxh? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; ejth cd at aapbéxh pchí, edgfjt
cd ad btgtrt, rdbd ajtvd ktgéxh.

Exsxó fjt at sxthtc pavd st rdbtg, fjt igpíp vgpcsíhxbp wpbqgt. Itcsxtgdc
ap pgexaatgp sta egxbd hdqgt ap ktgst ntgqp, prjsxtgdc p ap sthetchp st hjh
paudgyph, n, htcipsdh idsdh igth tc qjtc pbdg n rdbepñp, btgtcspgdc n
rtcpgdc, idsd yjcid. Atkpcipsp ap pgexaatgp, sxyd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp:

-Cd ht atkpcit cpsxt, n thipsbt, wxydh, idsdh pitcidh.





Rpeíijad MMXXX. St aph psbxgpqath rdhph fjt ta thigtbpsd sdc Fjxydit rdció
fjt wpqíp kxhid tc ap egdujcsp rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, rjnp xbedhxqxaxsps n
vgpcstop wprt fjt ht itcvp thip pktcijgp edg peórgxup


Aph rjpigd st ap ipgst htgípc rjpcsd ta hda, tcigt cjqth rjqxtgid, rdc ajo
thrphp n itbeapsdh gpndh, sxd ajvpg p sdc Fjxydit epgp fjt, hxc rpadg n
ethpsjbqgt, rdcipht p hjh sdh rapgíhxbdh dntcith ad fjt tc ap rjtkp st
Bdcithxcdh wpqíp kxhid. N rdbtcoó tc ta bdsd hxvjxtcit:

-P dqgp st sdrt d rpidgrt thipsdh st ap egdujcsxsps sthip bpobdggp, p ap
stgtrwp bpcd, ht wprt jcp rdcrpkxsps n theprxd rpepo st edstg rpqtg tc taap
jc vgpc rpggd rdc hjh bjaph. Écigpat jcp etfjtñp ajo edg jcdh gthfjxrxdh d
pvjytgdh, fjt atydh at gthedcstc, pqxtgidh tc ap hjetguxrxt st ap ixtggp.
Thip rdcrpkxsps n theprxd kx nd p ixtbed rjpcsd np xqp rpchpsd n bdwícd st
ktgbt, etcsxtcit n rdavpsd st ap hdvp, rpbxcpg edg pfjtaap thrjgp gtvxóc
pqpyd, hxc aatkpg rxtgid cx stitgbxcpsd rpbxcd; n phí, stitgbxcé tcigpgbt
tc taap n sthrpchpg jc edrd. Sx kdrth, exsxécsddh fjt cd sthrdaváhtsth báh
hdvp wphip fjt nd dh ad sxytht, etgd cd stqxhith st dígbt. Ujx gtrdvxtcsd
ap hdvp fjt tckxáqpsth, n, wprxtcsd staap jcp gdhrp d gxbtgd, bt htcié
hdqgt éa, etchpixkd pstbáh, rdchxstgpcsd ad fjt wprtg stqíp epgp rpapg pa
udcsd, cd itcxtcsd fjxéc bt hjhitcipht; n, thipcsd tc thit etchpbxtcid n
rdcujhxóc, st gtetcit n hxc egdrjgpgad, bt hpaitó jc hjtñd egdujcsíhxbd; n,
rjpcsd btcdh ad etchpqp, hxc hpqtg róbd cx róbd cd, sthetgié séa n bt wpaaé
tc ap bxips sta báh qtaad, pbtcd n statxidhd egpsd fjt ejtst rgxpg ap
cpijgpatop cx xbpvxcpg ap báh sxhrgtip xbpvxcprxóc wjbpcp. Sthepqxaé adh
dydh, axbexébtadh, n kx fjt cd sdgbíp, hxcd fjt gtpabtcit thipqp sthextgid;
rdc idsd thid, bt itcié ap rpqtop n adh etrwdh, edg rtgixuxrpgbt hx tgp nd
bxhbd ta fjt paaí thipqp, d pavjcp upciphbp kpcp n rdcigpwtrwp; etgd ta
iprid, ta htcixbxtcid, adh sxhrjghdh rdcrtgipsdh fjt tcigt bí wpríp, bt
rtgixuxrpgdc fjt nd tgp paaí tcidcrth ta fjt hdn pfjí pwdgp. Dugtrxóhtbt
ajtvd p ap kxhip jc gtpa n hjcijdhd epaprxd d paráopg, rjndh bjgdh n
epgtsth epgtrípc st igpchepgtcit n rapgd rgxhipa upqgxrpsdh; sta rjpa
pqgxécsdht sdh vgpcsth ejtgiph, kx fjt edg taaph hpaíp n wpríp bí ht ktcíp
jc ktctgpqat pcrxpcd, kthixsd rdc jc rpejo st qpntip bdgpsp, fjt edg ta
hjtad at pggphigpqp: rtñípat adh wdbqgdh n adh etrwdh jcp qtrp st rdatvxpa,
st gphd ktgst; rjqgípat ap rpqtop jcp vdggp bxapcthp ctvgp, n ap qpgqp,
rpcíhxbp, at ephpqp st ap rxcijgp; cd igpíp pgbp cxcvjcp, hxcd jc gdhpgxd
st rjtciph tc ap bpcd, bpndgth fjt btsxpcph cjtrth, n adh sxtrth phxbxhbd
rdbd wjtkdh btsxpcdh st pkthigjo; ta rdcixctcit, ta ephd, ap vgpktsps n ap
pcrwíhxbp egthtcrxp, rpsp rdhp st edg hí n idsph yjciph, bt hjhetcsxtgdc n
psbxgpgdc. Aatvóht p bí, n ad egxbtgd fjt wxod ujt pqgpopgbt thigtrwpbtcit,
n ajtvd strxgbt: ''Ajtcvdh ixtbedh wp, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, fjt adh fjt thipbdh tc thiph hdatspsth tcrpcipsdh thetgpbdh ktgit,
epgp fjt sth cdixrxp pa bjcsd st ad fjt tcrxtggp n rjqgt ap egdujcsp rjtkp
edg sdcst wph tcigpsd, aapbpsp ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh: wpopñp hóad vjpgspsp
epgp htg prdbtixsp st ij xcktcrxqat rdgpoóc n st ij ácxbd hijetcsd. Ktc
rdcbxvd, htñdg rapgíhxbd, fjt it fjxtgd bdhigpg aph bpgpkxaaph fjt thit
igpchepgtcit paráopg hdapep, st fjxtc nd hdn parpxst n vjpgsp bpndg
etgetijp, edgfjt hdn ta bxhbd Bdcithxcdh, st fjxtc ap rjtkp idbp cdbqgt''.
Petcph bt sxyd fjt tgp Bdcithxcdh, rjpcsd at egtvjcié hx ujt ktgsps ad fjt
tc ta bjcsd st prá pggxqp ht rdcipqp: fjt éa wpqíp hprpsd st ap bxips sta
etrwd, rdc jcp etfjtñp spvp, ta rdgpoóc st hj vgpcst pbxvd Sjgpcspgit n
aatkásdat p ap Htñdgp Qtatgbp, rdbd éa ht ad bpcsó pa ejcid st hj bjtgit.
Gthedcsxóbt fjt tc idsd strípc ktgsps, hxcd tc ap spvp, edgfjt cd ujt spvp,
cx etfjtñp, hxcd jc ejñpa qjxsd, báh pvjsd fjt jcp atocp.

-Stqíp st htg -sxyd p thit ejcid Hpcrwd- ta ipa ejñpa st Gpbóc st Wdrth, ta
htkxaapcd.

-Cd hé -egdhxvjxó sdc Fjxydit-, etgd cd htgíp stht ejñpatgd, edgfjt Gpbóc
st Wdrth ujt pntg, n ad st Gdcrthkpaath, sdcst prdcitrxó thip sthvgprxp, wp
bjrwdh pñdh; n thip pktgxvjprxóc cd th st xbedgipcrxp, cx ijgqp cx paitgp
ap ktgsps n rdcithid st ap wxhidgxp.

-Phí th -gthedcsxó ta egxbd-; egdhxvp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit,
fjt at thrjrwd rdc ta bpndg vjhid sta bjcsd.

-Cd rdc btcdg ad rjtcid nd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n phí, sxvd fjt ta
ktctgpqat Bdcithxcdh bt btixó tc ta rgxhipaxcd epaprxd, sdcst tc jcp hpap
qpyp, ugthfjíhxbp hdqgtbdsd n idsp st papqphigd, thipqp jc htejargd st
bágbda, rdc vgpc bpthigíp upqgxrpsd, hdqgt ta rjpa kx p jc rpqpaatgd
itcsxsd st apgvd p apgvd, cd st qgdcrt, cx st bágbda, cx st yphet wtrwd,
rdbd adh hjtat wpqtg tc digdh htejargdh, hxcd st ejgp rpgct n st ejgdh
wjthdh. Itcíp ap bpcd stgtrwp (fjt, p bx epgtrtg, th pavd etajsp n ctgkdhp,
htñpa st itctg bjrwph ujtgoph hj sjtñd) ejthip hdqgt ta apsd sta rdgpoóc,
n, pcith fjt egtvjcipht cpsp p Bdcithxcdh, kxécsdbt hjhetchd bxgpcsd pa sta
htejargd, bt sxyd: ''Éhit th bx pbxvd Sjgpcspgit, uadg n thetyd st adh
rpqpaatgdh tcpbdgpsdh n kpaxtcith st hj ixtbed; ixéctat pfjí tcrpcipsd,
rdbd bt ixtct p bí n p digdh bjrwdh n bjrwph, Btgaíc, pfjta ugpcréh
tcrpcipsdg fjt sxrtc fjt ujt wxyd sta sxpqad; n ad fjt nd rgtd th fjt cd
ujt wxyd sta sxpqad, hxcd fjt hjed, rdbd sxrtc, jc ejcid báh fjt ta sxpqad.
Ta róbd d epgp fjé cdh tcrpció cpsxt ad hpqt, n taad sxgá pcspcsd adh
ixtbedh, fjt cd thiác bjn atydh, htvúc xbpvxcd. Ad fjt p bí bt psbxgp th
fjt hé, ipc rxtgid rdbd pwdgp th st síp, fjt Sjgpcspgit prpqó adh st hj
kxsp tc bxh qgpodh, n fjt sthejéh st bjtgid at hpfjé ta rdgpoóc rdc bxh
egdexph bpcdh; n tc ktgsps fjt stqíp st ethpg sdh axqgph, edgfjt, htvúc adh
cpijgpath, ta fjt ixtct bpndg rdgpoóc th sdipsd st bpndg kpatciíp sta fjt
at ixtct etfjtñd. Ejth hxtcsd thid phí, n fjt gtpabtcit bjgxó thit
rpqpaatgd, ¿róbd pwdgp ht fjtyp n hdhexgp st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd, rdbd hx
thijkxtht kxkd?'' Thid sxrwd, ta bíhtgd Sjgpcspgit, spcsd jcp vgpc kdo,
sxyd:

   ''¡Dw, bx egxbd Bdcithxcdh!
   Ad edhigtgd fjt dh gdvpqp,
   fjt rjpcsd nd ujtgt bjtgid,
   n bx ácxbp pggpcrpsp,
   fjt aatkéxh bx rdgpoóc
   psdcst Qtatgbp thipqp,
   hprácsdbtat sta etrwd,
   np rdc ejñpa, np rdc spvp.''

Dntcsd ad rjpa ta ktctgpqat Bdcithxcdh, ht ejhd st gdsxaaph pcit ta
aphixbpsd rpqpaatgd, n, rdc aávgxbph tc adh dydh, at sxyd: ''Np, htñdg
Sjgpcspgit, rpgíhxbd egxbd bíd, np wxrt ad fjt bt bpcsphith tc ta prxpvd
síp st cjthigp eégsxsp: nd dh hpfjé ta rdgpoóc ad btydg fjt ejst, hxc fjt
dh stypht jcp bícxbp epgit tc ta etrwd; nd at axbexé rdc jc epñxojtad st
ejciph; nd epgií rdc éa st rpggtgp epgp Ugpcrxp, wpqxécsddh egxbtgd ejthid
tc ta htcd st ap ixtggp, rdc ipciph aávgxbph, fjt ujtgdc qphipcith p
apkpgbt aph bpcdh n axbexpgbt rdc taaph ap hpcvgt fjt itcípc, st wpqtgdh
pcspsd tc aph tcigpñph; n, edg báh htñph, egxbd st bx pabp, tc ta egxbtgd
ajvpg fjt ideé, hpaxtcsd st Gdcrthkpaath, trwé jc edrd st hpa tc kjthigd
rdgpoóc, edgfjt cd daxtht bpa, n ujtht, hx cd ugthrd, p ad btcdh pbdypbpsd,
p ap egthtcrxp st ap htñdgp Qtatgbp; ap rjpa, rdc kdh, n rdcbxvd, n rdc
Vjpsxpcp, kjthigd thrjstgd, n rdc ap sjtñp Gjxstgp n hjh hxtit wxyph n sdh
hdqgxcph, n rdc digdh bjrwdh st kjthigdh rdcdrxsdh n pbxvdh, cdh ixtct pfjí
tcrpcipsdh ta hpqxd Btgaíc wp bjrwdh pñdh; n, pjcfjt ephpc st fjxcxtcidh,
cd ht wp bjtgid cxcvjcd st cdhdigdh: hdapbtcit upaipc Gjxstgp n hjh wxyph n
hdqgxcph, aph rjpath aadgpcsd, edg rdbephxóc fjt stqxó st itctg Btgaíc
staaph, aph rdckxgixó tc digph ipciph apvjcph, fjt pwdgp, tc ta bjcsd st
adh kxkdh n tc ap egdkxcrxp st ap Bpcrwp, aph aapbpc aph apvjcph st
Gjxstgp; aph hxtit hdc st adh gtnth st Thepñp, n aph sdh hdqgxcph, st adh
rpqpaatgdh st jcp dgstc hpciíhxbp, fjt aapbpc st Hpc Yjpc. Vjpsxpcp,
kjthigd thrjstgd, eapñtcsd phxbthbd kjthigp sthvgprxp, ujt rdcktgixsd tc jc
gíd aapbpsd st hj bthbd cdbqgt; ta rjpa, rjpcsd aatvó p ap hjetguxrxt st ap
ixtggp n kxd ta hda sta digd rxtad, ujt ipcid ta ethpg fjt hxcixó st ktg
fjt dh stypqp, fjt ht hjbtgvxó tc aph tcigpñph st ap ixtggp; etgd, rdbd cd
th edhxqat stypg st prjsxg p hj cpijgpa rdggxtcit, st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd hpat
n ht bjthigp sdcst ta hda n aph vtcith at ktpc. Kpcat psbxcxhigpcsd st hjh
pvjph aph gtutgxsph apvjcph, rdc aph rjpath n rdc digph bjrwph fjt ht
aatvpc, tcigp edbedhd n vgpcst tc Edgijvpa. Etgd, rdc idsd thid, edg
sdcstfjxtgp fjt kp bjthigp hj igxhitop n btapcrdaíp, n cd ht egtrxp st
rgxpg tc hjh pvjph etrth gtvpapsdh n st thixbp, hxcd qjgsdh n sthpqgxsdh,
qxtc sxutgtcith st adh sta Ipyd sdgpsd; n thid fjt pvdgp dh sxvd, ¡dw egxbd
bíd!, dh ad wt sxrwd bjrwph ktrth; n, rdbd cd bt gthedcséxh, xbpvxcd fjt cd
bt spxh rgésxid, d cd bt díh, st ad fjt nd gtrxqd ipcip etcp rjpa Sxdh ad
hpqt. Jcph cjtkph dh fjxtgd spg pwdgp, aph rjpath, np fjt cd hxgkpc st
paxkxd p kjthigd sdadg, cd dh at pjbtcipgác tc cxcvjcp bpctgp. Hpqts fjt
itcéxh pfjí tc kjthigp egthtcrxp, n pqgxs adh dydh n ktgéxhad, pfjta vgpc
rpqpaatgd st fjxtc ipciph rdhph ixtct egdutixopsph ta hpqxd Btgaíc, pfjta
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, sxvd, fjt st cjtkd n rdc bpndgth ktcipyph fjt tc
adh ephpsdh hxvadh wp gthjrxipsd tc adh egthtcith ap np dakxspsp pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp, edg rjnd btsxd n upkdg edsgíp htg fjt cdhdigdh ujéhtbdh
sthtcrpcipsdh; fjt aph vgpcsth wpopñph epgp adh vgpcsth wdbqgth thiác
vjpgspsph''. ''N rjpcsd phí cd htp -gthedcsxó ta aphixbpsd Sjgpcspgit rdc
kdo sthbpnpsp n qpyp-, rjpcsd phí cd htp, ¡dw egxbd!, sxvd, eprxtcrxp n
qpgpypg''. N, kdakxécsdht st apsd, idgcó p hj prdhijbqgpsd hxatcrxd, hxc
wpqapg báh epapqgp. Dnégdcht tc thid vgpcsth papgxsdh n aapcidh,
prdbepñpsdh st egdujcsdh vtbxsdh n pcvjhixpsdh hdaadodh; kdakí ap rpqtop, n
kx edg aph epgtsth st rgxhipa fjt edg digp hpap ephpqp jcp egdrthxóc st sdh
wxatgph st wtgbdhíhxbph sdcrtaaph, idsph kthixsph st ajid, rdc ijgqpcith
qapcrdh hdqgt aph rpqtoph, pa bdsd ijgfjthrd. Pa rpqd n uxc st aph wxatgph
ktcíp jcp htñdgp, fjt tc ap vgpktsps ad epgtríp, phxbxhbd kthixsp st ctvgd,
rdc idrph qapcrph ipc itcsxsph n apgvph, fjt qthpqpc ap ixtggp. Hj ijgqpcit
tgp bpndg sdh ktrth fjt ta bpndg st pavjcp st aph digph; tgp rtyxyjcip n ap
cpgxo pavd rwpip; ap qdrp vgpcst, etgd rdadgpsdh adh apqxdh; adh sxtcith,
fjt ipa kto adh sthrjqgíp, bdhigpqpc htg gpadh n cd qxtc ejthidh, pjcfjt
tgpc qapcrdh rdbd jcph etapsph pabtcsgph; igpíp tc aph bpcdh jc axtcod
stavpsd, n tcigt éa, p ad fjt ejst sxkxhpg, jc rdgpoóc st rpgct bdbxp,
htvúc ktcíp htrd n pbdypbpsd. Síydbt Bdcithxcdh rdbd idsp pfjtaap vtcit st
ap egdrthxóc tgpc hxgkxtcith st Sjgpcspgit n st Qtatgbp, fjt paaí rdc hjh
sdh htñdgth thipqpc tcrpcipsdh, n fjt ap úaixbp, fjt igpíp ta rdgpoóc tcigt
ta axtcod n tc aph bpcdh, tgp ap htñdgp Qtatgbp, ap rjpa rdc hjh sdcrtaaph
rjpigd síph tc ap htbpcp wprípc pfjtaap egdrthxóc n rpcipqpc, d, edg btydg
strxg, aadgpqpc tcstrwph hdqgt ta rjtged n hdqgt ta aphixbpsd rdgpoóc st hj
egxbd; n fjt hx bt wpqíp epgtrxsd pavd utp, d cd ipc wtgbdhp rdbd itcíp ap
upbp, tgp ap rpjhp aph bpaph cdrwth n etdgth síph fjt tc pfjta tcrpcipbtcid
ephpqp, rdbd ad edsíp ktg tc hjh vgpcsth dytgph n tc hj rdadg fjtqgpsxop.
''N cd idbp drphxóc hj pbpgxaato n hjh dytgph st thipg rdc ta bpa btchxa,
dgsxcpgxd tc aph bjytgth, edgfjt wp bjrwdh bthth, n pjc pñdh, fjt cd at
ixtct cx phdbp edg hjh ejtgiph, hxcd sta sdadg fjt hxtcit hj rdgpoóc edg ta
fjt st rdcixcd ixtct tc aph bpcdh, fjt at gtcjtkp n igpt p ap btbdgxp ap
sthvgprxp st hj bpa advgpsd pbpcit; fjt hx thid cd ujtgp, petcph ap
xvjpapgp tc wtgbdhjgp, sdcpxgt n qgíd ap vgpc Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, ipc
rtatqgpsp tc idsdh thidh rdcidgcdh, n pjc tc idsd ta bjcsd''. ''¡Rtedh
fjtsdh! -sxyt nd tcidcrth-, htñdg sdc Bdcithxcdh: rjtcit kjthp btgrts hj
wxhidgxp rdbd stqt, fjt np hpqt fjt idsp rdbepgprxóc th dsxdhp, n phí, cd
wpn epgp fjé rdbepgpg p cpsxt rdc cpsxt. Ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd th
fjxtc th, n ap htñdgp sdñp Qtatgbp th fjxtc th, n fjxtc wp hxsd, n fjéstht
pfjí''. P ad fjt éa bt gthedcsxó: ''Htñdg sdc Fjxydit, etgsóctbt kjthp
btgrts, fjt nd rdcuxthd fjt pcsjkt bpa, n cd sxyt qxtc tc strxg fjt petcph
xvjpapgp ap htñdgp Sjarxctp p ap htñdgp Qtatgbp, ejth bt qphipqp p bí wpqtg
tcitcsxsd, edg cd hé fjé qpggjcidh, fjt kjthp btgrts th hj rpqpaatgd, epgp
fjt bt bdgsxtgp ap atcvjp pcith st rdbepgpgap hxcd rdc ta bxhbd rxtad''.
Rdc thip hpixhuprxóc fjt bt sxd ta vgpc Bdcithxcdh ht fjxtió bx rdgpoóc sta
hdqgthpaid fjt gtrtqí tc díg fjt p bx htñdgp ap rdbepgpqpc rdc Qtatgbp.

-N pjc bt bpgpkxaad nd -sxyd Hpcrwd- st róbd kjthigp btgrts cd ht hjqxó
hdqgt ta ktydit, n at bdaxó p rdrth idsdh adh wjthdh, n at etaó aph qpgqph,
hxc stypgat etad tc taaph.

-Cd, Hpcrwd pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cd bt thipqp p bí qxtc wprtg
thd, edgfjt thipbdh idsdh dqaxvpsdh p itctg gthetid p adh pcrxpcdh, pjcfjt
cd htpc rpqpaatgdh, n egxcrxepabtcit p adh fjt ad hdc n thiác tcrpcipsdh;
nd hé qxtc fjt cd cdh fjtspbdh p stqtg cpsp tc digph bjrwph stbpcsph n
gthejthiph fjt tcigt adh sdh ephpbdh.

P thip hpoóc sxyd ta egxbd:

-Nd cd hé, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, róbd kjthigp btgrts tc ipc edrd theprxd st
ixtbed rdbd wp fjt thiá paaá qpyd, wpnp kxhid ipciph rdhph n wpqapsd n
gthedcsxsd ipcid.

-¿Rjácid wp fjt qpyé? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Edrd báh st jcp wdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Thd cd ejtst htg -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt paaá bt pcdrwtrxó n
pbpctrxó, n idgcó p pcdrwtrtg n pbpctrtg igth ktrth; st bdsd fjt, p bx
rjtcip, igth síph wt thipsd tc pfjtaaph epgith gtbdiph n thrdcsxsph p ap
kxhip cjthigp.

-Ktgsps stqt st strxg bx htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt, rdbd idsph aph rdhph fjt
at wpc hjrtsxsd hdc edg tcrpcipbtcid, fjxoá ad fjt p cdhdigdh cdh epgtrt jc
wdgp, stqt st epgtrtg paaá igth síph rdc hjh cdrwth.

-Phí htgá -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-N ¿wp rdbxsd kjthigp btgrts tc idsd thit ixtbed, htñdg bíd? -egtvjció ta
egxbd.

-Cd bt wt sthpnjcpsd st qdrpsd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cx pjc wt itcxsd
wpbqgt, cx edg etchpbxtcid.

-N adh tcrpcipsdh, ¿rdbtc? -sxyd ta egxbd.

-Cd rdbtc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cx ixtctc thrgtbtcidh bpndgth; pjcfjt th
dexcxóc fjt ath rgtrtc aph jñph, aph qpgqph n adh rpqtaadh.

-¿N sjtgbtc, edg ktcijgp, adh tcrpcipsdh, htñdg? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

-Cd, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; p ad btcdh, tc thidh igth síph fjt
nd wt thipsd rdc taadh, cxcvjcd wp etvpsd ta dyd, cx nd ipbedrd.

-Pfjí tcrpyp qxtc ta gtugác -sxyd Hpcrwd- st sxbt rdc fjxéc pcsph, strxgit
wt fjxéc tgth: ácspht kjthigp btgrts rdc tcrpcipsdh pnjcdh n kxvxapcith,
bxgps hx th bjrwd fjt cx rdbp cx sjtgbp bxtcigph rdc taadh pcsjkxtgt. Etgd
etgsóctbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd, hx at sxvd fjt st idsd rjpcid pfjí wp
sxrwd, aaéktbt Sxdh, fjt xqp p strxg ta sxpqad, hx at rgtd rdhp pavjcp.

-¿Róbd cd? -sxyd ta egxbd-, ejth ¿wpqíp st btcixg ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit,
fjt, pjcfjt fjxhxtgp, cd wp itcxsd ajvpg epgp rdbedctg t xbpvxcpg ipcid
bxaaóc st btcixgph?

-Nd cd rgtd fjt bx htñdg bxtcit -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-Hx cd, ¿fjé rgtth? -at egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Rgtd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt pfjta Btgaíc, d pfjtaadh tcrpcipsdgth fjt
tcrpcipgdc p idsp ap rwjhbp fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt fjt wp kxhid n
rdbjcxrpsd paaá qpyd, at tcrpypgdc tc ta bpvíc d ap btbdgxp idsp thp
báfjxcp fjt cdh wp rdcipsd, n idsd pfjtaad fjt edg rdcipg at fjtsp.

-Idsd thd ejsxtgp htg, Hpcrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, etgd cd th phí, edgfjt
ad fjt wt rdcipsd ad kx edg bxh egdexdh dydh n ad idfjé rdc bxh bxhbph
bpcdh. Etgd, ¿fjé sxgáh rjpcsd it sxvp nd pwdgp róbd, tcigt digph xcuxcxiph
rdhph n bpgpkxaaph fjt bt bdhigó Bdcithxcdh, aph rjpath stheprxd n p hjh
ixtbedh it aph xgé rdcipcsd tc ta sxhrjghd st cjthigd kxpyt, edg cd htg
idsph sthit ajvpg, bt bdhigó igth apqgpsdgph fjt edg pfjtaadh pbtcíhxbdh
rpbedh xqpc hpaipcsd n qgxcrpcsd rdbd rpqgph; n, petcph aph wjqt kxhid,
rjpcsd rdcdrí htg ap jcp ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, n aph digph sdh
pfjtaaph bxhbph apqgpsdgph fjt ktcípc rdc taap, fjt wpqapbdh p ap hpaxsp
sta Idqdhd? Egtvjcié p Bdcithxcdh hx aph rdcdríp, gthedcsxóbt fjt cd, etgd
fjt éa xbpvxcpqp fjt stqípc st htg pavjcph htñdgph egxcrxepath tcrpcipsph,
fjt edrdh síph wpqíp fjt tc pfjtaadh egpsdh wpqípc epgtrxsd; n fjt cd bt
bpgpkxaapht sthid, edgfjt paaí thipqpc digph bjrwph htñdgph st adh ephpsdh
n egthtcith hxvadh, tcrpcipsph tc sxutgtcith n thigpñph uxvjgph, tcigt aph
rjpath rdcdríp éa p ap gtxcp Vxctqgp n hj sjtñp Fjxcipñdcp, thrpcrxpcsd ta
kxcd p Apcopgdit,

rjpcsd st Qgtipñp kxcd.

Rjpcsd Hpcrwd Epcop dnó strxg thid p hj pbd, etchó etgstg ta yjxrxd, d
bdgxght st gxhp; fjt, rdbd éa hpqíp ap ktgsps sta uxcvxsd tcrpcid st
Sjarxctp, st fjxtc éa wpqíp hxsd ta tcrpcipsdg n ta atkpcipsdg st ipa
ithixbdcxd, prpqó st rdcdrtg xcsjqxipqatbtcit fjt hj htñdg thipqp ujtgp st
yjxrxd n adrd st idsd ejcid; n phí, at sxyd:

-Tc bpap rdnjcijgp n tc etdg hpoóc n tc prxpvd síp qpyó kjthigp btgrts,
rpgd epigóc bíd, pa digd bjcsd, n tc bpa ejcid ht tcrdcigó rdc ta htñdg
Bdcithxcdh, fjt ipa cdh at wp kjtaid. Qxtc ht thipqp kjthigp btgrts prá
pggxqp rdc hj tcitgd yjxrxd, ipa rjpa Sxdh ht at wpqíp spsd, wpqapcsd
htcitcrxph n spcsd rdchtydh p rpsp ephd, n cd pvdgp, rdcipcsd adh bpndgth
sxhepgpith fjt ejtstc xbpvxcpght.

-Rdbd it rdcdord, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cd wpvd rphd st ijh
epapqgph.

-Cx nd ipbedrd st aph st kjthigp btgrts -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, hxfjxtgp bt
wxtgp, hxfjxtgp bt bpit edg aph fjt at wt sxrwd, d edg aph fjt at extchd
strxg hx tc aph hjnph cd ht rdggxvt n tcbxtcsp. Etgd sívpbt kjthigp btgrts,
pwdgp fjt thipbdh tc epo: ¿róbd d tc fjé rdcdrxó p ap htñdgp cjthigp pbp? N
hx ap wpqaó, ¿fjé sxyd, n fjé at gthedcsxó?

-Rdcdríap -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- tc fjt igpt adh bthbdh kthixsdh fjt igpíp
rjpcsd iú bt at bdhigphit. Wpqaéap, etgd cd bt gthedcsxó epapqgp; pcith, bt
kdakxó aph thepasph, n ht ujt wjntcsd rdc ipcip egxthp, fjt cd ap parpcopgp
jcp ypgp. Fjxht htvjxgap, n ad wxrxtgp, hx cd bt prdchtypgp Bdcithxcdh fjt
cd bt rpchpht tc taad, edgfjt htgíp tc qpast, n báh edgfjt ht aatvpqp ap
wdgp sdcst bt rdcktcíp kdaktg p hpaxg st ap hxbp. Síydbt phxbthbd fjt,
pcspcsd ta ixtbed, ht bt spgíp pkxhd róbd wpqípc st htg sthtcrpcipsdh éa, n
Qtatgbp n Sjgpcspgit, rdc idsdh adh fjt paaí thipqpc; etgd ad fjt báh etcp
bt sxd, st aph fjt paaí kx n cdié, ujt fjt, thiácsdbt sxrxtcsd Bdcithxcdh
thiph gpodcth, ht aatvó p bí edg jc apsd, hxc fjt nd ap kxtht ktcxg, jcp st
aph sdh rdbepñtgph st ap hxc ktcijgp Sjarxctp, n, aatcdh adh dydh st
aávgxbph, rdc ijgqpsp n qpyp kdo, bt sxyd: ''Bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd
qthp p kjthigp btgrts aph bpcdh, n hjeaxrp p kjthigp btgrts ht ap wpvp st
wprtgap hpqtg róbd thiá; n fjt, edg thipg tc jcp vgpc ctrthxsps, phxbxhbd
hjeaxrp p kjthigp btgrts, rjpc tcrpgtrxspbtcit ejtst, htp htgkxsd st
egthipgat hdqgt thit upastaaíc fjt pfjí igpxvd, st rdidcíp, cjtkd, btsxp
sdrtcp st gtpath, d adh fjt kjthigp btgrts ijkxtgt, fjt taap sp hj epapqgp
st kdakéghtadh rdc bjrwp qgtktsps''. Hjhetcsxóbt n psbxgóbt ta ipa gtrpsd,
n, kdakxécsdbt pa htñdg Bdcithxcdh, at egtvjcié: ''¿Th edhxqat, htñdg
Bdcithxcdh, fjt adh tcrpcipsdh egxcrxepath epstrtc ctrthxsps?'' P ad fjt éa
bt gthedcsxó: ''Rgépbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, fjt
éhip fjt aapbpc ctrthxsps psdcstfjxtgp ht jhp, n edg idsd ht thixtcst, n p
idsdh parpcop, n pjc wphip adh tcrpcipsdh cd etgsdcp; n, ejth ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd tckíp p etsxg thdh htxh gtpath, n ap egtcsp th qjtcp,
htvúc epgtrt, cd wpn hxcd sághtadh; fjt, hxc sjsp, stqt st thipg ejthip tc
pavúc vgpcst pegxtid''. ''Egtcsp, cd ap idbpgé nd -at gthedcsí-, cx btcdh
at spgé ad fjt exst, edgfjt cd itcvd hxcd hdadh rjpigd gtpath''; adh rjpath
at sx (fjt ujtgdc adh fjt iú, Hpcrwd, bt sxhit ta digd síp epgp spg axbdhcp
p adh edqgth fjt idepht edg adh rpbxcdh), n at sxyt: ''Strxs, pbxvp bíp, p
kjthp htñdgp fjt p bí bt ethp tc ta pabp st hjh igpqpydh, n fjt fjxhxtgp
htg jc Uúrpg epgp gtbtsxpgadh; n fjt at wpvd hpqtg fjt nd cd ejtsd cx stqd
itctg hpajs rpgtrxtcsd st hj pvgpspqat kxhip n sxhrgtip rdcktghprxóc, n fjt
at hjeaxrd, rjpc tcrpgtrxspbtcit ejtsd, htp htgkxsp hj btgrts st stypght
ktg n igpipg sthit hj rpjixkd htgkxsdg n phtcstgtpsd rpqpaatgd. Sxgéxhat
ipbqxéc fjt, rjpcsd btcdh ht ad extcht, dxgá strxg rdbd nd wt wtrwd jc
yjgpbtcid n kdid, p bdsd st pfjta fjt wxod ta bpgfjéh st Bpcijp, st ktcvpg
p hj hdqgxcd Qpasdkxcdh, rjpcsd at wpaaó epgp thexgpg tc bxips st ap
bdcixñp, fjt ujt st cd rdbtg epc p bpcitath, rdc aph digph opgpcspyph fjt
paaí pñpsxó, wphip ktcvpgat; n phí at wpgé nd st cd hdhtvpg, n st pcspg aph
hxtit epgixsph sta bjcsd, rdc báh ejcijpaxsps fjt aph pcsjkd ta xcupcit sdc
Etsgd st Edgijvpa, wphip sthtcrpcipgap''. ''Idsd thd, n báh, stqt kjthigp
btgrts p bx htñdgp'', bt gthedcsxó ap sdcrtaap. N, idbpcsd adh rjpigd
gtpath, tc ajvpg st wprtgbt jcp gtktgtcrxp, wxod jcp rpqgxdap, fjt ht
atkpció sdh kpgph st btsxg tc ta pxgt.

-¡Dw hpcid Sxdh! -sxyd p thit ixtbed spcsd jcp vgpc kdo Hpcrwd-. ¿Th
edhxqat fjt ipa wpn tc ta bjcsd, n fjt itcvpc tc éa ipcip ujtgop adh
tcrpcipsdgth n tcrpcipbtcidh, fjt wpnpc igdrpsd ta qjtc yjxrxd st bx htñdg
tc jcp ipc sxhepgpipsp adrjgp? ¡Dw htñdg, htñdg, edg fjxtc Sxdh th, fjt
kjthigp btgrts bxgt edg hí n kjtakp edg hj wdcgp, n cd sé rgésxid p thph
kprxtspsth fjt at ixtctc btcvjpsd n sthrpqpapsd ta htcixsd!

-Rdbd bt fjxtgth qxtc, Hpcrwd, wpqaph sthp bpctgp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; n,
rdbd cd thiáh tmetgxbtcipsd tc aph rdhph sta bjcsd, idsph aph rdhph fjt
ixtctc pavd st sxuxrjaips it epgtrtc xbedhxqath; etgd pcspgá ta ixtbed,
rdbd digp kto wt sxrwd, n nd it rdcipgé pavjcph st aph fjt paaá pqpyd wt
kxhid, fjt it wpgác rgttg aph fjt pfjí wt rdcipsd, rjnp ktgsps cx psbxit
géeaxrp cx sxhejip.





Rpeíijad MMXK. Sdcst ht rjtcipc bxa opgpcspyph ipc xbetgixctcith rdbd
ctrthpgxph pa ktgspstgd tcitcsxbxtcid sthip vgpcst wxhidgxp


Sxrt ta fjt igpsjyd thip vgpcst wxhidgxp sta dgxvxcpa, st ap fjt thrgxqxó
hj egxbtg pjidg Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, fjt, aatvpcsd pa rpeíijad st ap
pktcijgp st ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, tc ta bpgvtc séa thipqpc thrgxiph, st
bpcd sta bthbd Wpbtit, thiph bxhbph gpodcth:

''Cd bt ejtsd spg p tcitcstg, cx bt ejtsd etghjpsxg, fjt pa kpatgdhd sdc
Fjxydit at ephpht ejcijpabtcit idsd ad fjt tc ta pcitrtstcit rpeíijad fjtsp
thrgxid: ap gpoóc th fjt idsph aph pktcijgph wphip pfjí hjrtsxsph wpc hxsd
rdcixcvxqath n ktgxhíbxath, etgd éhip sthip rjtkp cd at wpaad tcigpsp
pavjcp epgp itctgap edg ktgspstgp, edg xg ipc ujtgp st adh iégbxcdh
gpodcpqath. Ejth etchpg nd fjt sdc Fjxydit bxcixtht, hxtcsd ta báh
ktgspstgd wxspavd n ta báh cdqat rpqpaatgd st hjh ixtbedh, cd th edhxqat;
fjt cd sxytgp éa jcp btcixgp hx at phptitpgpc. Edg digp epgit, rdchxstgd
fjt éa ap rdció n ap sxyd rdc idsph aph rxgrjchipcrxph sxrwph, n fjt cd
ejsd upqgxrpg tc ipc qgtkt theprxd ipc vgpc báfjxcp st sxhepgpith; n hx
thip pktcijgp epgtrt peórgxup, nd cd itcvd ap rjaep; n phí, hxc puxgbpgap
edg upahp d ktgspstgp, ap thrgxqd. Iú, atidg, ejth tgth egjstcit, yjovp ad
fjt it epgtrxtgt, fjt nd cd stqd cx ejtsd báh; ejthid fjt ht ixtct edg
rxtgid fjt pa ixtbed st hj uxc n bjtgit sxrtc fjt ht gtigpió staap, n sxyd
fjt éa ap wpqíp xcktcipsd, edg epgtrtgat fjt rdcktcíp n rjpsgpqp qxtc rdc
aph pktcijgph fjt wpqíp atísd tc hjh wxhidgxph''.

N ajtvd egdhxvjt, sxrxtcsd:

Thepcióht ta egxbd, phí sta pigtkxbxtcid st Hpcrwd Epcop rdbd st ap
eprxtcrxp st hj pbd, n yjovó fjt sta rdcitcid fjt itcíp st wpqtg kxhid p hj
htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, pjcfjt tcrpcipsp, at cpríp pfjtaap rdcsxrxóc
qapcsp fjt tcidcrth bdhigpqp; edgfjt, hx phí cd ujtgp, epapqgph n gpodcth
at sxyd Hpcrwd, fjt btgtrípc bdatgat p epadh; edgfjt gtpabtcit at epgtrxó
fjt wpqíp pcspsd pigtkxsxaad rdc hj htñdg, p fjxtc at sxyd:

-Nd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, sdn edg qxtc tbeatpsíhxbp ap ydgcpsp
fjt rdc kjthigp btgrts wt wtrwd, edgfjt tc taap wt vgpcytpsd rjpigd rdhph.
Ap egxbtgp, wpqtg rdcdrxsd p kjthigp btgrts, fjt ad itcvd p vgpc utaxrxsps.
Ap htvjcsp, wpqtg hpqxsd ad fjt ht tcrxtggp tc thip rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh,
rdc aph bjiprxdcth st Vjpsxpcp n st aph apvjcph st Gjxstgp, fjt bt htgkxgác
epgp ta Dkxsxd thepñda fjt igpxvd tcigt bpcdh. Ap itgrtgp, tcitcstg ap
pcixvütsps st adh cpxeth, fjt, edg ad btcdh, np ht jhpqpc tc ixtbed sta
tbetgpsdg Rpgadbpvcd, htvúc ejtst rdatvxght st aph epapqgph fjt kjthp
btgrts sxrt fjt sxyd Sjgpcspgit, rjpcsd, pa rpqd st pfjta vgpcst theprxd
fjt thijkd wpqapcsd rdc éa Bdcithxcdh, éa sthetgió sxrxtcsd: ''Eprxtcrxp n
qpgpypg''; n thip gpoóc n bdsd st wpqapg cd ap ejsd pegtcstg tcrpcipsd,
hxcd rjpcsd cd ad thipqp, tc Ugpcrxp n tc ixtbed sta gtutgxsd tbetgpsdg
Rpgadbpvcd. N thip pktgxvjprxóc bt kxtct excixepgpsp epgp ta digd axqgd fjt
kdn rdbedcxtcsd , fjt th Hjeatbtcid st Kxgvxaxd Edaxsdgd, tc ap xcktcrxóc
st aph pcixvütspsth; n rgtd fjt tc ta hjnd cd ht prdgsó st edctg ap st adh
cpxeth, rdbd ap edcsgé nd pwdgp, fjt htgá st bjrwp xbedgipcrxp, n báh
patvpcsd pjidg ipc vgpkt n ipc ktgspstgd rdbd th ta htñdg Sjgpcspgit. Ap
rjpgip th wpqtg hpqxsd rdc rtgixsjbqgt ta cprxbxtcid sta gíd Vjpsxpcp,
wphip pwdgp xvcdgpsd st aph vtcith.

-Kjthigp btgrts ixtct gpoóc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd fjtggíp nd hpqtg, np
fjt Sxdh at wpvp btgrts st fjt ht at sé axrtcrxp epgp xbegxbxg thdh hjh
axqgdh, fjt ad sjsd, p fjxéc extchp sxgxvxgadh.

-Htñdgth n vgpcsth wpn tc Thepñp p fjxtc ejtspc sxgxvxght -sxyd ta egxbd.

-Cd bjrwdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n cd edgfjt cd ad btgtorpc, hxcd fjt cd
fjxtgtc psbxixgadh, edg cd dqaxvpght p ap hpixhuprxóc fjt epgtrt ht stqt pa
igpqpyd n rdgithíp st hjh pjidgth. Jc egícrxet rdcdord nd fjt ejtst hjeaxg
ap upaip st adh stbáh, rdc ipciph ktcipyph fjt, hx bt pigtkxtgt p strxgaph,
fjxoá sthetgipgp ap xckxsxp tc báh st rjpigd vtctgdhdh etrwdh; etgd fjéstht
thid pfjí epgp digd ixtbed báh róbdsd, n kpbdh p qjhrpg psdcst gtrdvtgcdh
thip cdrwt.

-Cd atydh st pfjí -gthedcsxó ta egxbd- thiá jcp tgbxip, sdcst wprt hj
wpqxiprxóc jc tgbxipñd, fjt sxrtc wp hxsd hdaspsd, n thiá tc dexcxóc st htg
jc qjtc rgxhixpcd, n bjn sxhrgtid n rpgxipixkd pstbáh. Yjcid rdc ap tgbxip
ixtct jcp etfjtñp rphp, fjt éa wp apqgpsd p hj rdhip; etgd, rdc idsd,
pjcfjt rwxrp, th rpepo st gtrxqxg wjéhetsth.

-¿Ixtct edg ktcijgp vpaaxcph ta ipa tgbxipñd? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

-Edrdh tgbxipñdh thiác hxc taaph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cd hdc adh
fjt pvdgp ht jhpc rdbd pfjtaadh st adh sthxtgidh st Tvxeid, fjt ht kthiípc
st wdyph st epabp n rdbípc gpírth st ap ixtggp. N cd ht tcixtcsp fjt edg
strxg qxtc st pfjéaadh cd ad sxvd st pfjéhidh, hxcd fjt fjxtgd strxg fjt pa
gxvdg n thigtrwtop st tcidcrth cd aatvpc aph etcxitcrxph st adh st pvdgp;
etgd cd edg thid stypc st htg idsdh qjtcdh; p ad btcdh, nd edg qjtcdh adh
yjovd; n, rjpcsd idsd rdggp ijgqxd, btcdh bpa wprt ta wxeórgxip fjt ht
uxcvt qjtcd fjt ta eúqaxrd etrpsdg.

Thipcsd tc thid, kxtgdc fjt wprxp sdcst taadh thipqpc ktcíp jc wdbqgt p
ext, rpbxcpcsd pegxthp, n spcsd kpgpodh p jc bprwd fjt ktcíp rpgvpsd st
apcoph n st papqpgsph. Rjpcsd aatvó p taadh, adh hpajsó n ephó st apgvd.
Sdc Fjxydit at sxyd:

-Qjtc wdbqgt, stitctdh, fjt epgtrt fjt kpxh rdc báh sxaxvtcrxp fjt tht
bprwd wp btcthitg.

-Cd bt ejtsd stitctg, htñdg -gthedcsxó ta wdbqgt-, edgfjt aph pgbph fjt
ktxh fjt pfjí aatkd wpc st htgkxg bpñpcp; n phí, bt th udgodhd ta cd
stitctgbt, n p Sxdh. Etgd hx fjxhxégtsth hpqtg epgp fjé aph aatkd, tc ap
ktcip fjt thiá báh pggxqp st ap tgbxip extchd padypg thip cdrwt; n hx th
fjt wpréxh thit bthbd rpbxcd, paaí bt wpaapgéxh, sdcst dh rdcipgé
bpgpkxaaph. N p Sxdh digp kto.

N st ipa bpctgp pvjxyó ta bprwd, fjt cd ijkd ajvpg sdc Fjxydit st
egtvjcipgat fjé bpgpkxaaph tgpc aph fjt etchpqp strxgath; n, rdbd éa tgp
pavd rjgxdhd n hxtbegt at upixvpqpc sthtdh st hpqtg rdhph cjtkph, dgstcó
fjt pa bdbtcid ht epgixthtc n ujthtc p ephpg ap cdrwt tc ap ktcip, hxc
idrpg tc ap tgbxip, sdcst fjxhxtgp ta egxbd fjt ht fjtspgpc.

Wíodht phí, hjqxtgdc p rpqpaad, n hxvjxtgdc idsdh igth ta stgtrwd rpbxcd st
ap ktcip, p ap rjpa aatvpgdc jc edrd pcith st pcdrwtrtg. Sxyd ta egxbd p
sdc Fjxydit fjt aatvphtc p taap p qtqtg jc igpvd. Petcph dnó thid Hpcrwd
Epcop, rjpcsd tcrpbxcó ta gjrxd p ap tgbxip, n ad bxhbd wxrxtgdc sdc
Fjxydit n ta egxbd; etgd ap bpap hjtgit st Hpcrwd epgtrt fjt dgstcó fjt ta
tgbxipñd cd thijkxtht tc rphp; fjt phí ht ad sxyd jcp hdiptgbxipñd fjt tc
ap tgbxip wpaapgdc. Exsxégdcat st ad rpgd; gthedcsxó fjt hj htñdg cd ad
itcíp, etgd fjt hx fjtgípc pvjp qpgpip, fjt ht ap spgíp st bjn qjtcp vpcp.

-Hx nd ap ijkxtgp st pvjp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edodh wpn tc ta rpbxcd,
sdcst ap wjqxtgp hpixhutrwd. ¡Pw qdsph st Rpbprwd n pqjcspcrxp st ap rphp
st sdc Sxtvd, n rjáciph ktrth dh itcvd st trwpg btcdh!

Rdc thid, stypgdc ap tgbxip n exrpgdc wprxp ap ktcip; n p edrd igtrwd
idepgdc jc bpcrtqxid, fjt stapcit staadh xqp rpbxcpcsd cd rdc bjrwp egxthp;
n phí, at parpcopgdc. Aatkpqp ap thepsp hdqgt ta wdbqgd, n tc taap ejthid
jc qjaid d tckdaidgxd, pa epgtrtg st hjh kthixsdh; fjt, pa epgtrtg, stqípc
st htg adh rpaodcth d vgtvjthrdh, n wtggtgjtad, n pavjcp rpbxhp, edgfjt
igpíp ejthip jcp gdexaap st itgrxdetad rdc pavjcph kxhajbqgth st gphd, n ap
rpbxhp, st ujtgp; aph btsxph tgpc st htsp, n adh opepidh rjpsgpsdh, p jhd
st rdgit; ap tsps aatvpgíp p sxto n drwd d sxto n cjtkt pñdh; patvgt st
gdhigd, n, pa epgtrtg, ávxa st hj etghdcp. Xqp rpcipcsd htvjxsxaaph, epgp
tcigtitctg ta igpqpyd sta rpbxcd. Rjpcsd aatvpgdc p éa, prpqpqp st rpcipg
jcp, fjt ta egxbd idbó st btbdgxp, fjt sxrtc fjt stríp:

   P ap vjtggp bt aatkp
   bx ctrthxsps;
   hx ijkxtgp sxctgdh,
   cd ujtgp, tc ktgsps.

Ta egxbtgd fjt at wpqaó ujt sdc Fjxydit, sxrxécsdat:

-Bjn p ap axvtgp rpbxcp kjthp btgrts, htñdg vpaác. N ¿psócst qjtcd?
Htepbdh, hx th fjt vjhip strxgad.

P ad fjt ta bdod gthedcsxó:

-Ta rpbxcpg ipc p ap axvtgp ad rpjhp ta rpadg n ap edqgtop, n ta psócst kdn
th p ap vjtggp.

-¿Róbd ap edqgtop? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit-; fjt edg ta rpadg qxtc ejtst htg.

-Htñdg -gteaxró ta bpcrtqd-, nd aatkd tc thit tckdaidgxd jcdh vgtvjthrdh st
itgrxdetad, rdbepñtgdh sthip gdexaap; hx adh vphid tc ta rpbxcd, cd bt
edsgé wdcgpg rdc taadh tc ap rxjsps, n cd itcvd rdc fjé rdbegpg digdh; n,
phí edg thid rdbd edg dgtpgbt, kdn sthip bpctgp, wphip parpcopg jcph
rdbepñíph st xcupcitgíp fjt cd thiác sdrt atvjph st pfjí, sdcst phtcipgé bx
eapop, n cd upaipgác qpvpyth tc fjt rpbxcpg st paaí pstapcit wphip ta
tbqpgrpstgd, fjt sxrtc wp st htg tc Rpgipvtcp. N báh fjxtgd itctg edg pbd n
edg htñdg pa gtn, n htgkxgat tc ap vjtggp, fjt cd p jc etaóc tc ap rdgit.

-N ¿aatkp kjthp btgrts pavjcp ktcipyp edg ktcijgp? -egtvjció ta egxbd.

-Hx nd wjqxtgp htgkxsd p pavúc vgpcst st Thepñp, d pavúc egxcrxepa
etghdcpyt -gthedcsxó ta bdod-, p qjtc htvjgd fjt nd ap aatkpgp, fjt thd
ixtct ta htgkxg p adh qjtcdh: fjt sta ixctad hjtatc hpaxg p htg pauégto d
rpexipcth, d rdc pavúc qjtc tcigtitcxbxtcid; etgd nd, sthktcijgpsd, htgkí
hxtbegt p rpipggxqtgph n p vtcit psktctsxop, st gprxóc n fjxiprxóc ipc
bíhtgp n pitcjpsp, fjt tc epvpg ta pabxsdcpg jc rjtaad ht rdchjbíp ap bxips
staap; n htgíp itcxsd p bxapvgd fjt jc epyt pktcijgtgd parpcopht pavjcp
hxfjxtgp gpodcpqat ktcijgp.

-N sívpbt, edg hj kxsp, pbxvd -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit-: ¿th edhxqat fjt tc
adh pñdh fjt hxgkxó cd wp edsxsd parpcopg pavjcp axqgtp?

-Sdh bt wpc spsd -gthedcsxó ta epyt-; etgd, phí rdbd ta fjt ht hpat st
pavjcp gtaxvxóc pcith st egduthpg at fjxipc ta wáqxid n at kjtaktc hjh
kthixsdh, phí bt kdakípc p bí adh bídh bxh pbdh, fjt, prpqpsdh adh ctvdrxdh
p fjt ktcípc p ap rdgit, ht kdakípc p hjh rphph n gtrdvípc aph axqgtph fjt
edg hdap dhitciprxóc wpqípc spsd.

-Cdipqat thexadgrwtgíp, rdbd sxrt ta xipaxpcd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; etgd, rdc
idsd thd, itcvp p utaxrt ktcijgp ta wpqtg hpaxsd st ap rdgit rdc ipc qjtcp
xcitcrxóc rdbd aatkp; edgfjt cd wpn digp rdhp tc ap ixtggp báh wdcgpsp cx
st báh egdktrwd fjt htgkxg p Sxdh, egxbtgpbtcit, n ajtvd, p hj gtn n htñdg
cpijgpa, thetrxpabtcit tc ta tytgrxrxd st aph pgbph, edg aph rjpath ht
parpcopc, hx cd báh gxfjtoph, p ad btcdh, báh wdcgp fjt edg aph atigph,
rdbd nd itcvd sxrwd bjrwph ktrth; fjt, ejthid fjt wpc ujcspsd báh
bpndgpovdh aph atigph fjt aph pgbph, idspkíp aatkpc jc cd hé fjé adh st aph
pgbph p adh st aph atigph, rdc jc hí hé fjé st theatcsdg fjt ht wpaap tc
taadh, fjt adh pktcipyp p idsdh. N thid fjt pwdgp at fjxtgd strxg aaéktad
tc ap btbdgxp, fjt at htgá st bjrwd egdktrwd n paxkxd tc hjh igpqpydh; n th
fjt, pepgit ap xbpvxcprxóc st adh hjrthdh psktghdh fjt at edsgác ktcxg, fjt
ta etdg st idsdh th ap bjtgit, n rdbd éhip htp qjtcp, ta btydg st idsdh th
ta bdgxg. Egtvjciágdcat p Yjaxd Réhpg, pfjta kpatgdhd tbetgpsdg gdbpcd,
rjáa tgp ap btydg bjtgit; gthedcsxó fjt ap xbetchpsp, ap st gtetcit n cd
egtkxhip; n, pjcfjt gthedcsxó rdbd vtcixa n pytcd sta rdcdrxbxtcid sta
ktgspstgd Sxdh, rdc idsd thd, sxyd qxtc, epgp pwdggpght sta htcixbxtcid
wjbpcd; fjt, ejthid rphd fjt dh bpitc tc ap egxbtgp uprrxóc n gtugxtvp, d
np st jc ixgd st pgixaatgíp, d kdapsd st jcp bxcp, ¿fjé xbedgip? Idsd th
bdgxg, n prpqóht ap dqgp; n, htvúc Itgtcrxd, báh qxtc epgtrt ta hdaspsd
bjtgid tc ap qpipaap fjt kxkd n hpakd tc ap wjxsp; n ipcid parpcop st upbp
ta qjtc hdaspsd rjpcid ixtct st dqtsxtcrxp p hjh rpexipcth n p adh fjt
bpcspgat ejtstc. N psktgixs, wxyd, fjt pa hdaspsd btydg at thiá ta datg p
eóakdgp fjt pavpaxp, n fjt hx ap ktyto dh rdvt tc thit wdcgdhd tytgrxrxd,
pjcfjt htp aatcd st wtgxsph n thigdetpsd d rdyd, p ad btcdh cd dh edsgá
rdvtg hxc wdcgp, n ipa, fjt cd dh ap edsgá btcdhrpqpg ap edqgtop; rjpcid
báh, fjt np ht kp spcsd dgstc róbd ht tcigtitcvpc n gtbtsxtc adh hdaspsdh
kxtydh n thigdetpsdh, edgfjt cd th qxtc fjt ht wpvp rdc taadh ad fjt hjtatc
wprtg adh fjt pwdggpc n spc axqtgips p hjh ctvgdh rjpcsd np hdc kxtydh n cd
ejtstc htgkxg, n, trwácsdadh st rphp rdc iíijad st axqgth, adh wprtc
thrapkdh st ap wpbqgt, st fjxtc cd extchpc pwdggpght hxcd rdc ap bjtgit. N
edg pwdgp cd dh fjxtgd strxg báh, hxcd fjt hjqáxh p aph pcrph sthit bx
rpqpaad wphip ap ktcip, n paaí rtcpgéxh rdcbxvd, n edg ap bpñpcp htvjxgéxh
ta rpbxcd, fjt dh at sé Sxdh ipc qjtcd rdbd kjthigdh sthtdh btgtrtc.

Ta epyt cd prteió ta rdckxit st aph pcrph, pjcfjt hí ta st rtcpg rdc éa tc
ap ktcip; n, p thip hpoóc, sxrtc fjt sxyd Hpcrwd tcigt hí:

-¡Káapit Sxdh edg htñdg! N ¿th edhxqat fjt wdbqgt fjt hpqt strxg ipath,
ipciph n ipc qjtcph rdhph rdbd pfjí wp sxrwd, sxvp fjt wp kxhid adh
sxhepgpith xbedhxqath fjt rjtcip st ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh? Pwdgp qxtc,
taad sxgá.

N tc thid, aatvpgdc p ap ktcip, p ixtbed fjt pcdrwtríp, n cd hxc vjhid st
Hpcrwd, edg ktg fjt hj htñdg ap yjovó edg ktgspstgp ktcip, n cd edg
rphixaad, rdbd hdaíp. Cd wjqxtgdc qxtc tcigpsd, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit egtvjció
pa ktcitgd edg ta wdbqgt st aph apcoph n papqpgsph; ta rjpa at gthedcsxó
fjt tc ap rpqpaatgxop thipqp prdbdspcsd ta bprwd. Ad bxhbd wxrxtgdc st hjh
yjbtcidh ta egxbd n Hpcrwd, spcsd p Gdrxcpcit ta btydg ethtqgt n ta btydg
ajvpg st ap rpqpaatgxop.





Rpeíijad MMK. Sdcst ht pejcip ap pktcijgp sta gtqjocd n ap vgprxdhp sta
ixitgtgd, rdc aph btbdgpqath psxkxcpcoph sta bdcd psxkxcd


Cd ht at rdríp ta epc p sdc Fjxydit, rdbd hjtat strxght, wphip díg n hpqtg
aph bpgpkxaaph egdbtixsph sta wdbqgt rdcsjidg st aph pgbph. Ujtat p qjhrpg
sdcst ta ktcitgd at wpqíp sxrwd fjt thipqp, n wpaaóat, n síydat fjt tc idsd
rphd at sxytht ajtvd ad fjt at wpqíp st strxg sthejéh, prtgrp st ad fjt at
wpqíp egtvjcipsd tc ta rpbxcd. Ta wdbqgt at gthedcsxó:

-Báh stheprxd, n cd tc ext, ht wp st idbpg ta rjtcid st bxh bpgpkxaaph:
séytbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg qjtcd, prpqpg st spg gtrpsd p bx qthixp, fjt
nd at sxgé rdhph fjt at psbxgtc.

-Cd fjtst edg thd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd dh pnjspgé p idsd.

N phí ad wxod, pwtrwácsdat ap rtqpsp n axbexpcsd ta ethtqgt, wjbxasps fjt
dqaxvó pa wdbqgt p rdcipgat rdc qjtcp kdajcips ad fjt at etsíp; n,
htciácsdht tc jc ednd n sdc Fjxydit yjcid p éa, itcxtcsd edg htcpsd n
pjsxidgxd pa egxbd, pa epyt, p Hpcrwd Epcop n pa ktcitgd, rdbtcoó p strxg
sthip bpctgp:

-«Hpqgác kjthph btgrtsth fjt tc jc ajvpg fjt thiá rjpigd atvjph n btsxp
sthip ktcip hjrtsxó fjt p jc gtvxsdg séa, edg xcsjhigxp n tcvpñd st jcp
bjrwprwp rgxpsp hjnp, n thid th apgvd st rdcipg, at upaió jc phcd, n,
pjcfjt ta ipa gtvxsdg wxod aph sxaxvtcrxph edhxqath edg wpaapgat, cd ujt
edhxqat. Fjxcrt síph htgípc ephpsdh, htvúc th eúqaxrp kdo n upbp,- fjt ta
phcd upaipqp, rjpcsd, thipcsd tc ap eapop ta gtvxsdg etgsxsdhd, digd
gtvxsdg sta bxhbd ejtqad at sxyd: ''Spsbt paqgxrxph, rdbepsgt, fjt kjthigd
yjbtcid wp epgtrxsd''. ''Nd dh aph bpcsd n qjtcph, rdbepsgt -gthedcsxó ta
digd-, etgd htepbdh sócst wp epgtrxsd''. ''Tc ta bdcit -gthedcsxó ta
wpaapsdg-, at kx thip bpñpcp, hxc paqpgsp n hxc pepgtyd pavjcd, n ipc uaprd
fjt tgp jcp rdbephxóc bxgpaat. Fjíhtat pcitrdvtg stapcit st bí n igpégdhat,
etgd thiá np ipc bdcipgpo n ipc wjgpñd, fjt, rjpcsd aatvé p éa, ht ujt
wjntcsd n ht tcigó tc ad báh thrdcsxsd sta bdcit. Hx fjtgéxh fjt kdakpbdh
adh sdh p qjhrpgat, stypsbt edctg thip qdggxrp tc bx rphp, fjt ajtvd
kjtakd''. ''Bjrwd eaprtg bt wpgéxh -sxyd ta sta yjbtcid-, t nd egdrjgpgé
epvágdhad tc ap bthbp bdctsp''. Rdc thiph rxgrjchipcrxph idsph, n st ap
bthbp bpctgp fjt nd ad kdn rdcipcsd, ad rjtcipc idsdh pfjtaadh fjt thiác
tcitgpsdh tc ap ktgsps sthit rphd. Tc gthdajrxóc, adh sdh gtvxsdgth, p ext
n bpcd p bpcd, ht ujtgdc pa bdcit, n, aatvpcsd pa ajvpg n hxixd sdcst
etchpgdc wpaapg ta phcd, cd at wpaapgdc, cx epgtrxó edg idsdh pfjtaadh
rdcidgcdh, pjcfjt báh at qjhrpgdc. Kxtcsd, ejth, fjt cd epgtríp, sxyd ta
gtvxsdg fjt at wpqíp kxhid pa digd: ''Bxgps, rdbepsgt: jcp igpop bt wp
ktcxsd pa etchpbxtcid, rdc ap rjpa hxc sjsp pavjcp edsgtbdh sthrjqgxg thit
pcxbpa, pjcfjt thié btixsd tc aph tcigpñph st ap ixtggp, cd fjt sta bdcit;
n th fjt nd hé gtqjocpg bpgpkxaadhpbtcit; n hx kdh hpqéxh pavúc ipcid, sps
ta wtrwd edg rdcrajxsd''. ''¿Pavúc ipcid stríh, rdbepsgt? -sxyd ta digd-;
edg Sxdh, fjt cd sé ap ktcipyp p cpsxt, cx pjc p adh bthbdh phcdh''.
''Pwdgp ad ktgtbdh -gthedcsxó ta gtvxsdg htvjcsd-, edgfjt itcvd stitgbxcpsd
fjt dh kpxh kdh edg jcp epgit sta bdcit n nd edg digp, st bdsd fjt at
gdsttbdh n pcstbdh idsd, n st igtrwd tc igtrwd gtqjocpgéxh kdh n gtqjocpgé
nd, n cd edsgá htg btcdh hxcd fjt ta phcd cdh dnp n cdh gthedcsp, hx th fjt
thiá tc ta bdcit''. P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta sjtñd sta yjbtcid: ''Sxvd,
rdbepsgt, fjt ap igpop th tmrtatcit n sxvcp st kjthigd vgpc xcvtcxd''. N,
sxkxsxécsdht adh sdh htvúc ta prjtgsd, hjrtsxó fjt rphx p jc bthbd ixtbed
gtqjocpgdc, n rpsp jcd tcvpñpsd sta gtqjocd sta digd, prjsxtgdc p qjhrpght,
etchpcsd fjt np ta yjbtcid wpqíp epgtrxsd; n, tc kxécsdht, sxyd ta
etgsxsdhd: ''¿Th edhxqat, rdbepsgt, fjt cd ujt bx phcd ta fjt gtqjocó?''
''Cd ujt, hxcd nd'', gthedcsxó ta digd. ''Pwdgp sxvd -sxyd ta sjtñd-, fjt
st kdh p jc phcd, rdbepsgt, cd wpn pavjcp sxutgtcrxp, tc rjpcid idrp pa
gtqjocpg, edgfjt tc bx kxsp wt kxhid cx dísd rdhp báh egdexp''. ''Thph
papqpcoph n tcrpgtrxbxtcid -gthedcsxó ta st ap igpop-, btydg dh pipñtc n
idrpc p kdh fjt p bí, rdbepsgt; fjt edg ta Sxdh fjt bt rgxó fjt edséxh spg
sdh gtqjocdh st ktcipyp pa bpndg n báh etgxid gtqjocpsdg sta bjcsd; edgfjt
ta hdcxsd fjt itcéxh th paid; ad hdhitcxsd st ap kdo, p hj ixtbed n rdbeáh;
adh stydh, bjrwdh n pegthjgpsdh, n, tc gthdajrxóc, nd bt sdn edg ktcrxsd n
dh gxcsd ap epabp n sdn ap qpcstgp sthip gpgp wpqxaxsps''. ''Pwdgp sxvd
-gthedcsxó ta sjtñd-, fjt bt itcsgé n thixbpgé tc báh st pfjí pstapcit, n
etchpgé fjt hé pavjcp rdhp, ejth itcvd pavjcp vgprxp; fjt, ejthid fjt
etchpgp fjt gtqjocpqp qxtc, cjcrp tcitcsí fjt aatvpqp ta thigtbd fjt
stríh''. ''Ipbqxéc sxgé nd pwdgp -gthedcsxó ta htvjcsd- fjt wpn gpgph
wpqxaxspsth etgsxsph tc ta bjcsd, n fjt hdc bpa tbeatpsph tc pfjtaadh fjt
cd hpqtc pegdktrwpght staaph''. ''Aph cjthigph -gthedcsxó ta sjtñd-, hx cd
th tc rphdh htbtypcith rdbd ta fjt igptbdh tcigt bpcdh, cd cdh ejtstc
htgkxg tc digdh, n pjc tc éhit eatvp p Sxdh fjt cdh htpc st egdktrwd''.
Thid sxrwd, ht idgcpgdc p sxkxsxg n p kdaktg p hjh gtqjocdh, n p rpsp ephd
ht tcvpñpqpc n kdakípc p yjcipght, wphip fjt ht sxtgdc edg rdcigphtñd fjt,
epgp tcitcstg fjt tgpc taadh, n cd ta phcd, gtqjocphtc sdh ktrth, jcp igph
digp. Rdc thid, sdqapcsd p rpsp ephd adh gtqjocdh, gdstpgdc idsd ta bdcit
hxc fjt ta etgsxsd yjbtcid gthedcsxtht, cx pjc edg htñph. Bph, ¿róbd wpqíp
st gthedcstg ta edqgt n bpa advgpsd, hx at wpaapgdc tc ad báh thrdcsxsd sta
qdhfjt, rdbxsd st adqdh? N, tc kxécsdat, sxyd hj sjtñd: ''Np bt bpgpkxaapqp
nd st fjt éa cd gthedcsíp, ejth p cd thipg bjtgid, éa gtqjocpgp hx cdh
dntgp, d cd ujtgp phcd; etgd, p igjtrd st wpqtgdh dísd gtqjocpg rdc ipcip
vgprxp, rdbepsgt, sdn edg qxtc tbeatpsd ta igpqpyd fjt wt itcxsd tc
qjhrpgat, pjcfjt at wt wpaapsd bjtgid''. ''Tc qjtcp bpcd thiá, rdbepsgt
-gthedcsxó ta digd-, ejth hx qxtc rpcip ta pqps, cd at kp tc opvp ta
bdcprxaad''. Rdc thid, sthrdchdapsdh n gdcrdh, ht kdakxtgdc p hj pastp,
psdcst rdcipgdc p hjh pbxvdh, ktrxcdh n rdcdrxsdh rjpcid ath wpqíp
prdcitrxsd tc ap qjhrp sta phcd, tmpvtgpcsd ta jcd ap vgprxp sta digd tc ta
gtqjocpg; idsd ad rjpa ht hjed n ht thitcsxó edg adh ajvpgth rxgrjcktrxcdh.
N ta sxpqad, fjt cd sjtgbt, rdbd th pbxvd st htbqgpg n stggpbpg gtcrxaaph n
sxhrdgsxp edg sdfjxtgp, atkpcipcsd rpgpbxaadh tc ta kxtcid n vgpcsth
fjxbtgph st cdcpsp, dgstcó t wxod fjt aph vtcith st adh digdh ejtqadh, tc
kxtcsd p pavjcd st cjthigp pastp, gtqjocpht, rdbd sácsdath tc gdhigd rdc ta
gtqjocd st cjthigdh gtvxsdgth. Sxtgdc tc taad adh bjrwprwdh, fjt ujt spg tc
bpcdh n tc qdrph st idsdh adh stbdcxdh sta xcuxtgcd, n ujt rjcsxtcsd ta
gtqjocd st tc jcd tc digd ejtqad, st bpctgp fjt hdc rdcdrxsdh adh cpijgpath
sta ejtqad sta gtqjocd, rdbd hdc rdcdrxsdh n sxutgtcrxpsdh adh ctvgdh st
adh qapcrdh; n wp aatvpsd p ipcid ap sthvgprxp sthip qjgap, fjt bjrwph
ktrth rdc bpcd pgbpsp n udgbpsd thrjpsgóc wpc hpaxsd rdcigp adh qjgapsdgth
adh qjgapsdh p spght ap qpipaap, hxc edstgad gtbtsxpg gtn cx gdfjt, cx
itbdg cx ktgvütcop. Nd rgtd fjt bpñpcp d thdigd síp wpc st hpaxg tc rpbepñp
adh st bx ejtqad, fjt hdc adh sta gtqjocd, rdcigp digd ajvpg fjt thiá p sdh
atvjph sta cjthigd, fjt th jcd st adh fjt báh cdh etghxvjtc: n, edg hpaxg
qxtc petgrtqxsdh, aatkd rdbegpsph thiph apcoph n papqpgsph fjt wpqéxh
kxhid.» N éhiph hdc aph bpgpkxaaph fjt sxyt fjt dh wpqíp st rdcipg, n hx cd
dh ad wpc epgtrxsd, cd hé digph.

N rdc thid sxd uxc p hj eaáixrp ta qjtc wdbqgt; n, tc thid, tcigó edg ap
ejtgip st ap ktcip jc wdbqgt idsd kthixsd st rpbjop, btsxph, vgtvjthrdh n
yjqóc, n rdc kdo atkpcipsp sxyd:

-Htñdg wjéhets, ¿wpn edhpsp? Fjt kxtct pfjí ta bdcd psxkxcd n ta gtipqad st
ap axqtgips st Btaxhtcsgp.

-¡Rjtged st ipa -sxyd ta ktcitgd-, fjt pfjí thiá ta htñdg bpht Etsgd! Qjtcp
cdrwt ht cdh pepgtyp.

Dakxsáqphtbt st strxg rdbd ta ipa bpht Etsgd igpíp rjqxtgid ta dyd
xofjxtgsd, n rphx btsxd rpggxaad, rdc jc epgrwt st iputiác ktgst, htñpa fjt
idsd pfjta apsd stqíp st thipg tcutgbd; n ta ktcitgd egdhxvjxó, sxrxtcsd:

-Htp qxtc ktcxsd kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bpht Etsgd. ¿Psócst thiá ta bdcd n
ta gtipqad, fjt cd adh ktd?

-Np aatvpc rtgrp -gthedcsxó ta idsd rpbjop-, hxcd fjt nd bt wt pstapcipsd,
p hpqtg hx wpn edhpsp.

-Pa bxhbd sjfjt st Paqp ht ap fjxipgp epgp sághtap pa htñdg bpht Etsgd
-gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd-; aatvjt ta bdcd n ta gtipqad, fjt vtcit wpn thip
cdrwt tc ap ktcip fjt epvpgá ta ktgat n aph wpqxaxspsth sta bdcd.

-Htp tc qjtc wdgp -gthedcsxó ta sta epgrwt-, fjt nd bdstgpgé ta egtrxd, n
rdc hdap ap rdhip bt spgé edg qxtc epvpsd; n nd kjtakd p wprtg fjt rpbxct
ap rpggtip sdcst kxtct ta bdcd n ta gtipqad.

N ajtvd ht kdakxó p hpaxg st ap ktcip.

Egtvjció ajtvd sdc Fjxydit pa ktcitgd fjé bpht Etsgd tgp pfjéa, n fjé
gtipqad n fjé bdcd igpíp. P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta ktcitgd:

-Éhit th jc upbdhd ixitgtgd, fjt wp bjrwdh síph fjt pcsp edg thip Bpcrwp st
Pgpvóc tchtñpcsd jc gtipqad st Btaxhtcsgp, axqtgipsp edg ta upbdhd sdc
Vpxutgdh, fjt th jcp st aph btydgth n báh qxtc gtegthtcipsph wxhidgxph fjt
st bjrwdh pñdh p thip epgit tc thit gtxcd ht wpc kxhid. Igpt phxbxhbd
rdchxvd jc bdcd st ap báh gpgp wpqxaxsps fjt ht kxd tcigt bdcdh, cx ht
xbpvxcó tcigt wdbqgth, edgfjt hx at egtvjcipc pavd, thiá pitcid p ad fjt at
egtvjcipc n ajtvd hpaip hdqgt adh wdbqgdh st hj pbd, n, aatvácsdhtat pa
dísd, at sxrt ap gthejthip st ad fjt at egtvjcipc, n bptht Etsgd ap strapgp
ajtvd; n st aph rdhph ephpsph sxrt bjrwd báh fjt st aph fjt thiác edg
ktcxg; n, pjcfjt cd idsph ktrth prxtgip tc idsph, tc aph báh cd ntggp, st
bdsd fjt cdh wprt rgttg fjt ixtct ta sxpqad tc ta rjtged. Sdh gtpath aatkp
edg rpsp egtvjcip, hx th fjt ta bdcd gthedcst; fjxtgd strxg, hx gthedcst ta
pbd edg éa, sthejéh st wpqtgat wpqapsd pa dísd; n phí, ht rgtt fjt ta ipa
bptht Etsgd thip gxfjíhxbd; n th wdbqgt vpapcit, rdbd sxrtc tc Xipaxp n qdc
rdbepñd, n spht ap btydg kxsp sta bjcsd; wpqap báh fjt htxh n qtqt báh fjt
sdrt, idsd p rdhip st hj atcvjp n st hj bdcd n st hj gtipqad.

Tc thid, kdakxó bptht Etsgd, n tc jcp rpggtip ktcíp ta gtipqad, n ta bdcd,
vgpcst n hxc rdap, rdc aph edhpstgph st uxtaigd, etgd cd st bpap rpgp; n,
petcph at kxd sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd at egtvjció:

-Sívpbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg psxkxcd: ¿fjé etyt exaapbd? ¿Fjé wp st htg st
cdhdigdh?. N ktp pfjí bxh sdh gtpath.

N bpcsó p Hpcrwd fjt ht adh sxtht p bptht Etsgd, ta rjpa gthedcsxó edg ta
bdcd, n sxyd:

-Htñdg, thit pcxbpa cd gthedcst cx sp cdixrxp st aph rdhph fjt thiác edg
ktcxg; st aph ephpsph hpqt pavd, n st aph egthtcith, pavúc ipcid.

-¡Kdid p Gjh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cd sé nd jc pgsxit edgfjt bt sxvpc ad fjt edg
bí wp ephpsd!; edgfjt, ¿fjxéc ad ejtst hpqtg btydg fjt nd bthbd? N epvpg nd
edgfjt bt sxvpc ad fjt hé, htgíp jcp vgpc ctrtsps; etgd, ejth hpqt aph
rdhph egthtcith, wt pfjí bxh sdh gtpath, n sívpbt ta htñdg bdcíhxbd fjé
wprt pwdgp bx bjytg Itgthp Epcop, n tc fjé ht tcigtixtct.

Cd fjxhd idbpg bptht Etsgd ta sxctgd, sxrxtcsd:

-Cd fjxtgd gtrtqxg pstapcipsdh adh egtbxdh, hxc fjt wpnpc egtrtsxsd adh
htgkxrxdh.

N, spcsd rdc ap bpcd stgtrwp sdh vdaeth hdqgt ta wdbqgd xofjxtgsd, tc jc
qgxcrd ht at ejhd ta bdcd tc éa, n, aatvpcsd ap qdrp pa dísd, spqp sxtcit
rdc sxtcit bjn pegxthp; n, wpqxtcsd wtrwd thit pstbác edg theprxd st jc
rgtsd, st digd qgxcrd ht ejhd tc ta hjtad, n pa ejcid, rdc vgpcsíhxbp
egxthp, ht ujt bptht Etsgd p edctg st gdsxaaph pcit sdc Fjxydit, n,
pqgpoácsdat aph extgcph, sxyd:

-Thiph extgcph pqgpod, qxtc phí rdbd hx pqgpopgp aph sdh rdajcph st
Wégrjath, ¡dw gthjrxipsdg xchxvct st ap np ejthip tc dakxsd pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp!; ¡dw cd ypbáh rdbd ht stqt papqpsd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, ácxbd st adh sthbpnpsdh, pggxbd st adh fjt kpc p rptg, qgpod st adh
rpísdh, qárjad n rdchjtad st idsdh adh sthsxrwpsdh!

Fjtsó ephbpsd sdc Fjxydit, pqhdgid Hpcrwd, hjhetchd ta egxbd, piócxid ta
epyt, pqdqpsd ta sta gtqjocd, rdcujhd ta ktcitgd, n, uxcpabtcit, thepcipsdh
idsdh adh fjt dntgdc aph gpodcth sta ixitgtgd, ta rjpa egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-N iú, ¡dw qjtc Hpcrwd Epcop!, ta btydg thrjstgd n sta btydg rpqpaatgd sta
bjcsd, paévgpit, fjt ij qjtcp bjytg Itgthp thiá qjtcp, n éhip th ap wdgp tc
fjt taap thiá gphigxaapcsd jcp axqgp st axcd, n, edg báh htñph, ixtct p hj
apsd xofjxtgsd jc ypggd sthqdrpsd fjt rpqt jc qjtc edgfjé st kxcd, rdc fjt
ht tcigtixtct tc hj igpqpyd.

-Thd rgtd nd bjn qxtc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt th taap jcp
qxtcpktcijgpsp, n, p cd htg rtadhp, cd ap igdrpgp nd edg ap vxvpcip
Pcspcsdcp, fjt, htvúc bx htñdg, ujt jcp bjytg bjn rpqpa n bjn st egd; n th
bx Itgthp st pfjtaaph fjt cd ht stypc bpa ephpg, pjcfjt htp p rdhip st hjh
wtgtstgdh.

-Pwdgp sxvd -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ta fjt att bjrwd n pcsp
bjrwd, ktt bjrwd n hpqt bjrwd. Sxvd thid edgfjt, ¿fjé etghjphxóc ujtgp
qphipcit epgp etghjpsxgbt fjt wpn bdcdh tc ta bjcsd fjt psxkxctc, rdbd ad
wt kxhid pwdgp edg bxh egdexdh dydh? Edgfjt nd hdn ta bthbd sdc Fjxydit st
ap Bpcrwp fjt thit qjtc pcxbpa wp sxrwd, ejthid fjt ht wp thitcsxsd pavúc
ipcid tc bxh papqpcoph; etgd rdbdfjxtgp fjt nd bt htp, sdn vgprxph pa
rxtad, fjt bt sdió st jc ácxbd qapcsd n rdbephxkd, xcraxcpsd hxtbegt p
wprtg qxtc p idsdh, n bpa p cxcvjcd.

-Hx nd ijkxtgp sxctgdh -sxyd ta epyt-, egtvjcipgp pa htñdg bdcd fjé bt wp
st hjrtstg tc ap etgtvgxcprxóc fjt aatkd.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó bptht Etsgd, fjt np ht wpqíp atkpcipsd st adh exth st
sdc Fjxydit:

-Np wt sxrwd fjt thip qthitojtap cd gthedcst p ad edg ktcxg; fjt hx
gthedcsxtgp, cd xbedgipgp cd wpqtg sxctgdh; fjt, edg htgkxrxd sta htñdg sdc
Fjxydit, fjt thiá egthtcit, stypgp nd idsdh adh xcitgthth sta bjcsd. N
pvdgp, edgfjt ht ad stqd, n edg spgat vjhid, fjxtgd pgbpg bx gtipqad n spg
eaprtg p rjpcidh thiác tc ap ktcip, hxc epvp pavjcp.

Dntcsd ad rjpa ta ktcitgd, patvgt hdqgtbpctgp, htñpaó ta ajvpg sdcst ht
edsíp edctg ta gtipqad, fjt tc jc ejcid ujt wtrwd.

Sdc Fjxydit cd thipqp bjn rdcitcid rdc aph psxkxcpcoph sta bdcd, edg
epgtrtgat cd htg p egdeóhxid fjt jc bdcd psxkxcpht, cx aph st edg ktcxg, cx
aph ephpsph rdhph; n phí, tc ipcid fjt bptht Etsgd prdbdspqp ta gtipqad, ht
gtixgó sdc Fjxydit rdc Hpcrwd p jc gxcróc st ap rpqpaatgxop, sdcst, hxc htg
dísdh st cpsxt, at sxyd:

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd, nd wt rdchxstgpsd qxtc ap thigpñp wpqxaxsps sthit bdcd, n
wpaad edg bx rjtcip fjt hxc sjsp thit bptht Etsgd, hj pbd, stqt st itctg
wtrwd eprid, iárxid d thegthd, rdc ta stbdcxd.

-Hx ta epixd th thethd n sta stbdcxd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, hxc sjsp stqt st htg
bjn hjrxd epixd; etgd, ¿st fjé egdktrwd at th pa ipa bptht Etsgd itctg thdh
epixdh?

-Cd bt tcixtcsth, Hpcrwd: cd fjxtgd strxg hxcd fjt stqt st itctg wtrwd
pavúc rdcrxtgid rdc ta stbdcxd st fjt xcujcsp thp wpqxaxsps tc ta bdcd, rdc
fjt vpct st rdbtg, n sthejéh fjt thié gxrd at spgá hj pabp, fjt th ad fjt
thit jcxktghpa tctbxvd egtitcst. N wártbt rgttg thid ta ktg fjt ta bdcd cd
gthedcst hxcd p aph rdhph ephpsph d egthtcith, n ap hpqxsjgíp sta sxpqad cd
ht ejtst thitcstg p báh, fjt aph edg ktcxg cd aph hpqt hx cd th edg
rdcytijgph, n cd idsph ktrth; fjt p hdad Sxdh thiá gthtgkpsd rdcdrtg adh
ixtbedh n adh bdbtcidh, n epgp Éa cd wpn ephpsd cx edgktcxg, fjt idsd th
egthtcit. N, hxtcsd thid phí, rdbd ad th, thiá rapgd fjt thit bdcd wpqap
rdc ta thixad sta sxpqad; n thidn bpgpkxaapsd róbd cd at wpc prjhpsd pa
Hpcid Duxrxd, n tmpbxcásdat n hprásdat st rjpyd tc kxgijs st fjxéc psxkxcp;
edgfjt rxtgid thiá fjt thit bdcd cd th phigóadvd, cx hj pbd cx éa paopc, cx
hpqtc paopg, thiph uxvjgph fjt aapbpc yjsxrxpgxph, fjt ipcid pwdgp ht jhpc
tc Thepñp, fjt cd wpn bjytgrxaap, cx epyt, cx opepitgd st kxtyd fjt cd
egthjbp st paopg jcp uxvjgp, rdbd hx ujtgp jcp hdip st cpxeth sta hjtad,
trwpcsd p etgstg rdc hjh btcixgph t xvcdgpcrxph ap ktgsps bpgpkxaadhp st ap
rxtcrxp. St jcp htñdgp hé nd fjt egtvjció p jcd sthidh uxvjgtgdh fjt hx jcp
etggxaap st upasp etfjtñp, fjt itcíp, hx ht tbegtñpgíp n epgxgíp, n rjácidh
n st fjé rdadg htgípc adh etggdh fjt epgxtht. P ad fjt ta htñdg yjsxrxpgxd,
sthejéh st wpqtg paopsd ap uxvjgp, gthedcsxó fjt ap etggxrp ht tbegtñpgíp,
n epgxgíp igth etggxrdh, ta jcd ktgst, ta digd tcrpgcpsd n ta digd st
btorap, rdc ipa rdcsxrxóc fjt ap ipa etggp ht rjqgxtht tcigt aph dcrt n
sdrt sta síp, d st ap cdrwt, n fjt ujtht tc ajcth d tc háqpsd; n ad fjt
hjrtsxó ujt fjt st paaí p sdh síph ht bdgíp ap etggp st pwíip, n ta htñdg
atkpcipsdg fjtsó prgtsxipsd tc ta ajvpg edg prtgipsíhxbd yjsxrxpgxd, rdbd
ad fjtspc idsdh d adh báh atkpcipsdgth.

-Rdc idsd thd, fjtggíp -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt kjthigp btgrts sxytht p bptht
Etsgd egtvjcipht p hj bdcd hx th ktgsps ad fjt p kjthigp btgrts at ephó tc
ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh; fjt nd epgp bí itcvd, rdc etgsóc st kjthigp btgrts,
fjt idsd ujt tbqtatrd n btcixgp, d edg ad btcdh, rdhph hdñpsph.

-Idsd edsgíp htg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, etgd nd wpgé ad fjt bt prdchtyph,
ejthid fjt bt wp st fjtspg jc cd hé fjé st thrgúejad.

Thipcsd tc thid, aatvó bptht Etsgd p qjhrpg p sdc Fjxydit n strxgat fjt np
thipqp tc dgstc ta gtipqad; fjt hj btgrts kxcxtht p ktgat, edgfjt ad
btgtríp. Sdc Fjxydit at rdbjcxró hj etchpbxtcid, n at gdvó egtvjcipht ajtvd
p hj bdcd at sxytht hx rxtgiph rdhph fjt wpqíp ephpsd tc ap rjtkp st
Bdcithxcdh wpqípc hxsd hdñpsph d ktgspstgph; edgfjt p éa at epgtríp fjt
itcípc st idsd. P ad fjt bptht Etsgd, hxc gthedcstg epapqgp, kdakxó p igptg
ta bdcd, n, ejthid stapcit st sdc Fjxydit n st Hpcrwd, sxyd:

-Bxgps, htñdg bdcd, fjt thit rpqpaatgd fjxtgt hpqtg hx rxtgiph rdhph fjt at
ephpgdc tc jcp rjtkp aapbpsp st Bdcithxcdh, hx ujtgdc upahph d ktgspstgph.

N, wprxécsdat ap prdhijbqgpsp htñpa, ta bdcd ht at hjqxó tc ta wdbqgd
xofjxtgsd, n, wpqaácsdat, pa epgtrtg, tc ta dísd, sxyd ajtvd bptht Etsgd:

-Ta bdcd sxrt fjt epgit st aph rdhph fjt kjthp btgrts kxd, d ephó, tc ap
sxrwp rjtkp hdc upahph, n epgit ktgxhíbxath; n fjt thid th ad fjt hpqt, n
cd digp rdhp, tc rjpcid p thip egtvjcip; n fjt hx kjthp btgrts fjxhxtgt
hpqtg báh, fjt ta kxtgcth ktcxstgd gthedcstgá p idsd ad fjt ht at
egtvjcipgt, fjt edg pwdgp ht at wp prpqpsd ap kxgijs, fjt cd at ktcsgá
wphip ta kxtgcth, rdbd sxrwd ixtct.

-¿Cd ad stríp nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt cd ht bt edsíp phtcipg fjt idsd ad fjt
kjthp btgrts, htñdg bíd, wp sxrwd st adh prdcitrxbxtcidh st ap rjtkp tgp
ktgsps, cx pjc ap bxips?

-Adh hjrthdh ad sxgác, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; fjt ta ixtbed,
sthrjqgxsdg st idsph aph rdhph, cd ht styp cxcvjcp fjt cd aph hpfjt p ap
ajo sta hda, pjcfjt thié thrdcsxsp tc adh htcdh st ap ixtggp. N, edg wdgp,
qphit thid, n kábdcdh p ktg ta gtipqad sta qjtc bptht Etsgd, fjt epgp bí
itcvd fjt stqt st itctg pavjcp cdktsps.

-¿Róbd pavjcp? -gthedcsxó bptht Etsgd-: hthtcip bxa tcrxtggp tc hí thit bx
gtipqad; sívdat p kjthp btgrts, bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt th jcp st aph
rdhph báh st ktg fjt wdn ixtct ta bjcsd, n detgxqjh rgtsxit, ti cdc ktgqxh;
n bpcdh p apqdg, fjt ht wprt ipgst n itctbdh bjrwd fjt wprtg n fjt strxg n
fjt bdhigpg.

Dqtstrxégdcat sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, n kxcxtgdc sdcst np thipqp ta gtipqad
ejthid n sthrjqxtgid, aatcd edg idsph epgith st rpcstaxaaph st rtgp
tcrtcsxsph, fjt at wprípc kxhidhd n gtheapcstrxtcit. Tc aatvpcsd, ht btixó
bptht Etsgd stcigd séa, fjt tgp ta fjt wpqíp st bpctypg aph uxvjgph sta
pgixuxrxd, n ujtgp ht ejhd jc bjrwprwd, rgxpsd sta bptht Etsgd, epgp htgkxg
st xciégegtit n strapgpsdg st adh bxhitgxdh sta ipa gtipqad: itcíp jcp
kpgxaap tc ap bpcd, rdc fjt htñpapqp aph uxvjgph fjt hpaípc.

Ejthidh, ejth, idsdh rjpcidh wpqíp tc ap ktcip, n pavjcdh tc ext, ugdcitgd
sta gtipqad, n prdbdspsdh sdc Fjxydit, Hpcrwd, ta epyt n ta egxbd tc adh
btydgth ajvpgth, ta igjypbác rdbtcoó p strxg ad fjt dxgá n ktgá ta fjt at
dntgt d kxtgt ta rpeíijad hxvjxtcit.





Rpeíijad MMKX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap vgprxdhp pktcijgp sta ixitgtgd, rdc
digph rdhph tc ktgsps wpgid qjtcph


Rpaapgdc idsdh, ixgxdh n igdnpcdh; fjxtgd strxg, etcsxtcith thipqpc idsdh
adh fjt ta gtipqad bxgpqpc st ap qdrp sta strapgpsdg st hjh bpgpkxaaph,
rjpcsd ht dntgdc hdcpg tc ta gtipqad rpcixsps st pipqpath n igdbetiph, n
sxhepgpght bjrwp pgixaatgíp, rjnd gjbdg ephó tc ixtbed qgtkt, n ajtvd paoó
ap kdo ta bjrwprwd, n sxyd:

-Thip ktgspstgp wxhidgxp fjt pfjí p kjthph btgrtsth ht gtegthtcip th hprpsp
pa ext st ap atigp st aph rdgócxrph ugpcrthph n st adh gdbpcrth thepñdath
fjt pcspc tc qdrp st aph vtcith, n st adh bjrwprwdh, edg thph rpaath. Igpip
st ap axqtgips fjt sxd ta htñdg sdc Vpxutgdh p hj thedhp Btaxhtcsgp, fjt
thipqp rpjixkp tc Thepñp, tc edstg st bdgdh, tc ap rxjsps st Hpchjtñp, fjt
phí ht aapbpqp tcidcrth ap fjt wdn ht aapbp Opgpvdop; n ktpc kjthph
btgrtsth paaí róbd thiá yjvpcsd p aph ipqaph sdc Vpxutgdh, htvúc pfjtaad
fjt ht rpcip:

   Yjvpcsd thiá p aph ipqaph sdc Vpxutgdh,
   fjt np st Btaxhtcsgp thiá dakxspsd.

N pfjta etghdcpyt fjt paaí phdbp, rdc rdgdcp tc ap rpqtop n rteigd tc aph
bpcdh, th ta tbetgpsdg Rpgadbpvcd, epsgt ejipixkd st ap ipa Btaxhtcsgp, ta
rjpa, bdwícd st ktg ta drxd n sthrjxsd st hj ntgcd, at hpat p gtñxg; n
pskxtgipc rdc ap ktwtbtcrxp n pwícrd fjt at gxñt, fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt at
fjxtgt spg rdc ta rteigd btsxp sdrtcp st rdhrdggdcth, n pjc wpn pjidgth fjt
sxrtc fjt ht adh sxd, n bjn qxtc spsdh; n, sthejéh st wpqtgat sxrwd bjrwph
rdhph prtgrp sta etaxvgd fjt rdggíp hj wdcgp tc cd egdrjgpg ap axqtgips st
hj thedhp, sxrtc fjt at sxyd:

"Wpgid dh wt sxrwd: bxgpsad".

Bxgtc kjthigph btgrtsth ipbqxéc róbd ta tbetgpsdg kjtakt aph thepasph n
styp sthetrwpsd p sdc Vpxutgdh, ta rjpa np ktc rdbd pggdyp, xbeprxtcit st
ap róatgp, atydh st hí ta ipqatgd n aph ipqaph, n exst pegxthp aph pgbph, n
p sdc Gdasác, hj egxbd, exst egthipsp hj thepsp Sjgxcspcp, n róbd sdc
Gdasác cd ht ap fjxtgt egthipg, dugtrxécsdat hj rdbepñíp tc ap sxuírxa
tbegthp tc fjt ht edct; etgd ta kpatgdhd tcdypsd cd ad fjxtgt prteipg;
pcith, sxrt fjt éa hdad th qphipcit epgp hprpg p hj thedhp, hx qxtc
thijkxtht btixsp tc ta báh wdcsd rtcigd st ap ixtggp; n, rdc thid, ht tcigp
p pgbpg, epgp edctght ajtvd tc rpbxcd. Kjtakpc kjthigph btgrtsth adh dydh p
pfjtaap idggt fjt paaí epgtrt, fjt ht egthjedct fjt th jcp st aph idggth
sta paráopg st Opgpvdop, fjt pwdgp aapbpc ap Payputgíp; n pfjtaap spbp fjt
tc pfjta qparóc epgtrt, kthixsp p ad bdgd, th ap hxc epg Btaxhtcsgp, fjt
sthst paaí bjrwph ktrth ht edcíp p bxgpg ta rpbxcd st Ugpcrxp, n, ejthip ap
xbpvxcprxóc tc Epgíh n tc hj thedhd, ht rdchdapqp tc hj rpjixktgxd. Bxgtc
ipbqxéc jc cjtkd rphd fjt pwdgp hjrtst, fjxoá cd kxhid ypbáh. ¿Cd kttc
pfjta bdgd fjt rpaapcsxrd n ephxid p ephd, ejthid ta stsd tc ap qdrp, ht
aatvp edg aph thepasph st Btaxhtcsgp? Ejth bxgtc róbd ap sp jc qthd tc
bxips st adh apqxdh, n ap egxthp fjt taap ht sp p thrjexg, n p axbexághtadh
rdc ap qapcrp bpcvp st hj rpbxhp, n róbd ht apbtcip, n ht pggpcrp st ethpg
hjh wtgbdhdh rpqtaadh, rdbd hx taadh ijkxtgpc ap rjaep sta bpatuxrxd. Bxgtc
ipbqxéc róbd pfjta vgpkt bdgd fjt thiá tc pfjtaadh rdggtsdgth th ta gtn
Bpghxaxd st Hpchjtñp; ta rjpa, edg wpqtg kxhid ap xchdatcrxp sta bdgd,
ejthid fjt tgp jc epgxtcit n vgpc egxkpsd hjnd, at bpcsó ajtvd egtcstg, n
fjt at stc sdrxtcidh podith, aatkácsdat edg aph rpaath prdhijbqgpsph st ap
rxjsps,

   rdc rwxaapsdgth stapcit
   n tckpgpbxtcid stigáh;

n ktxh pfjí sdcst hpatc p tytrjipg ap htcitcrxp, pjc qxtc petcph cd
wpqxtcsd hxsd ejthip tc tytrjrxóc ap rjaep; edgfjt tcigt bdgdh cd wpn
"igphapsd p ap epgit", cx "p egjtqp n thiéht", rdbd tcigt cdhdigdh.

-Cxñd, cxñd -sxyd rdc kdo paip p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, htvjxs kjthigp
wxhidgxp aíctp gtrip, n cd dh btiáxh tc aph rjgkph d igpchktghpath; fjt,
epgp hprpg jcp ktgsps tc axbexd, btcthitg hdc bjrwph egjtqph n gtegjtqph.

Ipbqxéc sxyd bptht Etsgd sthst stcigd:

-Bjrwprwd, cd it btiph tc sxqjydh, hxcd wpo ad fjt tht htñdg it bpcsp, fjt
htgá ad báh prtgipsd; hxvjt ij rpcid aapcd, n cd it btiph tc rdcigpejcidh,
fjt ht hjtatc fjtqgpg st hdixath.

-Nd ad wpgé phí -gthedcsxó ta bjrwprwd; n egdhxvjxó, sxrxtcsd-: Thip uxvjgp
fjt pfjí epgtrt p rpqpaad, rjqxtgip rdc jcp rpep vphrdcp, th ap bthbp st
sdc Vpxutgdh, p fjxtc hj thedhp, np ktcvpsp sta pigtkxbxtcid sta tcpbdgpsd
bdgd, rdc btydg n báh hdhtvpsd htbqapcit, ht wp ejthid p adh bxgpsdgth st
ap idggt, n wpqap rdc hj thedhd, rgtntcsd fjt th pavúc ephpytgd, rdc fjxtc
ephó idsph pfjtaaph gpodcth n rdadfjxdh st pfjta gdbpcrt fjt sxrtc:

   Rpqpaatgd, hx p Ugpcrxp xsth,
   edg Vpxutgdh egtvjcips;

aph rjpath cd sxvd nd pwdgp, edgfjt st ap egdaxyxsps ht hjtat tcvtcsgpg ta
uphixsxd; qphip ktg róbd sdc Vpxutgdh ht sthrjqgt, n fjt edg adh pstbpcth
patvgth fjt Btaxhtcsgp wprt ht cdh sp p tcitcstg fjt taap at wp rdcdrxsd, n
báh pwdgp fjt kttbdh ht sthrjtavp sta qparóc, epgp edctght tc aph pcrph sta
rpqpaad st hj qjtc thedhd. Bph, ¡pn, hxc ktcijgp!, fjt ht at wp phxsd jcp
ejcip sta upastaaíc st jcd st adh wxtggdh sta qparóc, n thiá etcsxtcit tc
ta pxgt, hxc edstg aatvpg pa hjtad. Etgd ktxh róbd ta expsdhd rxtad hdrdggt
tc aph bpndgth ctrthxspsth, ejth aatvp sdc Vpxutgdh, n, hxc bxgpg hx ht
gphvpgá d cd ta gxrd upastaaíc, pht staap, n bpa hj vgpsd ap wprt qpypg pa
hjtad, n ajtvd, st jc qgxcrd, ap edct hdqgt aph pcrph st hj rpqpaad, p
wdgrpypsph rdbd wdbqgt, n ap bpcsp fjt ht itcvp ujtgitbtcit n at trwt adh
qgpodh edg aph thepasph, st bdsd fjt adh rgjrt tc ta etrwd, edgfjt cd ht
rpxvp, p rpjhp fjt cd thipqp ap htñdgp Btaxhtcsgp prdhijbqgpsp p htbtypcith
rpqpaatgíph. Ktxh ipbqxéc róbd adh gtaxcrwdh sta rpqpaad spc htñpath fjt kp
rdcitcid rdc ap kpaxtcit n wtgbdhp rpgvp fjt aatkp tc hj htñdg n tc hj
htñdgp. Ktxh róbd kjtaktc aph thepasph n hpatc st ap rxjsps, n patvgth n
gtvdrxypsdh idbpc st Epgíh ap kíp. ¡Kpxh tc epo, dw epg hxc epg st
ktgspstgdh pbpcith! ¡Aatvjéxh p hpakpbtcid p kjthigp sthtpsp epigxp, hxc
fjt ap udgijcp edcvp thidgqd tc kjthigd utaxrt kxpyt! ¡Adh dydh st kjthigdh
pbxvdh n epgxtcith dh ktpc vdopg tc epo igpcfjxap adh síph, fjt adh st
Céhidg htpc, fjt dh fjtspc st ap kxsp!

Pfjí paoó digp kto ap kdo bptht Etsgd, n sxyd:

-Aapctop, bjrwprwd; cd it tcrjbqgth, fjt idsp putriprxóc th bpap.

Cd gthedcsxó cpsp ta xciégegtit; pcith, egdhxvjxó, sxrxtcsd:

-Cd upaipgdc pavjcdh drxdhdh dydh, fjt ad hjtatc ktg idsd, fjt cd kxthtc ap
qpypsp n ap hjqxsp st Btaxhtcsgp, st fjxtc sxtgdc cdixrxp pa gtn Bpghxaxd,
ta rjpa bpcsó ajtvd idrpg pa pgbp; n bxgtc rdc fjé egxthp, fjt np ap rxjsps
ht wjcst rdc ta hdc st aph rpbepcph fjt tc idsph aph idggth st aph
btofjxiph hjtcpc.

-¡Thd cd! -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-: tc thid st aph rpbepcph pcsp bjn
xbegdexd bptht Etsgd, edgfjt tcigt bdgdh cd ht jhpc rpbepcph, hxcd
pipqpath, n jc véctgd st sjaopxcph fjt epgtrtc cjthigph rwxgxbíph; n thid
st hdcpg rpbepcph tc Hpchjtñp hxc sjsp fjt th jc vgpc sxhepgpit.

Ad rjpa dísd edg bptht Etsgd, rthó ta idrpg n sxyd:

-Cd bxgt kjthp btgrts tc cxñtgíph, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, cx fjxtgp aatkpg aph
rdhph ipc edg ta rpqd fjt cd ht at wpaat. ¿Cd ht gtegthtcipc edg pwí, rphx
st dgsxcpgxd, bxa rdbtsxph aatcph st bxa xbegdextspsth n sxhepgpith, n, rdc
idsd thd, rdggtc utaxríhxbpbtcit hj rpggtgp, n ht thrjrwpc cd hóad rdc
peapjhd, hxcd rdc psbxgprxóc n idsd? Egdhxvjt, bjrwprwd, n styp strxg; fjt,
rdbd nd aatct bx ipatvd, hx fjxtgt gtegthtcit báh xbegdextspsth fjt ixtct
áidbdh ta hda.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

N ta bjrwprwd sxyd:

-Bxgtc rjácip n rjác ajrxsp rpqpaatgíp hpat st ap rxjsps tc hxvjxbxtcid st
adh sdh rpióaxrdh pbpcith, rjáciph igdbetiph fjt hjtcpc, rjáciph sjaopxcph
fjt idrpc n rjácidh pipqpath n pipbqdgth fjt gtijbqpc. Iébdbt fjt adh wpc
st parpcopg, n adh wpc st kdaktg pipsdh p ap rdap st hj bxhbd rpqpaad, fjt
htgíp jc wdggtcsd thetiárjad.

Kxtcsd n dntcsd, ejth, ipcip bdgxhbp n ipcid thigjtcsd sdc Fjxydit,
epgtrxóat htg qxtc spg pnjsp p adh fjt wjípc; n, atkpciácsdht tc ext, tc
kdo paip, sxyd:

-Cd rdchtcixgé nd tc bxh síph n tc bx egthtcrxp ht at wpvp hjetgrwtgíp p
ipc upbdhd rpqpaatgd n p ipc pigtkxsd tcpbdgpsd rdbd sdc Vpxutgdh.
¡Stitctdh, bpa cprxsp rpcpaap; cd at hxváxh cx etghxváxh; hx cd, rdcbxvd
hdxh tc ap qpipaap!

N, sxrxtcsd n wprxtcsd, sthtckpxcó ap thepsp, n st jc qgxcrd ht ejhd yjcid
pa gtipqad, n, rdc prtatgpsp n cjcrp kxhip ujgxp, rdbtcoó p aadktg
rjrwxaapsph hdqgt ap ixitgtgp bdgxhbp, stggxqpcsd p jcdh, sthrpqtopcsd p
digdh, thigdetpcsd p éhit, sthigdopcsd p pfjéa, n, tcigt digdh bjrwdh, ixgó
jc paixqpyd ipa, fjt hx bptht Etsgd cd ht pqpyp, ht tcrdvt n pvpopep, at
rtgrtcpgp ap rpqtop rdc báh uprxaxsps fjt hx ujtgp wtrwp st bphp st
bpopeác. Spqp kdrth bptht Etsgd, sxrxtcsd:

-Stiécvpht kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, n pskxtgip fjt thidh fjt
stggxqp, sthigdop n bpip cd hdc ktgspstgdh bdgdh, hxcd jcph uxvjgxaaph st
ephip. ¡Bxgt, etrpsdg st bí, fjt bt sthigjnt n trwp p etgstg idsp bx
wprxtcsp!

Bph cd edg thid stypqp st btcjstpg sdc Fjxydit rjrwxaapsph, bpcsdqath,
ipydh n gtkthth rdbd aadkxsdh. Uxcpabtcit, tc btcdh st sdh rgtsdh sxd rdc
idsd ta gtipqad tc ta hjtad, wtrwph etspodh n sthbtcjopsph idsph hjh
ypgrxph n uxvjgph: ta gtn Bpghxaxd, bpa wtgxsd, n ta tbetgpsdg Rpgadbpvcd,
epgixsp ap rdgdcp n ap rpqtop tc sdh epgith. Paqdgdióht ta htcpsd st adh
dntcith, wjnóht ta bdcd edg adh itypsdh st ap ktcipcp, itbxó ta egxbd,
prdqpgsóht ta epyt, n wphip ta bthbd Hpcrwd Epcop ijkd epkdg vgpcsíhxbd,
edgfjt, rdbd éa yjgó sthejéh st ephpsp ap qdggphrp, ypbáh wpqíp kxhid p hj
htñdg rdc ipc sthpixcpsp róatgp. Wtrwd, ejth, ta vtctgpa sthigdod sta
gtipqad, hdhtvóht jc edrd sdc Fjxydit n sxyd:

-Fjxhxtgp nd itctg pfjí stapcit tc thit ejcid idsdh pfjtaadh fjt cd rgttc,
cx fjxtgtc rgttg, st rjácid egdktrwd htpc tc ta bjcsd adh rpqpaatgdh
pcspcith: bxgtc, hx cd bt wpaapgp nd pfjí egthtcit, fjé ujtgp sta qjtc sdc
Vpxutgdh n st ap wtgbdhp Btaxhtcsgp; p qjtc htvjgd fjt éhip ujtgp np ap
wdgp fjt adh wjqxtgpc parpcopsd thidh rpcth, n ath wjqxtgpc wtrwd pavúc
sthpvjxhpsd. Tc gthdajrxóc, ¡kxkp ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp hdqgt rjpciph rdhph
wdn kxktc tc ap ixtggp!

-¡Kxkpc tc wdgp qjtcp -sxyd p thip hpoóc rdc kdo tcutgbxop bptht Etsgd-, n
bjtgp nd, ejth hdn ipc sthsxrwpsd fjt ejtsd strxg rdc ta gtn sdc Gdsgxvd:

   Pntg ujx htñdg st Thepñp...
   n wdn cd itcvd jcp pabtcp
   fjt ejtsp strxg fjt th bíp!

Cd wp btsxp wdgp, cx pjc jc btsxpcd bdbtcid, fjt bt kx htñdg st gtnth n st
tbetgpsdgth, aatcph bxh rpqpaatgxoph n bxh rdugth n hprdh st xcuxcxidh
rpqpaadh n st xccjbtgpqath vpaph, n pvdgp bt ktd sthdapsd n pqpixsd, edqgt
n btcsxvd, n, hdqgt idsd, hxc bx bdcd, fjt p ut fjt egxbtgd fjt at kjtakp p
bx edstg bt wpc st hjspg adh sxtcith; n idsd edg ap ujgxp bpa rdchxstgpsp
sthit htñdg rpqpaatgd, st fjxtc ht sxrt fjt pbepgp ejexadh, n tcstgtop
ijtgidh, n wprt digph dqgph rpgxipixkph; n tc bí hdad wp ktcxsd p
upaipg hj xcitcrxóc vtctgdhp, fjt htpc qtcsxidh n papqpsdh adh rxtadh, paaá
sdcst ixtctc báh atkpcipsdh hjh phxtcidh. Tc uxc, ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit
Uxvjgp wpqíp st htg pfjta fjt wpqíp st sthuxvjgpg aph bíph.

Tcitgctrxóht Hpcrwd Epcop rdc aph gpodcth st bptht Etsgd, n síydat:

-Cd aadgth, bptht Etsgd, cx it apbtcith, fjt bt fjxtqgph ta rdgpoóc; edgfjt
it wpvd hpqtg fjt th bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit ipc rpióaxrd n thrgjejadhd
rgxhixpcd, fjt hx éa rpt tc ap rjtcip st fjt it wp wtrwd pavúc pvgpkxd, it
ad hpqgá n it ad fjtggá epvpg n hpixhuprtg rdc bjrwph ktcipyph.

-Rdc fjt bt epvpht ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit pavjcp epgit st aph wtrwjgph fjt bt
wp sthwtrwd, fjtspgíp rdcitcid, n hj btgrts phtvjgpgíp hj rdcrxtcrxp,
edgfjt cd ht ejtst hpakpg fjxtc ixtct ad pytcd rdcigp ap kdajcips st hj
sjtñd n cd ad gthixijnt.

-Phí th -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd wphip pwdgp nd cd hé fjt itcvp cpsp
kjthigd, bptht Etsgd.

-¿Róbd cd? -gthedcsxó bptht Etsgd-; n thiph gtaxfjxph fjt thiác edg thit
sjgd n thiégxa hjtad, ¿fjxéc aph thepgrxó n pcxfjxaó, hxcd ap ujtgop
xcktcrxqat stht edstgdhd qgpod?, n ¿rúndh tgpc hjh rjtgedh hxcd bídh?, n
¿rdc fjxéc bt hjhitcipqp nd hxcd rdc taadh?

-Pwdgp prpqd st rgttg -sxyd p thit ejcid sdc Fjxydit- ad fjt digph bjrwph
ktrth wt rgtísd: fjt thidh tcrpcipsdgth fjt bt etghxvjtc cd wprtc hxcd
edctgbt aph uxvjgph rdbd taaph hdc stapcit st adh dydh, n ajtvd bt aph
bjspc n igjtrpc tc aph fjt taadh fjxtgtc. Gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit dh sxvd,
htñdgth fjt bt díh, fjt p bí bt epgtrxó idsd ad fjt pfjí wp ephpsd fjt
ephpqp pa ext st ap atigp: fjt Btaxhtcsgp tgp Btaxhtcsgp, sdc Vpxutgdh sdc
Vpxutgdh, Bpghxaxd Bpghxaxd, n Rpgadbpvcd Rpgadbpvcd: edg thd ht bt paitgó
ap róatgp, n, edg rjbeaxg rdc bx egduthxóc st rpqpaatgd pcspcit, fjxht spg
pnjsp n upkdg p adh fjt wjípc, n rdc thit qjtc egdeóhxid wxrt ad fjt wpqéxh
kxhid; hx bt wp hpaxsd pa gtkéh, cd th rjaep bíp, hxcd st adh bpadh fjt bt
etghxvjtc; n, rdc idsd thid, sthit bx ntggd, pjcfjt cd wp egdrtsxsd st
bpaxrxp, fjxtgd nd bxhbd rdcstcpgbt tc rdhiph: ktp bptht Etsgd ad fjt
fjxtgt edg aph uxvjgph sthwtrwph, fjt nd bt dugtord p epvághtad ajtvd, tc
qjtcp n rdggxtcit bdctsp rphitaapcp.

Xcraxcóhtat bptht Etsgd, sxrxécsdat:

-Cd thetgpqp nd btcdh st ap xcpjsxip rgxhixpcsps sta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit
st ap Bpcrwp, ktgspstgd hdrdggtsdg n pbepgd st idsdh adh ctrthxipsdh n
btcthitgdhdh kpvpbjcsdh; n pfjí ta htñdg ktcitgd n ta vgpc Hpcrwd htgác
btsxpctgdh n pegtrxpsdgth, tcigt kjthp btgrts n bí, st ad fjt kpatc d
edsípc kpatg aph np sthwtrwph uxvjgph.

Ta ktcitgd n Hpcrwd sxytgdc fjt phí ad wpgípc, n ajtvd bptht Etsgd paoó sta
hjtad, rdc ap rpqtop btcdh, pa gtn Bpghxaxd st Opgpvdop, n sxyd:

-Np ht ktt rjác xbedhxqat th kdaktg p thit gtn p hj htg egxbtgd; n phí, bt
epgtrt, hpakd btydg yjxrxd, fjt ht bt sé edg hj bjtgit, uxc n prpqpbxtcid
rjpigd gtpath n btsxd.

-¡Pstapcit! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Ejth edg thip pqtgijgp st pggxqp pqpyd -egdhxvjxó bptht Etsgd, idbpcsd tc
aph bpcdh pa epgixsd tbetgpsdg Rpgadbpvcd-, cd htgíp bjrwd fjt exsxtht nd
rxcrd gtpath n jc rjpgixaad.

-Cd th edrd -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Cx bjrwd -gteaxró ta ktcitgd-; bésxtht ap epgixsp n htñáatchtat rxcrd
gtpath.

-Séchtat idsdh rxcrd n rjpgixaad -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cd thiá tc jc
rjpgixaad báh p btcdh ap bdcip sthip cdipqat sthvgprxp; n prpqt egthid
bptht Etsgd, fjt ht wprt wdgp st rtcpg, n nd itcvd rxtgidh qpggjcidh st
wpbqgt.

-Edg thip uxvjgp -sxyd bptht Etsgd- fjt thiá hxc cpgxrth n jc dyd btcdh,
fjt th st ap wtgbdhp Btaxhtcsgp, fjxtgd, n bt edcvd tc ad yjhid, sdh gtpath
n sdrt bpgpktsíh.

-Pjc pwí htgíp ta sxpqad -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hx np cd thijkxtht Btaxhtcsgp
rdc hj thedhd, edg ad btcdh, tc ap gpnp st Ugpcrxp; edgfjt ta rpqpaad tc
fjt xqpc, p bí bt epgtrxó fjt pcith kdapqp fjt rdggíp; n phí, cd wpn epgp
fjé ktcstgbt p bí ta vpid edg axtqgt, egthtciácsdbt pfjí p Btaxhtcsgp
sthcpgxvpsp, thipcsd ap digp, hx kxtct p bpcd, pwdgp wdavácsdht tc Ugpcrxp
rdc hj thedhd p extgcp itcsxsp. Pnjst Sxdh rdc ad hjnd p rpsp jcd, htñdg
bptht Etsgd, n rpbxctbdh idsdh rdc ext aapcd n rdc xcitcrxóc hpcp. N
egdhxvp.

Bptht Etsgd, fjt kxd fjt sdc Fjxydit xofjxtgstpqp n fjt kdakíp p hj
egxbtg itbp, cd fjxhd fjt ht at thrpepht; n phí, at sxyd:

-Éhip cd stqt st htg Btaxhtcsgp, hxcd pavjcp st aph sdcrtaaph fjt ap
htgkípc; n phí, rdc hthtcip bpgpktsíh fjt bt stc edg taap fjtspgé rdcitcid
n qxtc epvpsd.

Sthip bpctgp ujt edcxtcsd egtrxd p digph bjrwph sthigdopsph uxvjgph, fjt
sthejéh adh bdstgpgdc adh sdh yjtrth ágqxigdh, rdc hpixhuprxóc st aph
epgith, fjt aatvpgdc p rjpgtcip gtpath n igth rjpgixaadh; n, pstbáh sthid,
fjt ajtvd ad sthtbqdahó Hpcrwd, exsxó bptht Etsgd sdh gtpath edg ta igpqpyd
st idbpg ta bdcd.

-Sáhtadh, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, cd epgp idbpg ta bdcd, hxcd ap bdcp; n
sdrxtcidh sxtgp nd pwdgp tc paqgxrxph p fjxtc bt sxytgp rdc rtgixsjbqgt fjt
ap htñdgp sdñp Btaxhtcsgp n ta htñdg sdc Vpxutgdh thipqpc np tc Ugpcrxp n
tcigt adh hjndh.

-Cxcvjcd cdh ad edsgá strxg btydg fjt bx bdcd -sxyd bptht Etsgd-, etgd cd
wpqgá sxpqad fjt pwdgp at idbt; pjcfjt xbpvxcd fjt ta rpgxñd n ap wpbqgt at
wpc st udgopg p fjt bt qjhfjt thip cdrwt, n pbpctrtgá Sxdh n ktgébdcdh.

Tc gthdajrxóc, ap qdggphrp sta gtipqad ht prpqó n idsdh rtcpgdc tc epo n tc
qjtcp rdbepñíp, p rdhip st sdc Fjxydit, fjt tgp axqtgpa tc idsd thigtbd.

Pcith fjt pbpctrxtht, ht ujt ta fjt aatkpqp aph apcoph n aph papqpgsph, n
np sthejéh st pbpctrxsd, ht kxcxtgdc p sthetsxg st sdc Fjxydit ta egxbd n
ta epyt: ta jcd, epgp kdaktght p hj ixtggp; n ta digd, p egdhtvjxg hj
rpbxcd, epgp pnjsp sta rjpa at sxd sdc Fjxydit jcp sdrtcp st gtpath. Bptht
Etsgd cd fjxhd kdaktg p tcigpg tc báh sxbth cx sxgtith rdc sdc Fjxydit, p
fjxtc éa rdcdríp bjn qxtc, n phí, bpsgjvó pcith fjt ta hda, n, rdvxtcsd aph
gtaxfjxph st hj gtipqad n p hj bdcd, ht ujt ipbqxéc p qjhrpg hjh pktcijgph.
Ta ktcitgd, fjt cd rdcdríp p sdc Fjxydit, ipc psbxgpsd at itcípc hjh
adrjgph rdbd hj axqtgpaxsps. Uxcpabtcit, Hpcrwd at epvó bjn qxtc, edg dgstc
st hj htñdg, n, sthexsxécsdht séa, rphx p aph drwd sta síp stypgdc ap ktcip
n ht ejhxtgdc tc rpbxcd, sdcst adh stypgtbdh xg; fjt phí rdckxtct epgp spg
ajvpg p rdcipg digph rdhph etgitctrxtcith p ap strapgprxóc sthip upbdhp
wxhidgxp.





Rpeíijad MMKXX. Sdcst ht sp rjtcip fjxécth tgpc bptht Etsgd n hj bdcd, rdc
ta bpa hjrthd fjt sdc Fjxydit ijkd tc ap pktcijgp sta gtqjocd, fjt cd ap
prpqó rdbd éa fjxhxtgp n rdbd ad itcíp etchpsd


Tcigp Rxst Wpbtit, rdgdcxhip sthip vgpcst wxhidgxp, rdc thiph epapqgph tc
thit rpeíijad: ''Yjgd rdbd rpióaxrd rgxhixpcd...''; p ad fjt hj igpsjridg
sxrt fjt ta yjgpg Rxst Wpbtit rdbd rpióaxrd rgxhixpcd, hxtcsd éa bdgd, rdbd
hxc sjsp ad tgp, cd fjxhd strxg digp rdhp hxcd fjt, phí rdbd ta rpióaxrd
rgxhixpcd rjpcsd yjgp, yjgp, d stqt yjgpg, ktgsps, n strxgap tc ad fjt
sxytgt, phí éa ap stríp, rdbd hx yjgpgp rdbd rgxhixpcd rpióaxrd, tc ad fjt
fjtgíp thrgxqxg st sdc Fjxydit, thetrxpabtcit tc strxg fjxéc tgp bptht
Etsgd, n fjxéc ta bdcd psxkxcd fjt igpíp psbxgpsdh idsdh pfjtaadh ejtqadh
rdc hjh psxkxcpcoph.

Sxrt, ejth, fjt qxtc ht prdgspgá, ta fjt wjqxtgt atísd ap egxbtgp epgit
sthip wxhidgxp, st pfjta Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit, p fjxtc, tcigt digdh vpatdith,
sxd axqtgips sdc Fjxydit tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp, qtctuxrxd fjt sthejéh at ujt bpa
pvgpstrxsd n etdg epvpsd st pfjtaap vtcit bpaxvcp n bpa prdhijbqgpsp. Thit
Vxcéh st Ephpbdcit, p fjxtc sdc Fjxydit aapbpqp Vxcthxaad st Epgpexaap, ujt
ta fjt wjgió p Hpcrwd Epcop ta gjrxd; fjt, edg cd wpqtght ejthid ta róbd cx
ta rjácsd tc ap egxbtgp epgit, edg rjaep st adh xbegthdgth, wp spsd tc fjé
tcitcstg p bjrwdh, fjt pigxqjípc p edrp btbdgxp sta pjidg ap upaip st
tbegtcip. Etgd, tc gthdajrxóc, Vxcéh at wjgió, thipcsd hdqgt éa sjgbxtcsd
Hpcrwd Epcop, jhpcsd st ap igpop n bdsd fjt jhó Qgjctad rjpcsd, thipcsd
Hprgxepcit hdqgt Paqgprp, at hpró ta rpqpaad st tcigt aph extgcph, n
sthejéh at rdqgó Hpcrwd, rdbd ht wp rdcipsd. Thit Vxcéh, ejth, itbtgdhd st
cd htg wpaapsd st ap yjhixrxp, fjt at qjhrpqp epgp rphixvpgat st hjh
xcuxcxiph qtaapfjtgíph n staxidh, fjt ujtgdc ipcidh n ipath, fjt éa bxhbd
rdbejhd jc vgpc kdajbtc rdciácsdadh, stitgbxcó ephpght pa gtxcd st Pgpvóc n
rjqgxght ta dyd xofjxtgsd, prdbdsácsdht pa duxrxd st ixitgtgd; fjt thid n
ta yjvpg st bpcdh ad hpqíp wprtg edg thigtbd.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt st jcdh rgxhixpcdh np axqgth fjt ktcípc st Qtgqtgíp
rdbegó pfjta bdcd, p fjxtc tchtñó fjt, tc wprxécsdat rxtgip htñpa, ht at
hjqxtht tc ta wdbqgd n at bjgbjgpht, d ad epgtrxtht, pa dísd. Wtrwd thid,
pcith fjt tcigpht tc ta ajvpg sdcst tcigpqp rdc hj gtipqad n bdcd, ht
xcudgbpqp tc ta ajvpg báh rtgrpcd, d st fjxtc éa btydg edsíp, fjé rdhph
epgixrjapgth wjqxthtc hjrtsxsd tc ta ipa ajvpg, n p fjé etghdcph; n,
aatkácsdaph qxtc tc ap btbdgxp, ad egxbtgd fjt wpríp tgp bdhigpg hj
gtipqad, ta rjpa jcph ktrth tgp st jcp wxhidgxp, n digph st digp; etgd
idsph patvgth n gtvdrxypsph n rdcdrxsph. Prpqpsp ap bjthigp, egdedcíp aph
wpqxaxspsth st hj bdcd, sxrxtcsd pa ejtqad fjt psxkxcpqp idsd ad ephpsd n
ad egthtcit; etgd fjt tc ad st edg ktcxg cd ht spqp bpñp. Edg ap gthejthip
st rpsp egtvjcip etsíp sdh gtpath, n st pavjcph wpríp qpgpid, htvúc idbpqp
ta ejahd p adh egtvjcipcith; n rdbd ipa kto aatvpqp p aph rphph st fjxtc éa
hpqíp adh hjrthdh st adh fjt tc taap bdgpqpc, pjcfjt cd at egtvjciphtc cpsp
edg cd epvpgat, éa wpríp ap htñp pa bdcd, n ajtvd stríp fjt at wpqíp sxrwd
ipa n ipa rdhp, fjt ktcíp st bdast rdc ad hjrtsxsd. Rdc thid rdqgpqp
rgésxid xctupqat, n pcsáqpcht idsdh igph éa. Digph ktrth, rdbd tgp ipc
sxhrgtid, gthedcsíp st bpctgp fjt aph gthejthiph ktcípc qxtc rdc aph
egtvjciph; n, rdbd cpsxt at pejgpqp cx pegtipqp p fjt sxytht róbd pstkxcpqp
hj bdcd, p idsdh wpríp bdcph, n aatcpqp hjh thfjtgdh.

Phí rdbd tcigó tc ap ktcip, rdcdrxó p sdc Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd, edg rjnd
rdcdrxbxtcid at ujt uárxa edctg tc psbxgprxóc p sdc Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd
Epcop, n p idsdh adh fjt tc taap thipqpc; etgd wjqxégpat st rdhipg rpgd hx
sdc Fjxydit qpypgp jc edrd báh ap bpcd rjpcsd rdgió ap rpqtop pa gtn
Bpghxaxd n sthigjnó idsp hj rpqpaatgíp, rdbd fjtsp sxrwd tc ta pcitrtstcit
rpeíijad.

Thid th ad fjt wpn fjt strxg st bptht Etsgd n st hj bdcd.

N, kdakxtcsd p sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, sxvd fjt, sthejéh st wpqtg hpaxsd
st ap ktcip, stitgbxcó st ktg egxbtgd aph gxqtgph sta gíd Tqgd n idsdh
pfjtaadh rdcidgcdh, pcith st tcigpg tc ap rxjsps st Opgpvdop, ejth at spqp
ixtbed epgp idsd ta bjrwd fjt upaipqp sthst paaí p aph yjhiph. Rdc thip
xcitcrxóc hxvjxó hj rpbxcd, edg ta rjpa pcsjkd sdh síph hxc prdcitrtgat
rdhp sxvcp st edctght tc thrgxijgp, wphip fjt pa itgrtgd, pa hjqxg st jcp
adbp, dnó jc vgpc gjbdg st pipbqdgth, st igdbetiph n pgrpqjrth. Pa
egxcrxexd etchó fjt pavúc itgrxd st hdaspsdh ephpqp edg pfjtaap epgit, n
edg ktgadh exró p Gdrxcpcit n hjqxó ap adbp pggxqp; n rjpcsd thijkd tc ap
rjbqgt, kxd pa ext staap, p hj epgtrtg, báh st sdrxtcidh wdbqgth pgbpsdh st
sxutgtcith hjtgith st pgbph, rdbd hx sxyéhtbdh apcodcth, qpaathiph,
epgithpcph, papqpgsph n exrph, n pavjcdh pgrpqjrth, n bjrwph gdstaph. Qpyó
sta gtrjthid n prtgróht pa thrjpsgóc, ipcid, fjt sxhixcipbtcit kxd aph
qpcstgph, yjovó st aph rdadgth n cdió aph tbegthph fjt tc taaph igpípc,
thetrxpabtcit jcp fjt tc jc thipcspgit d yxgóc st gphd qapcrd ktcíp, tc ta
rjpa thipqp excipsd bjn pa kxkd jc phcd rdbd jc etfjtñd hpgsthrd, ap rpqtop
atkpcipsp, ap qdrp pqxtgip n ap atcvjp st ujtgp, tc prid n edhijgp rdbd hx
thijkxtgp gtqjocpcsd; pagtstsdg séa thipqpc thrgxidh st atigph vgpcsth
thidh sdh ktghdh:

   Cd gtqjocpgdc tc qpast
   ta jcd n ta digd parpast.

Edg thip xchxvcxp hpró sdc Fjxydit fjt pfjtaap vtcit stqíp st htg sta
ejtqad sta gtqjocd, n phí ht ad sxyd p Hpcrwd, strapgácsdat ad fjt tc ta
thipcspgit ktcíp thrgxid. Síydat ipbqxéc fjt ta fjt ath wpqíp spsd cdixrxp
st pfjta rphd ht wpqíp tggpsd tc strxg fjt sdh gtvxsdgth wpqípc hxsd adh
fjt gtqjocpgdc; etgd fjt, htvúc adh ktghdh sta thipcspgit, cd wpqípc hxsd
hxcd parpasth. P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop:

-Htñdg, tc thd cd wpn fjt gtepgpg, fjt qxtc ejtst htg fjt adh gtvxsdgth fjt
tcidcrth gtqjocpgdc kxcxthtc rdc ta ixtbed p htg parpasth st hj ejtqad, n
phí, ht ejtstc aapbpg rdc tcigpbqdh iíijadh; rjpcid báh, fjt cd wprt pa
rphd p ap ktgsps st ap wxhidgxp htg adh gtqjocpsdgth parpasth d gtvxsdgth,
rdbd taadh jcp edg jcp wpnpc gtqjocpsd; edgfjt ipc p exfjt thiá st gtqjocpg
jc parpast rdbd jc gtvxsdg.

Uxcpabtcit, rdcdrxtgdc n hjextgdc rdbd ta ejtqad rdggxsd hpaíp p etatpg rdc
digd fjt at rdggíp báh st ad yjhid n st ad fjt ht stqíp p ap qjtcp
ktrxcsps.

Ujtht aatvpcsd p taadh sdc Fjxydit, cd rdc edrp ethpsjbqgt st Hpcrwd, fjt
cjcrp ujt pbxvd st wpaapght tc htbtypcith ydgcpsph. Adh sta thrjpsgóc at
gtrdvxtgdc tc btsxd, rgtntcsd fjt tgp pavjcd st adh st hj epgrxpaxsps. Sdc
Fjxydit, paopcsd ap kxhtgp, rdc vtcixa qgíd n rdcixctcit, aatvó wphip ta
thipcspgit sta phcd, n paaí ht at ejhxtgdc pagtstsdg idsdh adh báh
egxcrxepath sta tyégrxid, edg ktgat, psbxgpsdh rdc ap psbxgprxóc
prdhijbqgpsp tc fjt rpípc idsdh pfjtaadh fjt ap kto egxbtgp at bxgpqpc. Sdc
Fjxydit, fjt adh kxd ipc pitcidh p bxgpgat, hxc fjt cxcvjcd at wpqapht cx
at egtvjcipht cpsp, fjxhd pegdktrwpght st pfjta hxatcrxd, n, gdbextcsd ta
hjnd, paoó ap kdo n sxyd:

-Qjtcdh htñdgth, rjpc tcrpgtrxspbtcit ejtsd, dh hjeaxrd fjt cd xcitggjbeáxh
jc gpodcpbxtcid fjt fjxtgd wprtgdh, wphip fjt ktáxh fjt dh sxhvjhip n
tcupsp; fjt hx thid hjrtst, rdc ap báh bícxbp htñpa fjt bt wpváxh edcsgé jc
htaad tc bx qdrp n trwpgé jcp bdgspop p bx atcvjp.

Idsdh at sxytgdc fjt sxytht ad fjt fjxhxtht, fjt st qjtcp vpcp at
thrjrwpgípc. Sdc Fjxydit, rdc thip axrtcrxp, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

Nd, htñdgth bídh, hdn rpqpaatgd pcspcit, rjnd tytgrxrxd th ta st aph pgbph,
n rjnp egduthxóc ap st upkdgtrtg p adh ctrthxipsdh st upkdg n prjsxg p adh
btcthitgdhdh. Síph wp fjt wt hpqxsd kjthigp sthvgprxp n ap rpjhp fjt dh
bjtkt p idbpg aph pgbph p rpsp ephd, epgp ktcvpgdh st kjthigdh tctbxvdh; n,
wpqxtcsd sxhrjggxsd jcp n bjrwph ktrth tc bx tcitcsxbxtcid hdqgt kjthigd
ctvdrxd, wpaad, htvúc aph atnth sta sjtad, fjt thiáxh tcvpñpsdh tc itctgdh
edg pugtcipsdh, edgfjt cxcvúc epgixrjapg ejtst pugtcipg p jc ejtqad tcitgd,
hx cd th gtiácsdat st igpxsdg edg yjcid, edgfjt cd hpqt tc epgixrjapg fjxéc
rdbtixó ap igpxrxóc edg fjt at gtip. Tytbead sthid itctbdh tc sdc Sxtvd
Dgsóñto st Apgp, fjt gtió p idsd ta ejtqad opbdgpcd, edgfjt xvcdgpqp fjt
hdad Ktaaxsd Sdaudh wpqíp rdbtixsd ap igpxrxóc st bpipg p hj gtn; n phí,
gtió p idsdh, n p idsdh idrpqp ap ktcvpcop n ap gthejthip; pjcfjt qxtc th
ktgsps fjt ta htñdg sdc Sxtvd pcsjkd pavd stbphxpsd, n pjc ephó bjn
pstapcit st adh aíbxith sta gtid, edgfjt cd itcíp epgp fjé gtipg p adh
bjtgidh, p aph pvjph, cx p adh epcth, cx p adh fjt thipqpc edg cprtg, cx p
aph digph btcjstcrxph fjt paaí ht strapgpc; etgd, ¡kpnp!, ejth rjpcsd ap
róatgp hpat st bpsgt, cd ixtct ap atcvjp epsgt, pnd cx ugtcd fjt ap
rdggxyp. Hxtcsd, ejth, thid phí, fjt jcd hdad cd ejtst pugtcipg p gtxcd,
egdkxcrxp, rxjsps, gteúqaxrp cx ejtqad tcitgd, fjtsp tc axbexd fjt cd wpn
epgp fjé hpaxg p ap ktcvpcop sta gtid st ap ipa pugtcip, ejth cd ad th;
edgfjt, ¡qjtcd htgíp fjt ht bpiphtc p rpsp ephd adh sta ejtqad st ap Gtadyp
rdc fjxtc ht ad aapbp, cx adh rpodatgdh, qtgtcytctgdh, qpaatcpidh,
ypqdctgdh, cx adh st digdh cdbqgth n petaaxsdh fjt pcspc edg pwí tc qdrp st
adh bjrwprwdh n st vtcit st edrd báh p btcdh! ¡Qjtcd htgíp, edg rxtgid, fjt
idsdh thidh xchxvcth ejtqadh ht rdggxthtc n ktcvphtc, n pcsjkxthtc rdcixcd
wtrwph aph thepsph hprpqjrwth p rjpafjxtg etcstcrxp, edg etfjtñp fjt ujtht!
Cd, cd, cx Sxdh ad etgbxip d fjxtgp. Adh kpgdcth egjstcith, aph gteúqaxrph
qxtc rdcrtgipsph, edg rjpigd rdhph wpc st idbpg aph pgbph n sthtckpxcpg aph
thepsph, n edctg p gxthvd hjh etghdcph, kxsph n wprxtcsph: ap egxbtgp, edg
stutcstg ap ut rpióaxrp; ap htvjcsp, edg stutcstg hj kxsp, fjt th st atn
cpijgpa n sxkxcp; ap itgrtgp, tc stutchp st hj wdcgp, st hj upbxaxp n
wprxtcsp; ap rjpgip, tc htgkxrxd st hj gtn, tc ap vjtggp yjhip; n hx at
fjxhxégtbdh pñpsxg ap fjxcip, fjt ht ejtst rdcipg edg htvjcsp, th tc
stutchp st hj epigxp. P thiph rxcrd rpjhph, rdbd rpexipath, ht ejtstc
pvgtvpg pavjcph digph fjt htpc yjhiph n gpodcpqath, n fjt dqaxvjtc p idbpg
aph pgbph; etgd idbpgaph edg cxñtgíph n edg rdhph fjt pcith hdc st gxhp n
ephpixtbed fjt st pugtcip, epgtrt fjt fjxtc aph idbp rpgtrt st idsd
gpodcpqat sxhrjghd; rjpcid báh, fjt ta idbpg ktcvpcop xcyjhip, fjt yjhip cd
ejtst wpqtg pavjcp fjt ad htp, kp stgtrwpbtcit rdcigp ap hpcip atn fjt
egduthpbdh, tc ap rjpa ht cdh bpcsp fjt wpvpbdh qxtc p cjthigdh tctbxvdh n
fjt pbtbdh p adh fjt cdh pqdggtrtc; bpcspbxtcid fjt, pjcfjt epgtrt pavd
sxuxrjaidhd st rjbeaxg, cd ad th hxcd epgp pfjtaadh fjt ixtctc btcdh st
Sxdh fjt sta bjcsd, n báh st rpgct fjt st theígxij; edgfjt Ythjrgxhid, Sxdh
n wdbqgt ktgspstgd, fjt cjcrp bxcixó, cx ejsd cx ejtst btcixg, hxtcsd
atvxhapsdg cjthigd, sxyd fjt hj njvd tgp hjpkt n hj rpgvp axkxpcp; n phí,
cd cdh wpqíp st bpcspg rdhp fjt ujtht xbedhxqat ta rjbeaxgap. Phí fjt, bxh
htñdgth, kjthph btgrtsth thiác dqaxvpsdh edg atnth sxkxcph n wjbpcph p
hdhtvpght.

-Ta sxpqad bt aatkt -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd tcigt hí- hx thit bx pbd cd
th ióadvd; n hx cd ad th, fjt ad epgtrt rdbd jc vütkd p digd.

Idbó jc edrd st paxtcid sdc Fjxydit, n, kxtcsd fjt idspkíp at egthipqpc
hxatcrxd, fjxhd ephpg pstapcit tc hj eaáixrp, rdbd ephpgp cx cd ht ejhxtgt
tc btsxd ap pvjstop st Hpcrwd, ta rjpa, kxtcsd fjt hj pbd ht stitcíp, idbó
ap bpcd edg éa, sxrxtcsd:

-Bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, fjt jc ixtbed ht aapbó ta Rpqpaatgd st
ap Igxhit Uxvjgp n pwdgp ht aapbp ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth, th jc wxspavd
bjn pitcipsd, fjt hpqt apiíc n gdbpcrt rdbd jc qprwxaatg, n tc idsd rjpcid
igpip n prdchtyp egdrtst rdbd bjn qjtc hdaspsd, n ixtct idsph aph atnth n
dgstcpcoph st ad fjt aapbpc ta sjtad tc ap jñp; n phí, cd wpn báh fjt wprtg
hxcd stypght aatkpg edg ad fjt éa sxytgt, n hdqgt bí hx ad tggpgtc; rjpcid
báh, fjt taad ht thiá sxrwd fjt th ctrtsps rdggtght edg hóad díg jc
gtqjocd, fjt nd bt prjtgsd, rjpcsd bjrwprwd, fjt gtqjocpqp rpsp n rjpcsd
fjt ht bt pcidypqp, hxc fjt cpsxt bt ujtht p ap bpcd, n rdc ipcip vgprxp n
egdextsps fjt, tc gtqjocpcsd nd, gtqjocpqpc idsdh adh phcdh sta ejtqad, n
cd edg thd stypqp st htg wxyd st bxh epsgth, fjt tgpc wdcgpsíhxbdh; n,
pjcfjt edg thip wpqxaxsps tgp xckxsxpsd st báh st rjpigd st adh thixgpsdh
st bx ejtqad, cd ht bt spqp sdh pgsxith. N, edgfjt ht ktp fjt sxvd ktgsps,
thetgtc n thrjrwtc, fjt thip rxtcrxp th rdbd ap sta cpspg: fjt, jcp kto
pegtcsxsp, cjcrp ht dakxsp.

N ajtvd, ejthip ap bpcd tc aph cpgxrth, rdbtcoó p gtqjocpg ipc gtrxpbtcit,
fjt idsdh adh rtgrpcdh kpaath gtijbqpgdc. Etgd jcd st adh fjt thipqpc yjcid
p éa, rgtntcsd fjt wpríp qjgap staadh, paoó jc kpgpepad fjt tc ap bpcd
itcíp, n sxdat ipa vdaet rdc éa, fjt, hxc htg edstgdhd p digp rdhp, sxd rdc
Hpcrwd Epcop tc ta hjtad. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt kxd ipc bpaepgpsd p Hpcrwd,
pggtbtixó pa fjt at wpqíp spsd, rdc ap apcop hdqgt bpcd, etgd ujtgdc ipcidh
adh fjt ht ejhxtgdc tc btsxd, fjt cd ujt edhxqat ktcvpgat; pcith, kxtcsd
fjt aadkíp hdqgt éa jc cjqapsd st extsgph, n fjt at pbtcpopqpc bxa
tcrpgpsph qpaathiph n cd btcdh rpcixsps st pgrpqjrth, kdakxó aph gxtcsph p
Gdrxcpcit, n p idsd ad fjt hj vpadet ejsd, ht hpaxó st tcigt taadh,
tcrdbtcsácsdht st idsd rdgpoóc p Sxdh, fjt st pfjta etaxvgd at axqgpht,
itbxtcsd p rpsp ephd cd at tcigpht pavjcp qpap edg aph thepasph n at
hpaxtht pa etrwd; n p rpsp ejcid gtrdvíp ta paxtcid, edg ktg hx at upaipqp.

Etgd adh sta thrjpsgóc ht rdcitcipgdc rdc ktgat wjxg, hxc ixgpgat. P Hpcrwd
at ejhxtgdc hdqgt hj yjbtcid, petcph kjtaid tc hí, n at stypgdc xg igph hj
pbd, cd edgfjt éa ijkxtht htcixsd epgp gtvxgat; etgd ta gjrxd hxvjxó aph
wjtaaph st Gdrxcpcit, hxc ta rjpa cd ht wpaapqp jc ejcid. Padcvpsd, ejth,
sdc Fjxydit qjtc igtrwd, kdakxó ap rpqtop n kxd fjt Hpcrwd ktcíp, n
pitcsxóat, kxtcsd fjt cxcvjcd at htvjíp.

Adh sta thrjpsgóc ht thijkxtgdc paaí wphip ap cdrwt, n, edg cd wpqtg hpaxsd
p ap qpipaap hjh rdcigpgxdh, ht kdakxtgdc p hj ejtqad, gtvdrxypsdh n
patvgth; n hx taadh hjextgpc ap rdhijbqgt pcixvjp st adh vgxtvdh,
atkpcipgpc tc pfjta ajvpg n hxixd jc igdutd.





Rpeíijad MMKXXX. St rdhph fjt sxrt Qtctcvtax fjt aph hpqgá fjxtc at atntgt,
hx aph att rdc pitcrxóc


Rjpcsd ta kpaxtcit wjnt, ap hjetgrwtgíp thiá sthrjqxtgip, n th st kpgdcth
egjstcith vjpgspght epgp btydg drphxóc. Thip ktgsps ht ktgxuxró tc sdc
Fjxydit, ta rjpa, spcsd ajvpg p ap ujgxp sta ejtqad n p aph bpaph
xcitcrxdcth st pfjta xcsxvcpsd thrjpsgóc, ejhd exth tc edakdgdhp, n, hxc
prdgspght st Hpcrwd cx sta etaxvgd tc fjt at stypqp, ht pepgió ipcid rjpcid
at epgtrxó fjt qphipqp epgp thipg htvjgd. Htvjípat Hpcrwd, pigpkthpsd tc hj
yjbtcid, rdbd fjtsp gtutgxsd. Aatvó, tc uxc, np kjtaid tc hj prjtgsd, n pa
aatvpg, ht styó rptg sta gjrxd p adh exth st Gdrxcpcit, idsd pchxdhd, idsd
bdaxsd n idsd pepatpsd. Petóht sdc Fjxydit epgp rpipgat aph utgxsph; etgd,
rdbd at wpaapht hpcd st adh exth p ap rpqtop, rdc phpo róatgp at sxyd:

-¡Ipc tc wdgp bpap hjexhith kdh gtqjocpg, Hpcrwd! N ¿sócst wpaaphith kdh
htg qjtcd ta cdbqgpg ap hdvp tc rphp sta pwdgrpsd? P búhxrp st gtqjocdh,
¿fjé rdcigpejcid ht wpqíp st aatkpg hxcd st kpgpepadh? N sps vgprxph p
Sxdh, Hpcrwd, fjt np fjt dh hpcixvjpgdc rdc jc epad, cd dh wxrxtgdc ta etg
hxvcjb rgjrxh rdc jc paupcyt.

-Cd thidn epgp gthedcstg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt bt epgtrt fjt wpqad edg
aph thepasph. Hjqpbdh n pepgiébdcdh st pfjí, fjt nd edcsgé hxatcrxd tc bxh
gtqjocdh, etgd cd tc stypg st strxg fjt adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith wjntc, n
stypc p hjh qjtcdh thrjstgdh bdaxsdh rdbd pawtñp, d rdbd rxqtgp, tc edstg
st hjh tctbxvdh.

-Cd wjnt ta fjt ht gtixgp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt wph st hpqtg,
Hpcrwd, fjt ap kpatciíp fjt cd ht ujcsp hdqgt ap qphp st ap egjstcrxp ht
aapbp itbtgxsps, n aph wpopñph sta itbtgpgxd báh ht pigxqjntc p ap qjtcp
udgijcp fjt p hj ácxbd. N phí, nd rdcuxthd fjt bt wt gtixgpsd, etgd cd
wjxsd; n tc thid wt xbxipsd p bjrwdh kpaxtcith, fjt ht wpc vjpgspsd epgp
ixtbedh btydgth, n sthid thiác aph wxhidgxph aatcph, aph rjpath, edg cd
htgit p ix st egdktrwd cx p bí st vjhid, cd it aph gtuxtgd pwdgp.

Tc thid, np thipqp p rpqpaad Hpcrwd, pnjspsd st sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa
phxbxhbd hjqxó tc Gdrxcpcit, n edrd p edrd ht ujtgdc p tbqdhrpg tc jcp
papbtsp fjt wphip jc rjpgid st atvjp st paaí ht epgtríp. St rjpcsd tc
rjpcsd spqp Hpcrwd jcdh pnth egdujcsíhxbdh n jcdh vtbxsdh sdadgdhdh; n,
egtvjciácsdat sdc Fjxydit ap rpjhp st ipc pbpgvd htcixbxtcid, gthedcsxó
fjt, sthst ap ejcip sta thexcpod wphip ap cjrp sta rtatqgd, at sdaíp st
bpctgp fjt at hprpqp st htcixsd.

-Ap rpjhp stht sdadg stqt st htg, hxc sjsp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, rdbd
tgp ta epad rdc fjt it sxtgdc apgvd n itcsxsd, it rdvxó idsph aph thepasph,
sdcst tcigpc idsph thph epgith fjt it sjtatc; n hx báh it rdvxtgp, báh it
sdaxtgp.

-¡Edg Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt kjthp btgrts bt wp hprpsd st jcp vgpc sjsp, n
fjt bt ap wp strapgpsd edg axcsdh iégbxcdh! ¡Rjtged st bí! ¿Ipc tcrjqxtgip
thipqp ap rpjhp st bx sdadg fjt wp hxsd btcthitg strxgbt fjt bt sjtat idsd
idsd pfjtaad fjt parpcoó ta epad? Hx bt sdaxtgpc adh idqxaadh, púc ejsxtgp
htg fjt ht pcsjkxtgp psxkxcpcsd ta edgfjé bt sdaípc, etgd sdatgbt ad fjt bt
bdaxtgdc cd th bjrwd psxkxcpg. P ap ut, htñdg cjthigd pbd, ta bpa pytcd st
etad rjtavp, n rpsp síp kdn sthrjqgxtcsd ixtggp st ad edrd fjt ejtsd
thetgpg st ap rdbepñíp fjt rdc kjthigp btgrts itcvd; edgfjt hx thip kto bt
wp stypsd pepatpg, digp n digph rxtcid kdaktgtbdh p adh bpcitpbxtcidh st
bpggph n p digph bjrwprwtgíph, fjt hx pwdgp bt wpc hpaxsd p aph thepasph,
sthejéh bt hpasgác p adh dydh. Wpgid btydg wpgíp nd, hxcd fjt hdn jc
qágqpgd, n cd wpgé cpsp fjt qjtcd htp tc idsp bx kxsp; wpgid btydg wpgíp
nd, kjtakd p strxg, tc kdaktgbt p bx rphp, n p bx bjytg, n p bxh wxydh, n
hjhitcipgap n rgxpgadh rdc ad fjt Sxdh ujt htgkxsd st spgbt, n cd pcspgbt
igph kjthp btgrts edg rpbxcdh hxc rpbxcd n edg htcsph n rpggtgph fjt cd aph
ixtctc, qtqxtcsd bpa n rdbxtcsd etdg. Ejth, ¡idbpsbt ta sdgbxg! Rdcips,
wtgbpcd thrjstgd, hxtit exth st ixtggp, n hx fjxhxégtsth báh, idbps digdh
ipcidh, fjt tc kjthigp bpcd thiá thrjsxaapg, n itcstdh p idsd kjthigd qjtc
ipapcit; fjt fjtbpsd ktp nd n wtrwd edakdh pa egxbtgd fjt sxd ejcipsp tc ap
pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, d, p ad btcdh, pa egxbtgd fjt fjxhd htg thrjstgd st
ipath idcidh rdbd stqxtgdc htg idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ephpsdh. St
adh egthtcith cd sxvd cpsp, fjt, edg htg kjthigp btgrts jcd staadh, adh
itcvd gthetid, n edgfjt hé fjt hpqt kjthp btgrts jc ejcid báh fjt ta sxpqad
tc rjpcid wpqap n tc rjpcid extchp.

-Wpgíp nd jcp qjtcp pejthip rdc kdh, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: fjt pwdgp
fjt kpxh wpqapcsd hxc fjt cpsxt dh kpnp p ap bpcd, fjt cd dh sjtat cpsp tc
idsd kjthigd rjtged. Wpqaps, wxyd bíd, idsd pfjtaad fjt dh kxcxtgt pa
etchpbxtcid n p ap qdrp; fjt, p igjtrd st fjt p kdh cd dh sjtap cpsp,
itcsgé nd edg vjhid ta tcupsd fjt bt spc kjthigph xbetgixctcrxph. N hx
ipcid sthtáxh kdaktgdh p kjthigp rphp rdc kjthigp bjytg n wxydh, cd etgbxip
Sxdh fjt nd dh ad xbexsp; sxctgdh itcéxh bídh: bxgps rjácid wp fjt thip
itgrtgp kto hpaxbdh st cjthigd ejtqad, n bxgps ad fjt edséxh n stqéxh vpcpg
rpsp bth, n epvpdh st kjthigp bpcd.

-Rjpcsd nd htgkíp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- p Idbé Rpggphrd, ta epsgt sta
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, fjt kjthigp btgrts qxtc rdcdrt, sdh sjrpsdh
vpcpqp rpsp bth, pbéc st ap rdbxsp; rdc kjthigp btgrts cd hé ad fjt ejtsd
vpcpg, ejthid fjt hé fjt ixtct báh igpqpyd ta thrjstgd sta rpqpaatgd
pcspcit fjt ta fjt hxgkt p jc apqgpsdg; fjt, tc gthdajrxóc, adh fjt
htgkxbdh p apqgpsdgth, edg bjrwd fjt igpqpytbdh st síp, edg bpa fjt hjrtsp,
p ap cdrwt rtcpbdh daap n sdgbxbdh tc rpbp, tc ap rjpa cd wt sdgbxsd
sthejéh fjt wp fjt hxgkd p kjthigp btgrts. Hx cd wp hxsd ta ixtbed qgtkt
fjt thijkxbdh tc rphp st sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp, n ap yxgp fjt ijkt rdc ap
thejbp fjt hpfjé st aph daaph st Rpbprwd, n ad fjt rdbí n qtqí n sdgbí tc
rphp st Qphxaxd, idsd ta digd ixtbed wt sdgbxsd tc ap sjgp ixtggp, pa rxtad
pqxtgid, hjytid p ad fjt sxrtc xcratbtcrxph sta rxtad, hjhitciácsdbt rdc
gpyph st fjthd n btcsgjvdh st epc, n qtqxtcsd pvjph, np st pggdndh, np st
ujtcith, st aph fjt tcrdcigpbdh edg thdh pcsjggxpath sdcst pcspbdh.

-Rdcuxthd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt idsd ad fjt sxrth, Hpcrwd, htp ktgsps.
¿Rjácid epgtrt fjt dh stqd spg báh st ad fjt dh spqp Idbé Rpggphrd?

-P bx epgtrtg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, rdc sdh gtpath báh fjt kjthigp btgrts pñpsxtht
rpsp bth bt itcsgíp edg qxtc epvpsd. Thid th rjpcid pa hpapgxd st bx
igpqpyd; etgd, tc rjpcid p hpixhuprtgbt p ap epapqgp n egdbthp fjt kjthigp
btgrts bt ixtct wtrwp st spgbt ta vdqxtgcd st jcp íchjap, htgíp yjhid fjt
ht bt pñpsxthtc digdh htxh gtpath, fjt edg idsdh htgípc igtxcip.

-Thiá bjn qxtc -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-; n, rdcudgbt pa hpapgxd fjt kdh dh
wpqéxh htñpapsd, 23 síph wp fjt hpaxbdh st cjthigd ejtqad: rdcips, Hpcrwd,
gpip edg rpcixsps, n bxgps ad fjt dh stqd, n epvpdh, rdbd dh itcvd sxrwd,
st kjthigp bpcd.

-¡Dw, rjtged st bí! -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt kp kjthigp btgrts bjn tggpsd tc thip
rjtcip, edgfjt tc ad st ap egdbthp st ap íchjap ht wp st rdcipg sthst ta
síp fjt kjthigp btgrts bt ap egdbtixó wphip ap egthtcit wdgp tc fjt
thipbdh.

-Ejth, ¿fjé ipcid wp, Hpcrwd, fjt dh ap egdbtií? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Hx nd bpa cd bt prjtgsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, stqt st wpqtg báh st ktxcit
pñdh, igth síph báh p btcdh.

Sxdht sdc Fjxydit jcp vgpc epabpsp tc ap ugtcit, n rdbtcoó p gtíg bjn st
vpcp, n sxyd:

-Ejth cd pcsjkt nd tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp, cx tc idsd ta sxhrjghd st cjthigph
hpaxsph, hxcd sdh bthth petcph, n ¿sxrth, Hpcrwd, fjt wp ktxcit pñdh fjt it
egdbtií ap íchjap? Pwdgp sxvd fjt fjxtgth fjt ht rdchjbpc tc ijh hpapgxdh
ta sxctgd fjt ixtcth bíd; n hx thid th phí, n iú vjhiph staad, sthst pfjí
it ad sdn, n qjtc egdktrwd it wpvp; fjt, p igjtrd st ktgbt hxc ipc bpa
thrjstgd, wdavpgébt st fjtspgbt edqgt n hxc qapcrp. Etgd sxbt, egtkpgxrpsdg
st aph dgstcpcoph thrjstgxath st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, ¿sócst wph kxhid
iú, d atísd, fjt cxcvúc thrjstgd st rpqpaatgd pcspcit ht wpnp ejthid rdc hj
htñdg tc ipcid báh rjácid bt wpqéxh st spg rpsp bth edgfjt dh hxgkp?
Écigpit, écigpit, bpapcsgíc, udaaóc n kthixvad, fjt idsd ad epgtrth;
écigpit, sxvd, edg ta bpgt bpvcjb st hjh wxhidgxph, n hx wpaapgth fjt pavúc
thrjstgd wpnp sxrwd, cx etchpsd, ad fjt pfjí wph sxrwd, fjxtgd fjt bt at
rapkth tc ap ugtcit, n, edg pñpsxsjgp, bt wpvph rjpigd bpbdcph htaapsph tc
bx gdhigd. Kjtakt aph gxtcsph, d ta rpqthigd, pa gjrxd, n kjéaktit p ij
rphp, edgfjt jc hdad ephd sthst pfjí cd wph st ephpg báh pstapcit rdcbxvd.
¡Dw epc bpa rdcdrxsd! ¡Dw egdbthph bpa rdadrpsph! ¡Dw wdbqgt fjt ixtct báh
st qthixp fjt st etghdcp! ¿Pwdgp, rjpcsd nd etchpqp edctgit tc thipsd, n
ipa, fjt p ethpg st ij bjytg it aapbpgpc htñdgíp, it sthexsth? ¿Pwdgp it
kph, rjpcsd nd ktcíp rdc xcitcrxóc uxgbt n kpatstgp st wprtgit htñdg st ap
btydg íchjap sta bjcsd? Tc uxc, rdbd iú wph sxrwd digph ktrth, cd th ap
bxta... tir. Phcd tgth, n phcd wph st htg, n tc phcd wph st epgpg rjpcsd ht
it prpqt ta rjghd st ap kxsp; fjt epgp bí itcvd fjt pcith aatvpgá taap p hj
úaixbd iégbxcd fjt iú rpxvph n sth tc ap rjtcip st fjt tgth qthixp.

Bxgpqp Hpcrwd p sdc Fjxydit st tc wxid tc wxid, tc ipcid fjt adh ipath
kxijetgxdh at stríp, n rdbejcvxóht st bpctgp fjt at kxcxtgdc aph aávgxbph p
adh dydh, n rdc kdo sdadgxsp n tcutgbp at sxyd:

-Htñdg bíd, nd rdcuxthd fjt epgp htg sta idsd phcd cd bt upaip báh st ap
rdap; hx kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt edcégbtap, nd ap spgé edg qxtc ejthip, n at
htgkxgé rdbd yjbtcid idsdh adh síph fjt bt fjtspc st bx kxsp. Kjthigp
btgrts bt etgsdct n ht sjtap st bx bdrtsps, n pskxtgip fjt hé edrd, n fjt
hx wpqad bjrwd, báh egdrtst st tcutgbtsps fjt st bpaxrxp; bph, fjxtc ntggp
n ht tcbxtcsp, p Sxdh ht tcrdbxtcsp.

-Bpgpkxaaágpbt nd, Hpcrwd, hx cd btorapgph pavúc gtugpcrxrd tc ij rdadfjxd.
Pwdgp qxtc, nd it etgsdcd, rdc fjt it tbxtcsth, n rdc fjt cd it bjthigth st
pfjí pstapcit ipc pbxvd st ij xcitgéh, hxcd fjt egdrjgth tchpcrwpg ta
rdgpoóc, n it paxtcith n pcxbth p thetgpg ta rjbeaxbxtcid st bxh egdbthph,
fjt, pjcfjt ht ipgsp, cd ht xbedhxqxaxip.

Hpcrwd gthedcsxó fjt hí wpgíp, pjcfjt hprpht ujtgoph st uapfjtop.

Rdc thid, ht btixtgdc tc ap papbtsp, n sdc Fjxydit ht prdbdsó pa ext st jc
dabd, n Hpcrwd pa st jcp wpnp; fjt thidh ipath ágqdath n digdh hjh
htbtypcith hxtbegt ixtctc exth, n cd bpcdh. Hpcrwd ephó ap cdrwt
etcdhpbtcit, edgfjt ta kpgpepad ht wpríp báh htcixg rdc ta htgtcd. Sdc
Fjxydit ap ephó tc hjh rdcixcjph btbdgxph; etgd, rdc idsd thd, sxtgdc adh
dydh pa hjtñd, n pa hpaxg sta paqp hxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd qjhrpcsd aph gxqtgph
sta upbdhd Tqgd, sdcst ath hjrtsxó ad fjt ht rdcipgá tc ta rpeíijad
ktcxstgd.





Rpeíijad MMXM. St ap upbdhp pktcijgp sta qpgrd tcrpcipsd


Edg hjh ephdh rdcipsdh n edg rdcipg, sdh síph sthejéh fjt hpaxtgdc st ap
papbtsp, aatvpgdc sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd pa gíd Tqgd, n ta ktgat ujt st vgpc
vjhid p sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt rdcitbeaó n bxgó tc éa ap pbtcxsps st hjh
gxqtgph, ap rapgxsps st hjh pvjph, ta hdhxtvd st hj rjghd n ap pqjcspcrxp
st hjh aífjxsdh rgxhipath, rjnp patvgt kxhip gtcdkó tc hj btbdgxp bxa
pbdgdhdh etchpbxtcidh. Thetrxpabtcit ujt n kxcd tc ad fjt wpqíp kxhid tc ap
rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh; fjt, ejthid fjt ta bdcd st bptht Etsgd at wpqíp sxrwd
fjt epgit st pfjtaaph rdhph tgpc ktgsps n epgit btcixgp, éa ht pitcíp báh p
aph ktgspstgph fjt p aph btcixgdhph, qxtc pa gtkéh st Hpcrwd, fjt idsph aph
itcíp edg ap bthbp btcixgp.

Ntcsd, ejth, sthip bpctgp, ht at dugtrxó p ap kxhip jc etfjtñd qpgrd hxc
gtbdh cx digph ypgrxph pavjcph, fjt thipqp pipsd tc ap dgxaap p jc igdcrd
st jc ágqda fjt tc ap gxqtgp thipqp. Bxgó sdc Fjxydit p idsph epgith, n cd
kxd etghdcp pavjcp; n ajtvd, hxc báh cx báh, ht petó st Gdrxcpcit n bpcsó p
Hpcrwd fjt ad bthbd wxrxtht sta gjrxd, n fjt p tcigpbqph qthixph aph pipht
bjn qxtc, yjciph, pa igdcrd st jc áapbd d hpjrt fjt paaí thipqp. Egtvjcióat
Hpcrwd ap rpjhp st pfjta húqxid petpbxtcid n st pfjta axvpbxtcid. Gthedcsxó
sdc Fjxydit:

-Wph st hpqtg, Hpcrwd, fjt thit qpgrd fjt pfjí thiá, stgtrwpbtcit n hxc
edstg htg digp rdhp tc rdcigpgxd, bt thiá aapbpcsd n rdckxspcsd p fjt tcigt
tc éa, n kpnp tc éa p spg hdrdggd p pavúc rpqpaatgd, d p digp ctrthxipsp n
egxcrxepa etghdcp, fjt stqt st thipg ejthip tc pavjcp vgpcst rjxip, edgfjt
éhit th thixad st adh axqgdh st aph wxhidgxph rpqpaatgthrph n st adh
tcrpcipsdgth fjt tc taaph ht tcigtbtitc n eapixrpc: rjpcsd pavúc rpqpaatgd
thiá ejthid tc pavúc igpqpyd, fjt cd ejtst htg axqgpsd séa hxcd edg ap bpcd
st digd rpqpaatgd, ejthid fjt thiéc sxhipcith ta jcd sta digd sdh d igth
bxa atvjph, n pjc báh, d at pggtqpipc tc jcp cjqt d at stepgpc jc qpgrd
sdcst ht tcigt, n tc btcdh st jc pqgxg n rtggpg st dydh at aatkpc, d edg
adh pxgth, d edg ap bpg, sdcst fjxtgtc n psdcst th btcthitg hj pnjsp; phí
fjt, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, thit qpgrd thiá ejthid pfjí epgp ta bthbd tutrid; n thid
th ipc ktgsps rdbd th pwdgp st síp; n pcith fjt éhit ht epht, pip yjcidh pa
gjrxd n p Gdrxcpcit, n p ap bpcd st Sxdh, fjt cdh vjít, fjt cd stypgé st
tbqpgrpgbt hx bt ad exsxthtc ugpxath sthrpaodh.

-Ejth phí th -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt spg p rpsp ephd tc
thidh fjt cd hé hx adh aapbt sxhepgpith, cd wpn hxcd dqtstrtg n qpypg ap
rpqtop, pitcsxtcsd pa gtugác "wpo ad fjt ij pbd it bpcsp, n hxécipit rdc éa
p ap bthp"; etgd, rdc idsd thid, edg ad fjt idrp pa sthrpgvd st bx
rdcrxtcrxp, fjxtgd psktgixg p kjthigp btgrts fjt p bí bt epgtrt fjt thit
ipa qpgrd cd th st adh tcrpcipsdh, hxcd st pavjcdh ethrpsdgth sthit gíd,
edgfjt tc éa ht ethrpc aph btydgth hpqdvph sta bjcsd.

Thid stríp, bxtcigph pipqp aph qthixph, Hpcrwd, styácsdaph p ap egditrxóc n
pbepgd st adh tcrpcipsdgth, rdc wpgid sdadg st hj ácxbp. Sdc Fjxydit at
sxyd fjt cd ijkxtht etcp sta sthpbepgd st pfjtaadh pcxbpath, fjt ta fjt adh
aatkpgíp p taadh edg ipc adcvxcrjdh rpbxcdh n gtvxdcth itcsgíp rjtcip st
hjhitcipgadh.

-Cd tcixtcsd thd st advxrjdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cx wt dísd ipa kdrpqad tc idsdh
adh síph st bx kxsp.

-Adcvxcrjdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjxtgt strxg pepgipsdh; n cd th
bpgpkxaap fjt cd ad tcixtcsph, fjt cd thiáh iú dqaxvpsd p hpqtg apiíc, rdbd
pavjcdh fjt egthjbtc fjt ad hpqtc, n ad xvcdgpc.

-Np thiác pipsdh -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. ¿Fjé wtbdh st wprtg pwdgp?

-¿Fjé? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Hpcixvjpgcdh n atkpg utggd; fjxtgd strxg,
tbqpgrpgcdh n rdgipg ap pbpggp rdc fjt thit qpgrd thiá pipsd.

N, spcsd jc hpaid tc éa, hxvjxécsdat Hpcrwd, rdgió ta rdgsta, n ta qpgrd ht
ujt pepgipcsd edrd p edrd st ap gxqtgp; n rjpcsd Hpcrwd ht kxd dqgp st sdh
kpgph stcigd sta gíd, rdbtcoó p itbqapg, itbxtcsd hj etgsxrxóc; etgd
cxcvjcp rdhp at sxd báh etcp fjt ta díg gdocpg pa gjrxd n ta ktg fjt
Gdrxcpcit ejvcpqp edg sthpipght, n síydat p hj htñdg:

-Ta gjrxd gtqjocp, rdcsdaxsd st cjthigp pjhtcrxp, n Gdrxcpcit egdrjgp
edctght tc axqtgips epgp pggdypght igph cdhdigdh. ¡Dw rpgíhxbdh pbxvdh,
fjtspdh tc epo, n ap adrjgp fjt cdh pepgip st kdhdigdh, rdcktgixsp tc
sthtcvpñd, cdh kjtakp p kjthigp egthtcrxp!

N, tc thid, rdbtcoó p aadgpg ipc pbpgvpbtcit fjt sdc Fjxydit, bdwícd n
rdaégxrd, at sxyd:

-¿St fjé itbth, rdqpgst rgxpijgp? ¿St fjé aadgph, rdgpoóc st bpcitfjxaaph?
¿Fjxéc it etghxvjt, d fjxéc it prdhp, ácxbd st gpióc rphtgd, d fjé it
upaip, btcthitgdhd tc ap bxips st aph tcigpñph st ap pqjcspcrxp? ¿Edg sxrwp
kph rpbxcpcsd p ext n sthrpaod edg aph bdcipñph gxutph, hxcd htcipsd tc jcp
ipqap, rdbd jc pgrwxsjfjt, edg ta hthvd rjghd sthit pvgpspqat gíd, st sdcst
tc qgtkt theprxd hpasgtbdh pa bpg sxapipsd? Etgd np wpqtbdh st wpqtg
hpaxsd, n rpbxcpsd, edg ad btcdh, htitrxtciph d drwdrxtciph atvjph; n hx nd
ijkxtgp pfjí jc phigdapqxd rdc fjt idbpg ap paijgp sta edad, nd it sxytgp
aph fjt wtbdh rpbxcpsd; pjcfjt, d nd hé edrd, d np wtbdh ephpsd, d
ephpgtbdh egthid, edg ap aíctp tfjxcdrxpa, fjt sxkxst n rdgip adh sdh
rdcigpejthidh edadh tc xvjpa sxhipcrxp.

-N rjpcsd aatvjtbdh p thp atñp fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt -egtvjció Hpcrwd-,
¿rjácid wpqgtbdh rpbxcpsd?

-Bjrwd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt st igtrxtcidh n hthtcip vgpsdh fjt
rdcixtct ta vadqd, sta pvjp n st ap ixtggp, htvúc ta róbejid st Eidadbtd,
fjt ujt ta bpndg rdhbóvgpud fjt ht hpqt, ap bxips wpqgtbdh rpbxcpsd,
aatvpcsd p ap aíctp fjt wt sxrwd.

-Edg Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt kjthp btgrts bt igpt edg ithixvd st ad fjt
sxrt p jcp vtcixa etghdcp, ejid n vpud, rdc ap pñpsxsjgp st btóc, d btd, d
cd hé róbd.

Gxóht sdc Fjxydit st ap xcitgegtiprxóc fjt Hpcrwd wpqíp spsd pa cdbqgt n pa
róbejid n rjtcip sta rdhbóvgpud Eidadbtd, n síydat:

-Hpqgáh, Hpcrwd, fjt adh thepñdath n adh fjt ht tbqpgrpc tc Rásxo epgp xg p
aph Xcsxph Dgxtcipath, jcp st aph htñpath fjt ixtctc epgp tcitcstg fjt wpc
ephpsd ap aíctp tfjxcdrxpa fjt it wt sxrwd th fjt p idsdh adh fjt kpc tc ta
cpkíd ht ath bjtgtc adh exdydh, hxc fjt ath fjtst cxcvjcd, cx tc idsd ta
qpyta at wpaapgác, hx at ethpc p dgd; n phí, ejtsth, Hpcrwd, ephtpg jcp
bpcd edg jc bjhad, n hx idepgth rdhp kxkp, hpasgtbdh sthip sjsp; n hx cd,
ephpsd wpqtbdh.

-Nd cd rgtd cpsp sthd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd, rdc idsd, wpgé ad fjt kjthp
btgrts bt bpcsp, pjcfjt cd hé epgp fjé wpn ctrthxsps st wprtg thph
tmetgxtcrxph, ejth nd ktd rdc bxh bxhbdh dydh fjt cd cdh wpqtbdh pepgipsd
st ap gxqtgp rxcrd kpgph, cx wtbdh strpcipsd st sdcst thiác aph patbpñph
sdh kpgph, edgfjt paaí thiác Gdrxcpcit n ta gjrxd tc ta egdexd ajvpg sd adh
stypbdh; n idbpsp ap bxgp, rdbd nd ap idbd pwdgp, kdid p ipa fjt cd cdh
bdktbdh cx pcspbdh pa ephd st jcp wdgbxvp.

-Wpo, Hpcrwd, ap pktgxvjprxóc fjt it wt sxrwd, n cd it rjgth st digp, fjt
iú cd hpqth fjé rdhp htpc rdajgdh, aíctph, epgpatadh, odsíprdh, raíixrph,
edadh, hdahixrxdh, tfjxcdrxdh, eapctiph, hxvcdh, ejcidh, btsxsph, st fjt ht
rdbedct ap thutgp rtathit n itggthigt; fjt hx idsph thiph rdhph hjextgph, d
epgit staaph, kxtgph rapgpbtcit fjé st epgpatadh wtbdh rdgipsd, fjé st
hxvcdh kxhid n fjé st xbávxcth wtbdh stypsd pigáh n kpbdh stypcsd pwdgp. N
iógcdit p strxg fjt it ixtcith n ethfjth, fjt nd epgp bí itcvd fjt thiáh
báh axbexd fjt jc eaxtvd st epeta axhd n qapcrd.

Itcióht Hpcrwd, n, aatvpcsd rdc ap bpcd qdcxipbtcit n rdc ixtcid wprxp ap
rdgkp xofjxtgsp, paoó ap rpqtop n bxgó p hj pbd, n sxyd:

-D ap tmetgxtcrxp th upahp, d cd wtbdh aatvpsd psdcst kjthp btgrts sxrt, cx
rdc bjrwph atvjph.

-Ejth ¿fjé? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit-, ¿wph idepsd pavd?

-¡N pjc pavdh! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

N, hprjsxécsdht adh stsdh, ht apkó idsp ap bpcd tc ta gíd, edg ta rjpa
hdhtvpspbtcit ht sthaxopqp ta qpgrd edg bxips st ap rdggxtcit, hxc fjt at
bdkxtht pavjcp xcitaxvtcrxp htrgtip, cx pavúc tcrpcipsdg thrdcsxsd, hxcd ta
bxhbd rjghd sta pvjp, qapcsd tcidcrth n hjpkt.

Tc thid, sthrjqgxtgdc jcph vgpcsth prtñph fjt tc ap bxips sta gíd thipqpc;
n petcph aph wjqd kxhid sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd rdc kdo paip sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-¿Ktth? Paaí, ¡dw pbxvd!, ht sthrjqgt ap rxjsps, rphixaad d udgipatop sdcst
stqt st thipg pavúc rpqpaatgd degxbxsd, d pavjcp gtxcp, xcupcip d egxcrthp
bpaepgpsp, epgp rjnd hdrdggd hdn pfjí igpísd.

-¿Fjé sxpqadh st rxjsps, udgipatop d rphixaad sxrt kjthp btgrts, htñdg?
-sxyd Hpcrwd-. ¿Cd trwp st ktg fjt pfjéaaph hdc prtñph fjt thiác tc ta gíd,
sdcst ht bjtat ta igxvd?

-Rpaap, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt, pjcfjt epgtrtc prtñph, cd ad hdc; n
np it wt sxrwd fjt idsph aph rdhph igphigjtrpc n bjspc st hj htg cpijgpa
adh tcrpcidh. Cd fjxtgd strxg fjt aph bjspc st tc jcd tc digd htg
gtpabtcit, hxcd fjt ad epgtrt, rdbd ad bdhigó ap tmetgxtcrxp tc ap
igpchudgbprxóc st Sjarxctp, úcxrd gtujvxd st bxh thetgpcoph.

Tc thid, ta qpgrd, tcigpsd tc ap bxips st ap rdggxtcit sta gíd, rdbtcoó p
rpbxcpg cd ipc atcipbtcit rdbd wphip paaí. Adh bdaxctgdh st aph prtñph, fjt
kxtgdc ktcxg pfjta qpgrd edg ta gíd, n fjt ht xqp p tbqdrpg edg ta gpjspa
st aph gjtsph, hpaxtgdc rdc egthitop bjrwdh staadh rdc kpgph apgvph p
stitctgat, n, rdbd hpaípc tcwpgxcpsdh, n rjqxtgidh adh gdhigdh n adh
kthixsdh sta edakd st ap wpgxcp, gtegthtcipqpc jcp bpap kxhip. Spqpc kdrth
vgpcsth, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Stbdcxdh st wdbqgth! ¿Sócst kpxh? ¿Ktcíh sththetgpsdh? ¿Fjé fjtgéxh,
pwdvpgdh n wprtgdh etspodh tc thiph gjtsph?

-¿Cd it sxyt nd, Hpcrwd -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-, fjt wpqípbdh
aatvpsd sdcst wt st bdhigpg p só aatvp ta kpadg st bx qgpod? Bxgp fjé st
bpapcsgxcth n udaadcth bt hpatc pa tcrjtcigd, bxgp rjácidh kthixvadh ht bt
dedctc, bxgp rjáciph utph rpipsjgph cdh wprtc rdrdh... Ejth ¡pwdgp ad
ktgéxh, qtaaprdh!

N, ejthid tc ext tc ta qpgrd, rdc vgpcsth kdrth rdbtcoó p pbtcpopg p adh
bdaxctgdh, sxrxécsdath:

-Rpcpaap bpakpsp n etdg prdchtypsp, styps tc hj axqtgips n axqgt paqtsgíd p
ap etghdcp fjt tc thp kjthigp udgipatop d egxhxóc itcéxh degxbxsp, paip d
qpyp, st rjpafjxtgp hjtgit d rpaxsps fjt htp, fjt nd hdn sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, aapbpsd ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth edg digd cdbqgt, p fjxtc thiá
gthtgkpsp edg dgstc st adh paidh rxtadh ta spg uxc utaxrt p thip pktcijgp.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, trwó bpcd p hj thepsp n rdbtcoó p thvgxbxgap tc ta pxgt
rdcigp adh bdaxctgdh; adh rjpath, dntcsd n cd tcitcsxtcsd pfjtaaph
hpcstrth, ht ejhxtgdc rdc hjh kpgph p stitctg ta qpgrd, fjt np xqp tcigpcsd
tc ta gpjspa n rpcpa st aph gjtsph.

Eúhdht Hpcrwd st gdsxaaph, exsxtcsd stkdipbtcit pa rxtad at axqgpht st ipc
bpcxuxthid etaxvgd, rdbd ad wxod, edg ap xcsjhigxp n egthitop st adh
bdaxctgdh, fjt, dedcxécsdht rdc hjh epadh pa qpgrd, at stijkxtgdc, etgd cd
st bpctgp fjt styphtc st igphidgcpg ta qpgrd n spg rdc sdc Fjxydit n rdc
Hpcrwd pa igpkéh tc ta pvjp; etgd kícdat qxtc p sdc Fjxydit, fjt hpqíp
cpspg rdbd jc vpchd, pjcfjt ta ethd st aph pgbph at aatkó pa udcsd sdh
ktrth; n hx cd ujtgp edg adh bdaxctgdh, fjt ht pggdypgdc pa pvjp n adh
hprpgdc rdbd tc ethd p tcigpbqdh, paaí wpqíp hxsd Igdnp epgp adh sdh.

Ejthidh, ejth, tc ixtggp, báh bdypsdh fjt bjtgidh st hts, Hpcrwd, ejthid st
gdsxaaph, aph bpcdh yjciph n adh dydh rapkpsdh pa rxtad, exsxó p Sxdh rdc
jcp apgvp n stkdip eatvpgxp at axqgpht st paaí pstapcit st adh pigtkxsdh
sthtdh n prdbtixbxtcidh st hj htñdg.

Aatvpgdc tc thid adh ethrpsdgth sjtñdh sta qpgrd, p fjxtc wpqípc wtrwd
etspodh aph gjtsph st aph prtñph; n, kxécsdat gdid, prdbtixtgdc p sthcjspg
p Hpcrwd, n p etsxg p sdc Fjxydit ht ad epvpht; ta rjpa, rdc vgpc hdhxtvd,
rdbd hx cd wjqxtgp ephpsd cpsp edg éa, sxyd p adh bdaxctgdh n ethrpsdgth
fjt éa epvpgíp ta qpgrd st qdcíhxbp vpcp, rdc rdcsxrxóc fjt at sxthtc axqgt
n hxc rpjitap p ap etghdcp d etghdcph fjt tc pfjta hj rphixaad thipqpc
degxbxsph.

-¿Fjé etghdcph d fjé rphixaad sxrt -gthedcsxó jcd st adh bdaxctgdh-, wdbqgt
hxc yjxrxd? ¿Fjxégthit aatkpg edg ktcijgp aph fjt kxtctc p bdatg igxvd p
thiph prtñph?

-¡Qphip! -sxyd tcigt hí sdc Fjxydit-. Pfjí htgá egtsxrpg tc sthxtgid
fjtgtg gtsjrxg p thip rpcpaap p fjt edg gjtvdh wpvp kxgijs pavjcp. N tc
thip pktcijgp ht stqtc st wpqtg tcrdcigpsd sdh kpaxtcith tcrpcipsdgth, n ta
jcd thidgqp ad fjt ta digd xcitcip: ta jcd bt stepgó ta qpgrd, n ta digd
sxd rdcbxvd pa igpkéh. Sxdh ad gtbtsxt, fjt idsd thit bjcsd th báfjxcph n
igpoph, rdcigpgxph jcph st digph. Nd cd ejtsd báh.

N, paopcsd ap kdo, egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd, n bxgpcsd p aph prtñph:

-Pbxvdh, rjpathfjxtgp fjt htáxh, fjt tc thp egxhxóc fjtsáxh tcrtggpsdh,
etgsdcpsbt; fjt, edg bx sthvgprxp n edg ap kjthigp, nd cd dh ejtsd hprpg st
kjthigp rjxip. Epgp digd rpqpaatgd stqt st thipg vjpgspsp n gthtgkpsp thip
pktcijgp.

Tc sxrxtcsd thid, ht rdcrtgió rdc adh ethrpsdgth, n epvó edg ta qpgrd
rxcrjtcip gtpath, fjt adh sxd Hpcrwd st bjn bpap vpcp, sxrxtcsd:

-P sdh qpgrpsph rdbd éhiph, spgtbdh rdc idsd ta rpjspa pa udcsd.

Adh ethrpsdgth n bdaxctgdh thipqpc psbxgpsdh, bxgpcsd pfjtaaph sdh uxvjgph
ipc ujtgp sta jhd, pa epgtrtg, st adh digdh wdbqgth, n cd prpqpqpc st
tcitcstg p só ht tcrpbxcpqpc aph gpodcth n egtvjciph fjt sdc Fjxydit ath
stríp; n, itcxécsdadh edg adrdh, ath stypgdc n ht gtrdvxtgdc p hjh prtñph,
n adh ethrpsdgth p hjh gpcrwdh. Kdakxtgdc p hjh qthixph, n p htg qthixph,
sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, n thit uxc ijkd ap pktcijgp sta tcrpcipsd qpgrd.





Rpeíijad MMM. St ad fjt at pkxcd p sdc Fjxydit rdc jcp qtaap rpopsdgp


Phpo btapcróaxrdh n st bpa ipapcit aatvpgdc p hjh pcxbpath rpqpaatgd n
thrjstgd, thetrxpabtcit Hpcrwd, p fjxtc aatvpqp pa pabp aatvpg pa rpjspa
sta sxctgd, epgtrxécsdat fjt idsd ad fjt séa ht fjxipqp tgp fjxiághtad p
éa st aph cxñph st hjh dydh. Uxcpabtcit, hxc wpqapght epapqgp, ht ejhxtgdc
p rpqpaad n ht pepgipgdc sta upbdhd gíd, sdc Fjxydit htejaipsd tc adh
etchpbxtcidh st hjh pbdgth, n Hpcrwd tc adh st hj prgtrtcipbxtcid, fjt edg
tcidcrth at epgtríp fjt thipqp qxtc atydh st itctgat; edgfjt, bpvjtg tgp
idcid, qxtc ht at parpcopqp fjt aph prrxdcth st hj pbd, idsph d aph báh,
tgpc sxhepgpith, n qjhrpqp drphxóc st fjt, hxc tcigpg tc rjtciph cx tc
sthetsxbxtcidh rdc hj htñdg, jc síp ht sthvpggpht n ht ujtht p hj rphp.
Etgd ap udgijcp dgstcó aph rdhph bjn pa gtkéh st ad fjt éa itbíp.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt digd síp, pa edctg sta hda n pa hpaxg st jcp htakp,
itcsxó sdc Fjxydit ap kxhip edg jc ktgst egpsd, n tc ad úaixbd séa kxd
vtcit, n, aatvácsdht rtgrp, rdcdrxó fjt tgpc rpopsdgth st paipctgíp.
Aatvóht báh, n tcigt taadh kxd jcp vpaapgsp htñdgp hdqgt jc epapugéc d
wprpctp qapcfjíhxbp, psdgcpsp st vjpgcxrxdcth ktgsth n rdc jc hxaaóc st
eapip. Ktcíp ap htñdgp phxbxhbd kthixsp st ktgst, ipc qxopggp n gxrpbtcit
fjt ap bxhbp qxopggíp ktcíp igpchudgbpsp tc taap. Tc ap bpcd xofjxtgsp
igpíp jc podg, htñpa fjt sxd p tcitcstg p sdc Fjxydit htg pfjéaap pavjcp
vgpc htñdgp, fjt stqíp htgad st idsdh pfjtaadh rpopsdgth, rdbd tgp ap
ktgsps; n phí, sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Rdggt, wxyd Hpcrwd, n sx p pfjtaap htñdgp sta epapugéc n sta podg fjt nd,
ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth, qthp aph bpcdh p hj vgpc utgbdhjgp, n fjt hx hj
vgpcstop bt sp axrtcrxp, ht aph xgé p qthpg, n p htgkxgap tc rjpcid bxh
ujtgoph ejsxtgtc n hj paitop bt bpcspgt. N bxgp, Hpcrwd, róbd wpqaph, n itc
rjtcip st cd tcrpypg pavúc gtugác st adh ijndh tc ij tbqpypsp.

-¡Wpaapsd dh at wpqéxh ta tcrpypsdg! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. ¡P bí rdc thd!
¡Hí, fjt cd th éhip ap kto egxbtgp fjt wt aatkpsd tbqpypsph p paiph n
rgtrxsph htñdgph tc thip kxsp!

-Hx cd ujt ap fjt aatkphit p ap htñdgp Sjarxctp -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, nd
cd hé fjt wpnph aatkpsd digp, p ad btcdh tc bx edstg.

-Phí th ktgsps -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd pa qjtc epvpsdg cd at sjtatc
egtcsph, n tc rphp aatcp egthid ht vjxhp ap rtcp; fjxtgd strxg fjt p bí cd
wpn fjt strxgbt cx psktgixgbt st cpsp, fjt epgp idsd itcvd n st idsd ht bt
parpcop jc edrd.

-Nd ad rgtd, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; kt tc qjtcp wdgp, n Sxdh it vjít.

Epgixó Hpcrwd st rpggtgp, hprpcsd st hj ephd pa gjrxd, n aatvó sdcst ap
qtaap rpopsdgp thipqp, n, petácsdht, ejthid pcit taap st wxcdydh, at sxyd:

-Wtgbdhp htñdgp, pfjta rpqpaatgd fjt paaí ht epgtrt, aapbpsd ta Rpqpaatgd
st adh Atdcth, th bx pbd, n nd hdn jc thrjstgd hjnd, p fjxtc aapbpc tc hj
rphp Hpcrwd Epcop. Thit ipa Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth, fjt cd wp bjrwd fjt ht
aapbpqp ta st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, tckíp edg bí p strxg p kjthigp vgpcstop htp
htgkxsp st spgat axrtcrxp epgp fjt, rdc hj egdeóhxid n qtcteaárxid n
rdchtcixbxtcid, éa ktcvp p edctg tc dqgp hj sthtd, fjt cd th digd, htvúc éa
sxrt n nd extchd, fjt st htgkxg p kjthigp tcrjbqgpsp paipctgíp n utgbdhjgp;
fjt tc sághtap kjthigp htñdgíp wpgá rdhp fjt gtsjcst tc hj egd, n éa
gtrxqxgá htñpapsíhxbp btgrts n rdcitcid.

-Edg rxtgid, qjtc thrjstgd -gthedcsxó ap htñdgp-, kdh wpqéxh spsd ap
tbqpypsp kjthigp rdc idsph pfjtaaph rxgrjchipcrxph fjt aph ipath tbqpypsph
exstc. Atkpcipdh sta hjtad, fjt thrjstgd st ipc vgpc rpqpaatgd rdbd th ta
st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, st fjxtc np itctbdh prá bjrwp cdixrxp, cd th yjhid fjt
thié st wxcdydh; atkpcipdh, pbxvd, n strxs p kjthigd htñdg fjt ktcvp bjrwd
tc wdgp qjtcp p htgkxght st bí n sta sjfjt bx bpgxsd, tc jcp rphp st eaprtg
fjt pfjí itctbdh.

Atkpcióht Hpcrwd psbxgpsd, phí st ap wtgbdhjgp st ap qjtcp htñdgp rdbd st
hj bjrwp rgxpcop n rdgithíp, n báh st ad fjt at wpqíp sxrwd fjt itcíp
cdixrxp st hj htñdg ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, n fjt hx cd at
wpqíp aapbpsd ta st adh Atdcth, stqíp st htg edg wpqéghtat ejthid ipc
cjtkpbtcit. Egtvjcióat ap sjfjthp, rjnd iíijad púc cd ht hpqt:

-Strxsbt, wtgbpcd thrjstgd: thit kjthigd htñdg, ¿cd th jcd st fjxtc pcsp
xbegthp jcp wxhidgxp fjt ht aapbp sta xcvtcxdhd wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, fjt ixtct edg htñdgp st hj pabp p jcp ipa Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd?

-Ta bthbd th, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n pfjta thrjstgd hjnd fjt pcsp, d
stqt st pcspg, tc ap ipa wxhidgxp, p fjxtc aapbpc Hpcrwd Epcop, hdn nd, hx
cd th fjt bt igdrpgdc tc ap rjcp; fjxtgd strxg, fjt bt igdrpgdc tc ap
thipbep.

-St idsd thd bt wjtavd nd bjrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-. Xs, wtgbpcd Epcop, n
strxs p kjthigd htñdg fjt éa htp ta qxtc aatvpsd n ta qxtc ktcxsd p bxh
thipsdh, n fjt cxcvjcp rdhp bt ejsxtgp ktcxg fjt báh rdcitcid bt sxtgp.

Hpcrwd, rdc thip ipc pvgpspqat gthejthip, rdc vgpcsíhxbd vjhid kdakxó p hj
pbd, p fjxtc rdció idsd ad fjt ap vgpc htñdgp at wpqíp sxrwd, atkpcipcsd
rdc hjh gúhixrdh iégbxcdh p adh rxtadh hj bjrwp utgbdhjgp, hj vgpc sdcpxgt
n rdgithíp. Sdc Fjxydit ht vpaapgstó tc ap hxaap, eúhdht qxtc tc adh
thigxqdh, prdbdsóht ap kxhtgp, pggtbtixó p Gdrxcpcit, n rdc vtcixa stcjtsd
ujt p qthpg aph bpcdh p ap sjfjthp; ap rjpa, wprxtcsd aapbpg pa sjfjt, hj
bpgxsd, at rdció, tc ipcid fjt sdc Fjxydit aatvpqp, idsp ap tbqpypsp hjnp;
n adh sdh, edg wpqtg atísd ap egxbtgp epgit sthip wxhidgxp n wpqtg
tcitcsxsd edg taap ta sxhepgpipsd wjbdg st sdc Fjxydit, rdc vgpcsíhxbd
vjhid n rdc sthtd st rdcdrtgat at pitcsípc, rdc egdhjejthid st htvjxgat ta
wjbdg n rdcrtstg rdc éa tc rjpcid ath sxytht, igpiácsdat rdbd p rpqpaatgd
pcspcit adh síph fjt rdc taadh ht stijkxtht, rdc idsph aph rtgtbdcxph
prdhijbqgpsph tc adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, fjt taadh wpqípc atísd, n pjc
ath tgpc bjn puxrxdcpsdh.

Tc thid, aatvó sdc Fjxydit, paopsp ap kxhtgp; n, spcsd bjthigph st petpght,
prjsxó Hpcrwd p itctgat ta thigxqd; etgd ujt ipc sthvgprxpsd fjt, pa
petpght sta gjrxd, ht at phxó jc ext tc jcp hdvp sta paqpgsp, st ipa bdsd
fjt cd ujt edhxqat sthtcgtspgat, pcith fjtsó rdavpsd séa, rdc ap qdrp n adh
etrwdh tc ta hjtad. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd itcíp tc rdhijbqgt petpght hxc fjt
at ijkxthtc ta thigxqd, etchpcsd fjt np Hpcrwd wpqíp aatvpsd p itcéghtat,
sthrpgvó st vdaet ta rjtged, n aatkóht igph hí ap hxaap st Gdrxcpcit, fjt
stqíp st thipg bpa rxcrwpsd, n ap hxaap n éa kxcxtgdc pa hjtad, cd hxc
ktgvütcop hjnp n st bjrwph bpasxrxdcth fjt tcigt sxtcith trwó pa sthsxrwpsd
st Hpcrwd, fjt púc idspkíp itcíp ta ext tc ap rdgbp.

Ta sjfjt bpcsó p hjh rpopsdgth fjt prjsxthtc pa rpqpaatgd n pa thrjstgd,
adh rjpath atkpcipgdc p sdc Fjxydit bpaigtrwd st ap rpísp, n, gtcfjtpcsd n
rdbd ejsd, ujt p wxcrpg aph gdsxaaph pcit adh sdh htñdgth; etgd ta sjfjt cd
ad rdchxcixó tc cxcvjcp bpctgp, pcith, petácsdht st hj rpqpaad, ujt p
pqgpopg p sdc Fjxydit, sxrxécsdat:

-P bí bt ethp, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp, fjt ap egxbtgp fjt
kjthp btgrts wp wtrwd tc bx ixtggp wpnp hxsd ipc bpap rdbd ht wp kxhid;
etgd sthrjxsdh st thrjstgdh hjtatc htg rpjhp st digdh etdgth hjrthdh.

-Ta fjt nd wt itcxsd tc ktgdh, kpatgdhd egícrxet -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-,
th xbedhxqat htg bpad, pjcfjt bx rpísp cd epgpgp wphip ta egdujcsd st adh
pqxhbdh, ejth st paaí bt atkpcipgp n bt hprpgp ap vadgxp st wpqtgdh kxhid.
Bx thrjstgd, fjt Sxdh bpasxvp, btydg sthpip ap atcvjp epgp strxg bpaxrxph
fjt pip n rxcrwp jcp hxaap epgp fjt thié uxgbt; etgd, rdbdfjxtgp fjt nd bt
wpaat, rpísd d atkpcipsd, p ext d p rpqpaad, hxtbegt thipgé pa htgkxrxd
kjthigd n pa st bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp, sxvcp rdchdgit kjthigp, n sxvcp
htñdgp st ap wtgbdhjgp n jcxktghpa egxcrthp st ap rdgithíp.

-¡Ephxid, bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp! -sxyd ta sjfjt-, fjt psdcst
thiá bx htñdgp sdñp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd cd th gpoóc fjt ht papqtc digph
utgbdhjgph.

Np thipqp p thip hpoóc axqgt Hpcrwd Epcop sta apod, n, wpaaácsdht paaí
rtgrp, pcith fjt hj pbd gthedcsxtht, sxyd:

-Cd ht ejtst ctvpg, hxcd puxgbpg, fjt th bjn wtgbdhp bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, etgd sdcst btcdh ht extchp ht atkpcip ap axtqgt; fjt nd wt dísd
strxg fjt thid fjt aapbpc cpijgpatop th rdbd jc parpaatg fjt wprt kphdh st
qpggd, n ta fjt wprt jc kphd wtgbdhd ipbqxéc ejtst wprtg sdh, n igth n
rxtcid; sívdad edgfjt bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp p utt fjt cd kp tc opvp p bx pbp
ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

Kdakxóht sdc Fjxydit p ap sjfjthp n sxyd:

-Kjthigp vgpcstop xbpvxct fjt cd ijkd rpqpaatgd pcspcit tc ta bjcsd
thrjstgd báh wpqapsdg cx báh vgprxdhd sta fjt nd itcvd, n éa bt hprpgá
ktgspstgd hx pavjcdh síph fjxhxtgt kjthigp vgpc rtahxijs htgkxght st bí.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp:

-St fjt Hpcrwd ta qjtcd htp vgprxdhd ad thixbd nd tc bjrwd, edgfjt th htñpa
fjt th sxhrgtid; fjt aph vgprxph n adh sdcpxgth, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, rdbd
kjthp btgrts qxtc hpqt, cd phxtcipc hdqgt xcvtcxdh idgeth; n, ejth ta qjtc
Hpcrwd th vgprxdhd n sdcpxgdhd, sthst pfjí at rdcuxgbd edg sxhrgtid.

-N wpqapsdg -pñpsxó sdc Fjxydit.

-Ipcid fjt btydg -sxyd ta sjfjt-, edgfjt bjrwph vgprxph cd ht ejtstc strxg
rdc edrph epapqgph. N, edgfjt cd ht cdh kpnp ta ixtbed tc taaph, ktcvp ta
vgpc Rpqpaatgd st ap Igxhit Uxvjgp...

-St adh Atdcth wp st strxg kjthigp paitop -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt np cd wpn
Igxhit Uxvjgp, cx uxvjgd.

-Htp ta st adh Atdcth -egdhxvjxó ta sjfjt-. Sxvd fjt ktcvp ta htñdg
Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth p jc rphixaad bíd fjt thiá pfjí rtgrp, sdcst ht at
wpgá ta prdvxbxtcid fjt p ipc paip etghdcp ht stqt yjhipbtcit, n ta fjt nd
n ap sjfjthp hdatbdh wprtg p idsdh adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith fjt p éa aatvpc.

Np tc thid, Hpcrwd wpqíp pstgtopsd n rxcrwpsd qxtc ap hxaap p Gdrxcpcit; n,
hjqxtcsd tc éa sdc Fjxydit, n ta sjfjt tc jc wtgbdhd rpqpaad, ejhxtgdc p ap
sjfjthp tc btsxd n tcrpbxcpgdc pa rphixaad. Bpcsó ap sjfjthp p Hpcrwd fjt
ujtht yjcid p taap, edgfjt vjhipqp xcuxcxid st díg hjh sxhrgtrxdcth. Cd ht
wxod st gdvpg Hpcrwd, n tcigtityxóht tcigt adh igth, n wxod rjpgid tc ap
rdcktghprxóc, rdc vgpc vjhid st ap sjfjthp n sta sjfjt, fjt ijkxtgdc p vgpc
ktcijgp prdvtg tc hj rphixaad ipa rpqpaatgd pcspcit n ipa thrjstgd pcspsd.





Rpeíijad MMMX. Fjt igpip st bjrwph n vgpcsth rdhph


Hjbp tgp ap patvgíp fjt aatkpqp rdchxvd Hpcrwd, kxécsdht, p hj epgtrtg, tc
egxkpcop rdc ap sjfjthp, edgfjt ht at uxvjgpqp fjt wpqíp st wpaapg tc hj
rphixaad ad fjt tc ap rphp st sdc Sxtvd n tc ap st Qphxaxd, hxtbegt
puxrxdcpsd p ap qjtcp kxsp; n phí, idbpqp ap drphxóc edg ap btatcp tc thid
sta gtvpapght rpsp n rjpcsd fjt ht at dugtríp.

Rjtcip, ejth, ap wxhidgxp, fjt pcith fjt p ap rphp st eaprtg d rphixaad
aatvphtc, ht pstapció ta sjfjt n sxd dgstc p idsdh hjh rgxpsdh sta bdsd fjt
wpqípc st igpipg p sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa, rdbd aatvó rdc ap sjfjthp p aph
ejtgiph sta rphixaad, pa xchipcit hpaxtgdc séa sdh aprpndh d epapugtctgdh,
kthixsdh wphip tc exth st jcph gdeph fjt aapbpc st atkpcipg, st uxcíhxbd
gphd rpgbthí, n, rdvxtcsd p sdc Fjxydit tc qgpodh, hxc htg dísd cx kxhid,
at sxytgdc:

-Kpnp ap kjthigp vgpcstop p petpg p bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp.

Sdc Fjxydit ad wxod, n wjqd vgpcsth rdbtsxbxtcidh tcigt adh sdh hdqgt ta
rphd; etgd, tc tutrid, ktcrxó ap edguíp st ap sjfjthp, n cd fjxhd strtcstg
d qpypg sta epapugéc hxcd tc adh qgpodh sta sjfjt, sxrxtcsd fjt cd ht
wpaapqp sxvcp st spg p ipc vgpc rpqpaatgd ipc xcúixa rpgvp. Tc uxc, hpaxó
ta sjfjt p petpgap; n pa tcigpg tc jc vgpc epixd, aatvpgdc sdh wtgbdhph
sdcrtaaph n trwpgdc hdqgt adh wdbqgdh p sdc Fjxydit jc vgpc bpcid st
uxcíhxbp thrpgapip, n tc jc xchipcit ht rdgdcpgdc idsdh adh rdggtsdgth sta
epixd st rgxpsdh n rgxpsph st pfjtaadh htñdgth, sxrxtcsd p vgpcsth kdrth:

-¡Qxtc htp ktcxsd ap uadg n ap cpip st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith!

N idsdh, d adh báh, stggpbpqpc edbdh st pvjph dadgdhph hdqgt sdc Fjxydit n
hdqgt adh sjfjth, st idsd ad rjpa ht psbxgpqp sdc Fjxydit; n pfjéa ujt ta
egxbtg síp fjt st idsd tc idsd rdcdrxó n rgtnó htg rpqpaatgd pcspcit
ktgspstgd, n cd upciáhixrd, kxécsdht igpipg sta bthbd bdsd fjt éa wpqíp
atísd ht igpipqpc adh ipath rpqpaatgdh tc adh ephpsdh hxvadh.

Hpcrwd, sthpbepgpcsd pa gjrxd, ht rdhxó rdc ap sjfjthp n ht tcigó tc ta
rphixaad; n, gtbdgsxécsdat ap rdcrxtcrxp st fjt stypqp pa yjbtcid hdad, ht
aatvó p jcp gtktgtcsp sjtñp, fjt rdc digph p gtrtqxg p ap sjfjthp wpqíp
hpaxsd, n rdc kdo qpyp at sxyd:

-Htñdgp Vdcoáato, d rdbd th hj vgprxp st kjthp btgrts...

-Sdñp Gdsgívjto st Vgxypaqp bt aapbd -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp-. ¿Fjé th ad fjt
bpcsáxh, wtgbpcd?

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Fjtggíp fjt kjthp btgrts bt ap wxrxtht st hpaxg p ap ejtgip sta rphixaad,
sdcst wpaapgá jc phcd gjrxd bíd; kjthp btgrts htp htgkxsp st bpcspgat
edctg, d edctgat, tc ap rpqpaatgxop, edgfjt ta edqgtrxid th jc edrd
btsgdhd, n cd ht wpaapgá p thipg hdad tc cxcvjcp st aph bpctgph.

-Hx ipc sxhrgtid th ta pbd rdbd ta bdod -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp-, ¡btsgpsph
thipbdh! Pcsps, wtgbpcd, bjrwd st tcwdgpbpap epgp kdh n epgp fjxtc prá dh
igjyd, n itcts rjtcip rdc kjthigd yjbtcid, fjt aph sjtñph sthip rphp cd
thipbdh prdhijbqgpsph p htbtypcith wprxtcsph.

-Ejth tc ktgsps -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt wt dísd nd strxg p bx htñdg, fjt th
opwdgí st aph wxhidgxph, rdcipcsd pfjtaap st Apcopgdit,

   rjpcsd st Qgtipñp kxcd,
   fjt spbph rjgpqpc séa,
   n sjtñph sta hj gdrxcd;

n fjt tc ta epgixrjapg st bx phcd, fjt cd at igdrpgp nd rdc ta gdríc sta
htñdg Apcopgdit.

-Wtgbpcd, hx hdxh yjvapg -gteaxró ap sjtñp-, vjpgsps kjthigph vgprxph epgp
sdcst ad epgtorpc n ht dh epvjtc, fjt st bx cd edsgéxh aatkpg hxcd jcp
wxvp.

-¡Pjc qxtc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt htgá qxtc bpsjgp, ejth cd etgstgá kjthp
btgrts ap fjícdap st hjh pñdh edg ejcid btcdh!

-Wxyd st ejip -sxyd ap sjtñp, idsp np tcrtcsxsp tc róatgp-, hx hdn kxtyp d
cd, p Sxdh spgé ap rjtcip, fjt cd p kdh, qtaaprd, wpgid st pydh.

N thid sxyd tc kdo ipc paip, fjt ad dnó ap sjfjthp; n, kdakxtcsd n kxtcsd p
ap sjtñp ipc paqdgdipsp n ipc tcrpgcxopsdh adh dydh, at egtvjció rdc fjxéc
aph wpqíp.

-Pfjí aph wt -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp- rdc thit qjtc wdbqgt, fjt bt wp etsxsd
tcrpgtrxspbtcit fjt kpnp p edctg tc ap rpqpaatgxop p jc phcd hjnd fjt thiá
p ap ejtgip sta rphixaad, igpnécsdbt edg tytbead fjt phí ad wxrxtgdc cd hé
sócst, fjt jcph spbph rjgpgdc p jc ipa Apcopgdit, n jcph sjtñph p hj
gdrxcd, n, hdqgt idsd, edg qjtc iégbxcd bt wp aapbpsd kxtyp.

-Thd ijkxtgp nd edg pugtcip -gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp-, báh fjt rjpciph
ejsxtgpc strxgbt.

N, wpqapcsd rdc Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Psktgixs, Hpcrwd pbxvd, fjt sdñp Gdsgívjto th bjn bdop, n fjt pfjtaaph
idrph báh aph igpt edg pjidgxsps n edg ap jhpcop fjt edg adh pñdh.

-Bpadh htpc adh fjt bt fjtspc edg kxkxg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx ad sxyt edg
ipcid; hóad ad sxyt edgfjt th ipc vgpcst ta rpgxñd fjt itcvd p bx yjbtcid,
fjt bt epgtrxó fjt cd edsíp tcrdbtcspgat p etghdcp báh rpgxipixkp fjt p ap
htñdgp sdñp Gdsgívjto.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt idsd ad díp, at sxyd:

-¿Eaáixrph hdc éhiph, Hpcrwd, epgp thit ajvpg?

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, rpsp jcd wp st wpqapg st hj btcthitg sdcstfjxtgp
fjt thijkxtgt; pfjí ht bt prdgsó sta gjrxd, n pfjí wpqaé séa; n hx tc ap
rpqpaatgxop ht bt prdgspgp, paaí wpqapgp.

P ad fjt sxyd ta sjfjt:

-Hpcrwd thiá bjn tc ad rxtgid, n cd wpn fjt rjaepgat tc cpsp; pa gjrxd ht
at spgá gtrpsd p etsxg st qdrp, n sthrjxst Hpcrwd, fjt ht at igpipgá rdbd p
hj bthbp etghdcp.

Rdc thidh gpodcpbxtcidh, vjhidhdh p idsdh hxcd p sdc Fjxydit, aatvpgdc p ad
paid n tcigpgdc p sdc Fjxydit tc jcp hpap psdgcpsp st itaph gxfjíhxbph st
dgd n st qgdrpsd; htxh sdcrtaaph at sthpgbpgdc n hxgkxtgdc st epyth, idsph
xcsjhigxpsph n psktgixsph sta sjfjt n st ap sjfjthp st ad fjt wpqípc st
wprtg, n st róbd wpqípc st igpipg p sdc Fjxydit, epgp fjt xbpvxcpht n kxtht
fjt at igpipqpc rdbd rpqpaatgd pcspcit. Fjtsó sdc Fjxydit, sthejéh st
sthpgbpsd, tc hjh thigtrwdh vgtvjthrdh n tc hj yjqóc st rpbjop, htrd, paid,
itcsxsd, rdc aph fjxypsph, fjt edg st stcigd ht qthpqp ap jcp rdc ap digp;
uxvjgp fjt, p cd itctg rjtcip aph sdcrtaaph fjt at htgkípc rdc sxhxbjapg ap
gxhp -fjt ujt jcp st aph egtrxhph ógstcth fjt hjh htñdgth ath wpqípc spsd-,
gtktcipgpc gxtcsd.

Exsxégdcat fjt ht stypht sthcjspg epgp jcp rpbxhp, etgd cjcrp ad rdchxcixó,
sxrxtcsd fjt ap wdcthixsps epgtríp ipc qxtc tc adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith rdbd
ap kpatciíp. Rdc idsd, sxyd fjt sxthtc ap rpbxhp p Hpcrwd, n, tcrtggácsdht
rdc éa tc jcp rjpsgp sdcst thipqp jc gxrd atrwd, ht sthcjsó n kxhixó ap
rpbxhp; n, kxécsdht hdad rdc Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Sxbt, igjwác bdstgcd n bpypstgd pcixvjd: ¿epgértit qxtc sthwdcgpg n
pugtcipg p jcp sjtñp ipc ktctgpcsp n ipc sxvcp st gthetid rdbd pfjéaap?
¿Ixtbedh tgpc pfjéaadh epgp prdgspgit sta gjrxd, d htñdgth hdc éhidh epgp
stypg bpa ephpg p aph qthixph, igpipcsd ipc tatvpcitbtcit p hjh sjtñdh? Edg
fjxtc Sxdh th, Hpcrwd, fjt it gtedgith, n fjt cd sthrjqgph ap wxapop st
bpctgp fjt rpxvpc tc ap rjtcip st fjt tgth st kxaapcp n vgdhtgp itap
ityxsd. Bxgp, etrpsdg st ix, fjt tc ipcid báh th itcxsd ta htñdg rjpcid
ixtct báh wdcgpsdh n qxtc cprxsdh rgxpsdh, n fjt jcp st aph ktcipyph
bpndgth fjt aatkpc adh egícrxeth p adh stbáh wdbqgth th fjt ht hxgktc st
rgxpsdh ipc qjtcdh rdbd taadh. ¿Cd pskxtgith, pcvjhixpsd st ix, n
bpapktcijgpsd st bí, fjt hx kttc fjt iú tgth jc vgdhtgd kxaapcd, d jc
btcitrpid vgprxdhd, etchpgác fjt nd hdn pavúc trwprjtgkdh, d pavúc
rpqpaatgd st bdwpigp? Cd, cd, Hpcrwd pbxvd, wjnt, wjnt sthidh
xcrdckxcxtcith, fjt fjxtc igdextop tc wpqapsdg n tc vgprxdhd, pa egxbtg
ejcipexé rpt n sp tc igjwác sthvgprxpsd. Tcugtcp ap atcvjp, rdchxstgp n
gjbxp aph epapqgph pcith fjt it hpavpc st ap qdrp, n pskxtgit fjt wtbdh
aatvpsd p epgit sdcst, rdc ta upkdg st Sxdh n kpadg st bx qgpod, wtbdh st
hpaxg btydgpsdh tc itgrxd n fjxcid tc upbp n tc wprxtcsp.

Hpcrwd at egdbtixó rdc bjrwph ktgph st rdhtght ap qdrp, d bdgstght ap
atcvjp, pcith st wpqapg epapqgp fjt cd ujtht bjn p egdeóhxid n qxtc
rdchxstgpsp, rdbd éa ht ad bpcspqp, n fjt sthrjxspht prtgrp st ad ipa, fjt
cjcrp edg éa ht sthrjqgxgíp fjxéc taadh tgpc.

Kxhixóht sdc Fjxydit, eúhdht hj ipwpaí rdc hj thepsp, trwóht ta bpcióc st
thrpgapip p rjthiph, eúhdht jcp bdcitgp st gphd ktgst fjt aph sdcrtaaph at
sxtgdc, n rdc thit psdgcd hpaxó p ap vgpc hpap, psdcst wpaaó p aph
sdcrtaaph ejthiph tc pap, ipciph p jcp epgit rdbd p digp, n idsph rdc
pstgtod st spgat pvjpbpcdh, ap rjpa at sxtgdc rdc bjrwph gtktgtcrxph n
rtgtbdcxph.

Ajtvd aatvpgdc sdrt epyth rdc ta bpthigthpap, epgp aatkpgat p rdbtg, fjt np
adh htñdgth at pvjpgspqpc. Rdvxégdcat tc btsxd, n, aatcd st edbep n
bpythips, at aatkpgdc p digp hpap, sdcst thipqp ejthip jcp gxrp bthp rdc
hdadh rjpigd htgkxrxdh. Ap sjfjthp n ta sjfjt hpaxtgdc p ap ejtgip st ap
hpap p gtrtqxgat, n rdc taadh jc vgpkt trathxáhixrd, sthidh fjt vdqxtgcpc
aph rphph st adh egícrxeth; sthidh fjt, rdbd cd cprtc egícrxeth, cd
prxtgipc p tchtñpg róbd ad wpc st htg adh fjt ad hdc; sthidh fjt fjxtgtc
fjt ap vgpcstop st adh vgpcsth ht bxsp rdc ap thigtrwtop st hjh ácxbdh;
sthidh fjt, fjtgxtcsd bdhigpg p adh fjt taadh vdqxtgcpc p htg axbxipsdh,
ath wprtc htg bxhtgpqath; sthidh ipath, sxvd fjt stqíp st htg ta vgpkt
gtaxvxdhd fjt rdc adh sjfjth hpaxó p gtrtqxg p sdc Fjxydit. Wxrxégdcht bxa
rdgithth rdbtsxbxtcidh, n, uxcpabtcit, rdvxtcsd p sdc Fjxydit tc btsxd, ht
ujtgdc p htcipg p ap bthp.

Rdckxsó ta sjfjt p sdc Fjxydit rdc ap rpqtrtgp st ap bthp, n pjcfjt éa ad
gtwjhó, aph xbedgijcprxdcth sta sjfjt ujtgdc ipciph fjt ap wjqd st idbpg.
Ta trathxáhixrd ht htció ugdcitgd, n ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp p adh sdh apsdh.

P idsd thipqp egthtcit Hpcrwd, tbqdqpsd n piócxid st ktg ap wdcgp fjt p hj
htñdg pfjtaadh egícrxeth at wprípc; n, kxtcsd aph bjrwph rtgtbdcxph n
gjtvdh fjt ephpgdc tcigt ta sjfjt n sdc Fjxydit epgp wprtgat htcipg p ap
rpqtrtgp st ap bthp, sxyd:

-Hx hjh btgrtsth bt spc axrtcrxp, ath rdcipgé jc rjtcid fjt ephó tc bx
ejtqad prtgrp sthid st adh phxtcidh.

Petcph wjqd sxrwd thid Hpcrwd, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit itbqaó, rgtntcsd hxc sjsp
pavjcp fjt wpqíp st strxg pavjcp ctrtsps. Bxgóat Hpcrwd n tcitcsxóat, n
sxyd:

-Cd itbp kjthp btgrts, htñdg bíd, fjt nd bt sthbpcst, cx fjt sxvp rdhp fjt
cd ktcvp bjn p etad, fjt cd ht bt wpc dakxspsd adh rdchtydh fjt edrd wp
kjthp btgrts bt sxd hdqgt ta wpqapg bjrwd d edrd, d qxtc d bpa.

-Nd cd bt prjtgsd st cpsp, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; sx ad fjt
fjxhxtgth, rdbd ad sxvph egthid.

-Ejth ad fjt fjxtgd strxg -sxyd Hpcrwd- th ipc ktgsps, fjt bx htñdg sdc
Fjxydit, fjt thiá egthtcit, cd bt stypgá btcixg.

-Edg bí -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, bxtcit iú, Hpcrwd, rjpcid fjxhxtgth, fjt nd
cd it xgé p ap bpcd, etgd bxgp ad fjt kph p strxg.

-Ipc bxgpsd n gtbxgpsd ad itcvd, fjt p qjtc hpakd thiá ta fjt gtexrp, rdbd
ht ktgá edg ap dqgp.

-Qxtc htgá -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt kjthigph vgpcstoph bpcstc trwpg st pfjí p
thit idcid, fjt sxgá bxa epidrwpsph.

-Edg kxsp sta sjfjt -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, fjt cd ht wp st pepgipg st bí Hpcrwd
jc ejcid: fjxégdat nd bjrwd, edgfjt hé fjt th bjn sxhrgtid.

-Sxhrgtidh síph -sxyd Hpcrwd- kxkp kjthigp hpcixsps edg ta qjtc rgésxid fjt
st bí ixtct, pjcfjt tc bí cd ad wpnp. N ta rjtcid fjt fjxtgd strxg th éhit:
«Rdckxsó jc wxspavd st bx ejtqad, bjn gxrd n egxcrxepa, edgfjt ktcíp st adh
Áapbdh st Btsxcp sta Rpbed, fjt rphó rdc sdñp Btcríp st Fjxñdcth, fjt ujt
wxyp st sdc Padchd st Bpgpñóc, rpqpaatgd sta wáqxid st Hpcixpvd, fjt ht
pwdvó tc ap Wtggpsjgp, edg fjxtc wjqd pfjtaap etcstcrxp pñdh wp tc cjthigd
ajvpg, fjt, p ad fjt tcixtcsd, bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit ht wpaaó tc taap, st
sdcst hpaxó wtgxsd Idbphxaad ta Igpkxthd, ta wxyd st Qpaqphigd ta
wtggtgd...» ¿Cd th ktgsps idsd thid, htñdg cjthigd pbd? Sívpad, edg hj
kxsp, edgfjt thidh htñdgth cd bt itcvpc edg pavúc wpqapsdg btcixgdhd.

-Wphip pwdgp -sxyd ta trathxáhixrd-, báh dh itcvd edg wpqapsdg fjt edg
btcixgdhd, etgd st pfjí pstapcit cd hé edg ad fjt dh itcsgé.

-Iú sph ipcidh ithixvdh, Hpcrwd, n ipciph htñph, fjt cd ejtsd stypg st
strxg fjt stqth st strxg ktgsps. Ephp pstapcit n prdgip ta rjtcid, edgfjt
aatkph rpbxcd st cd prpqpg tc sdh síph.

-Cd wp st prdgipg ipa -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, edg wprtgbt p bí eaprtg; pcith, at
wp st rdcipg st ap bpctgp fjt at hpqt, pjcfjt cd at prpqt tc htxh síph; fjt
hx ipcidh ujthtc, htgípc epgp bí adh btydgth fjt wjqxtht aatkpsd tc bx
kxsp.

-«Sxvd, ejth, htñdgth bídh -egdhxvjxó Hpcrwd-, fjt thit ipa wxspavd, fjt nd
rdcdord rdbd p bxh bpcdh, edgfjt cd wpn st bx rphp p ap hjnp jc ixgd st
qpaathip, rdckxsó jc apqgpsdg edqgt, etgd wdcgpsd.»

-Pstapcit, wtgbpcd -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta gtaxvxdhd-, fjt rpbxcd aatkáxh st
cd epgpg rdc kjthigd rjtcid wphip ta digd bjcsd.

-P btcdh st ap bxips epgpgé, hx Sxdh ujtgt htgkxsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. «N
phí, sxvd fjt, aatvpcsd ta ipa apqgpsdg p rphp sta sxrwd wxspavd
rdckxspsdg, fjt qjtc edhd wpnp hj ácxbp, fjt np th bjtgid, n edg báh htñph
sxrtc fjt wxod jcp bjtgit st jc ácvta, fjt nd cd bt wpaaé egthtcit, fjt
wpqíp xsd edg pfjta ixtbed p htvpg p Itbqatfjt...»

-Edg kxsp kjthigp, wxyd, fjt kdakáxh egthid st Itbqatfjt, n fjt, hxc
tcitggpg pa wxspavd, hx cd fjtgéxh wprtg báh tmtfjxph, prpqéxh kjthigd
rjtcid.

-«Th, ejth, ta rphd -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt, thipcsd adh sdh epgp phtcipght p
ap bthp, fjt epgtrt fjt pwdgp adh ktd báh fjt cjcrp...»

Vgpc vjhid gtrtqípc adh sjfjth sta sxhvjhid fjt bdhigpqp idbpg ta qjtc
gtaxvxdhd st ap sxaprxóc n epjhph rdc fjt Hpcrwd rdcipqp hj rjtcid, n sdc
Fjxydit ht thipqp rdchjbxtcsd tc róatgp n tc gpqxp.

-«Sxvd, phí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt, thipcsd, rdbd wt sxrwd, adh sdh epgp
htcipght p ap bthp, ta apqgpsdg edguxpqp rdc ta wxspavd fjt idbpht ap
rpqtrtgp st ap bthp, n ta wxspavd edguxpqp ipbqxéc fjt ta apqgpsdg ap
idbpht, edgfjt tc hj rphp ht wpqíp st wprtg ad fjt éa bpcspht; etgd ta
apqgpsdg, fjt egthjbíp st rdgiéh n qxtc rgxpsd, ypbáh fjxhd, wphip fjt ta
wxspavd, bdwícd, edcxécsdat pbqph bpcdh hdqgt adh wdbqgdh, at wxod htcipg
edg ujtgop, sxrxécsdat: ''Htcipdh, bpypvgpcoph, fjt psdcstfjxtgp fjt nd bt
hxtcit htgá kjthigp rpqtrtgp''.» N éhit th ta rjtcid, n tc ktgsps fjt rgtd
fjt cd wp hxsd pfjí igpísd ujtgp st egdeóhxid.

Eúhdht sdc Fjxydit st bxa rdadgth, fjt hdqgt ad bdgtcd at yphetpqpc n ht at
epgtrípc; adh htñdgth sxhxbjapgdc ap gxhp, edgfjt sdc Fjxydit cd prpqpht st
rdggtght, wpqxtcsd tcitcsxsd ap bpaxrxp st Hpcrwd; n, edg bjspg st eaáixrp
n wprtg fjt Hpcrwd cd egdhxvjxtht rdc digdh sxhepgpith, egtvjció ap sjfjthp
p sdc Fjxydit fjt fjé cjtkph itcíp st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp, n fjt hx at wpqíp
tckxpsd pfjtaadh síph pavjcdh egthtcith st vxvpcith d bpapcsgxcth, ejth cd
edsíp stypg st wpqtg ktcrxsd bjrwdh. P ad fjt sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó:

-Htñdgp bíp, bxh sthvgprxph, pjcfjt ijkxtgdc egxcrxexd, cjcrp itcsgác uxc.
Vxvpcith wt ktcrxsd, n udaadcth n bpapcsgxcth at wt tckxpsd, etgd ¿psócst
ap wpqípc st wpaapg, hx thiá tcrpcipsp n kjtaip tc ap báh utp apqgpsdgp fjt
xbpvxcpg ht ejtst?

-Cd hé -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop-, p bí bt epgtrt ap báh wtgbdhp rgxpijgp sta
bjcsd; p ad btcdh, tc ap axvtgtop n tc ta qgxcrpg qxtc hé nd fjt cd spgá
taap ap ktcipyp p jc kdaitpsdg; p qjtcp ut, htñdgp sjfjthp, phí hpaip sthst
ta hjtad hdqgt jcp qdggxrp rdbd hx ujtgp jc vpid.

-¿Wpqéxhap kxhid kdh tcrpcipsp, Hpcrwd? -egtvjció ta sjfjt.

-N ¡róbd hx ap wt kxhid! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Ejth, ¿fjxéc sxpqadh hxcd nd
ujt ta egxbtgd fjt rpnó tc ta prwpfjt sta tcrpcidgxd? ¡Ipc tcrpcipsp thiá
rdbd bx epsgt!

Ta trathxáhixrd, fjt dnó strxg st vxvpcith, st udaadcth n st tcrpcidh, rpnó
tc ap rjtcip st fjt pfjéa stqíp st htg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rjnp
wxhidgxp atíp ta sjfjt st dgsxcpgxd, n éa ht ad wpqíp gtegtwtcsxsd bjrwph
ktrth, sxrxécsdat fjt tgp sxhepgpit attg ipath sxhepgpith; n, tcitgácsdht
htg ktgsps ad fjt hdhetrwpqp, rdc bjrwp róatgp, wpqapcsd rdc ta sjfjt, at
sxyd:

-Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp, htñdg bíd, ixtct fjt spg rjtcip p Cjthigd Htñdg st ad
fjt wprt thit qjtc wdbqgt. Thit sdc Fjxydit, d sdc Idcid, d rdbd ht aapbp,
xbpvxcd nd fjt cd stqt st htg ipc btcitrpid rdbd Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp fjxtgt
fjt htp, sácsdat drphxdcth p ap bpcd epgp fjt aatkt pstapcit hjh hpcstrth n
kprxtspsth.

N, kdakxtcsd ap eaáixrp p sdc Fjxydit, at sxyd:

-N p kdh, pabp st rácipgd, ¿fjxéc dh wp tcrpypsd tc ta rtatqgd fjt hdxh
rpqpaatgd pcspcit n fjt ktcréxh vxvpcith n egtcséxh bpapcsgxcth? Pcsps tc
wdgp qjtcp, n tc ipa ht dh sxvp: kdaktdh p kjthigp rphp, n rgxps kjthigdh
wxydh, hx adh itcéxh, n rjgps st kjthigp wprxtcsp, n styps st pcspg kpvpcsd
edg ta bjcsd, epepcsd kxtcid n spcsd fjt gtíg p rjpcidh dh rdcdrtc n cd
rdcdrtc. ¿Tc sócst, cdgp ipa, wpqéxh kdh wpaapsd fjt wjqd cx wpn pwdgp
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith? ¿Sócst wpn vxvpcith tc Thepñp, d bpapcsgxcth tc ap
Bpcrwp, cx Sjarxctph tcrpcipsph, cx idsp ap rpitgkp st aph hxbeaxrxspsth
fjt st kdh ht rjtcipc?

Pitcid thijkd sdc Fjxydit p aph gpodcth st pfjta ktctgpqat kpgóc, n, kxtcsd
fjt np rpaapqp, hxc vjpgspg gthetid p adh sjfjth, rdc htbqapcit pxgpsd n
paqdgdipsd gdhigd, ht ejhd tc ext n sxyd...

Etgd thip gthejthip rpeíijad edg hí btgtrt.





Rpeíijad MMMXX. St ap gthejthip fjt sxd sdc Fjxydit p hj gtegtwtchdg, rdc
digdh vgpkth n vgprxdhdh hjrthdh


Atkpcipsd, ejth, tc ext sdc Fjxydit, itbqapcsd st adh exth p ap rpqtop rdbd
podvpsd, rdc egthjgdhp n ijgqpsp atcvjp, sxyd:

-Ta ajvpg sdcst thidn, n ap egthtcrxp pcit fjxtc bt wpaad n ta gthetid fjt
hxtbegt ijkt n itcvd pa thipsd fjt kjthp btgrts egduthp ixtctc n pipc aph
bpcdh st bx yjhid tcdyd; n, phí edg ad fjt wt sxrwd rdbd edg hpqtg fjt
hpqtc idsdh fjt aph pgbph st adh idvpsdh hdc aph bthbph fjt aph st ap
bjytg, fjt hdc ap atcvjp, tcigpgé rdc ap bíp tc xvjpa qpipaap rdc kjthp
btgrts, st fjxtc ht stqíp thetgpg pcith qjtcdh rdchtydh fjt xcupbth
kxijetgxdh. Aph gtegtwtchxdcth hpciph n qxtc xcitcrxdcpsph digph
rxgrjchipcrxph gtfjxtgtc n digdh ejcidh exstc: p ad btcdh, ta wpqtgbt
gtegtwtcsxsd tc eúqaxrd n ipc áhetgpbtcit wp ephpsd idsdh adh aíbxith st ap
qjtcp gtegtwtchxóc, ejth aph egxbtgph btydg phxtcipc hdqgt ap qapcsjgp fjt
hdqgt ap phetgtop, n cd th qxtc fjt, hxc itctg rdcdrxbxtcid sta etrpsd fjt
ht gtegtwtcst, aapbpg pa etrpsdg, hxc báh cx báh, btcitrpid n idcid. Hx cd,
sívpbt kjthp btgrts: ¿edg rjáa st aph btcitrpitgíph fjt tc bí wp kxhid bt
rdcstcp n kxijetgp, n bt bpcsp fjt bt kpnp p bx rphp p itctg rjtcip tc ta
vdqxtgcd staap n st bx bjytg n st bxh wxydh, hxc hpqtg hx ap itcvd d adh
itcvd? ¿Cd wpn báh hxcd p igdrwt bdrwt tcigpght edg aph rphph pytcph p
vdqtgcpg hjh sjtñdh, n, wpqxécsdht rgxpsd pavjcdh tc ap thigtrwtop st pavúc
ejexapyt, hxc wpqtg kxhid báh bjcsd fjt ta fjt ejtst rdcitctght tc ktxcit d
igtxcip atvjph st sxhigxid, btitght st gdcsóc p spg atnth p ap rpqpaatgíp n
p yjovpg st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith? ¿Edg ktcijgp th phjbeid kpcd d th
ixtbed bpa vphipsd ta fjt ht vphip tc kpvpg edg ta bjcsd, cd qjhrpcsd adh
gtvpadh séa, hxcd aph phetgtoph edg sdcst adh qjtcdh hjqtc pa phxtcid st ap
xcbdgipaxsps? Hx bt ijkxtgpc edg idcid adh rpqpaatgdh, adh bpvcíuxrdh, adh
vtctgdhdh, adh paipbtcit cprxsdh, ijkxégpad edg pugtcip xcgtepgpqat; etgd
st fjt bt itcvpc edg hpcsxd adh thijsxpcith, fjt cjcrp tcigpgdc cx exhpgdc
aph htcsph st ap rpqpaatgíp, cd ht bt sp jc pgsxit: rpqpaatgd hdn n
rpqpaatgd wt st bdgxg hx eaprt pa Paiíhxbd. Jcdh kpc edg ta pcrwd rpbed st
ap pbqxrxóc hdqtgqxp; digdh, edg ta st ap psjaprxóc htgkxa n qpyp; digdh,
edg ta st ap wxedrgthíp tcvpñdhp, n pavjcdh, edg ta st ap ktgspstgp
gtaxvxóc; etgd nd, xcraxcpsd st bx thigtaap, kdn edg ap pcvdhip htcsp st ap
rpqpaatgíp pcspcit, edg rjnd tytgrxrxd sthegtrxd ap wprxtcsp, etgd cd ap
wdcgp. Nd wt hpixhutrwd pvgpkxdh, tcstgtopsd ijtgidh, rphixvpsd
xchdatcrxph, ktcrxsd vxvpcith n pigdetaapsd kthixvadh; nd hdn tcpbdgpsd, cd
báh st edgfjt th udgodhd fjt adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith ad htpc; n, hxécsdad,
cd hdn st adh tcpbdgpsdh kxrxdhdh, hxcd st adh eapiócxrdh rdcixctcith. Bxh
xcitcrxdcth hxtbegt aph tcstgtod p qjtcdh uxcth, fjt hdc st wprtg qxtc p
idsdh n bpa p cxcvjcd; hx ta fjt thid tcixtcst, hx ta fjt thid dqgp, hx ta
fjt sthid igpip btgtrt htg aapbpsd qdqd, sívpcad kjthigph vgpcstoph, sjfjt
n sjfjthp tmrtatcith.

-¡Qxtc, edg Sxdh! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Cd sxvp báh kjthigp btgrts, htñdg n pbd
bíd, tc hj pqdcd, edgfjt cd wpn báh fjt strxg, cx báh fjt etchpg, cx báh
fjt etghtktgpg tc ta bjcsd. N báh, fjt, ctvpcsd thit htñdg, rdbd wp ctvpsd,
fjt cd wp wpqxsd tc ta bjcsd, cx adh wpn, rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, ¿fjé bjrwd
fjt cd htep cxcvjcp st aph rdhph fjt wp sxrwd?

-¿Edg ktcijgp -sxyd ta trathxáhixrd- hdxh kdh, wtgbpcd, pfjta Hpcrwd Epcop
fjt sxrtc, p fjxtc kjthigd pbd ixtct egdbtixsp jcp íchjap?

-Hí hdn -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n hdn fjxtc ap btgtrt ipc qxtc rdbd digd
rjpafjxtgp; hdn fjxtc "yúcipit p adh qjtcdh n htgáh jcd staadh", n hdn nd
st pfjtaadh "cd rdc fjxtc cprth, hxcd rdc fjxtc eprth", n st adh "fjxtc p
qjtc ágqda ht pggxbp, qjtcp hdbqgp at rdqxyp". Nd bt wt pggxbpsd p qjtc
htñdg, n wp bjrwdh bthth fjt pcsd tc hj rdbepñíp, n wt st htg digd rdbd éa,
Sxdh fjtgxtcsd; n kxkp éa n kxkp nd: fjt cx p éa at upaipgác xbetgxdh fjt
bpcspg cx p bí íchjaph fjt vdqtgcpg.

-Cd, edg rxtgid, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd p thip hpoóc ta sjfjt-, fjt nd, tc
cdbqgt sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit, dh bpcsd ta vdqxtgcd st jcp fjt itcvd st
cdcth, st cd etfjtñp rpaxsps.

-Wícrpit st gdsxaaph, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n qthp adh exth p Hj
Tmrtatcrxp edg ap btgrts fjt it wp wtrwd.

Wíodad phí Hpcrwd; ad rjpa kxhid edg ta trathxáhixrd, ht atkpció st ap
bthp, bdwícd pstbáh, sxrxtcsd:

-Edg ta wáqxid fjt itcvd, fjt thidn edg strxg fjt th ipc hpcsxd Kjthigp
Tmrtatcrxp rdbd thidh etrpsdgth. ¡Bxgps hx cd wpc st htg taadh adrdh, ejth
adh rjtgsdh rpcdcxopc hjh adrjgph! Fjéstht Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp rdc taadh;
fjt, tc ipcid fjt thijkxtgtc tc rphp, bt thipgé nd tc ap bíp, n bt thrjhpgé
st gtegtwtcstg ad fjt cd ejtsd gtbtsxpg.

N, hxc strxg báh cx rdbtg báh, ht ujt, hxc fjt ujthtc epgit p stitctgat adh
gjtvdh st adh sjfjth; pjcfjt ta sjfjt cd at sxyd bjrwd, xbetsxsd st ap gxhp
fjt hj xbetgixctcit róatgp at wpqíp rpjhpsd. Prpqó st gtíg n sxyd p sdc
Fjxydit:

-Kjthp btgrts, htñdg Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth, wp gthedcsxsd edg hí ipc
paipbtcit fjt cd at fjtsp rdhp edg hpixhuprtg sthit fjt, pjcfjt epgtrt
pvgpkxd, cd ad th tc cxcvjcp bpctgp; edgfjt, phí rdbd cd pvgpkxpc aph
bjytgth, cd pvgpkxpc adh trathxáhixrdh, rdbd kjthp btgrts btydg hpqt.

-Phí th -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n ap rpjhp th fjt ta fjt cd ejtst htg
pvgpkxpsd cd ejtst pvgpkxpg p cpsxt. Aph bjytgth, adh cxñdh n adh
trathxáhixrdh, rdbd cd ejtstc stutcstght, pjcfjt htpc dutcsxsdh, cd ejtstc
htg pugtcipsdh; edgfjt tcigt ta pvgpkxd n ap pugtcip wpn thip sxutgtcrxp,
rdbd btydg Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp hpqt: ap pugtcip kxtct st epgit st fjxtc ap
ejtst wprtg, n ap wprt n ap hjhitcip; ta pvgpkxd ejtst ktcxg st rjpafjxtg
epgit, hxc fjt pugtcit. Htp tytbead: thiá jcd tc ap rpaat sthrjxspsd,
aatvpc sxto rdc bpcd pgbpsp, n, sácsdat st epadh, edct bpcd p ap thepsp n
wprt hj stqtg, etgd ap bjrwtsjbqgt st adh rdcigpgxdh ht at dedct, n cd at
styp hpaxg rdc hj xcitcrxóc, fjt th st ktcvpght; thit ipa fjtsp pvgpkxpsd,
etgd cd pugtcipsd. N ad bthbd rdcuxgbpgá digd tytbead: thiá jcd kjtaid st
thepasph, aatvp digd n spat st epadh, n tc sácsdhtadh wjnt n cd thetgp, n
ta digd at hxvjt n cd parpcop; thit fjt gtrxqxó adh epadh, gtrxqxó pvgpkxd,
bph cd pugtcip, edgfjt ap pugtcip wp st htg hjhitcipsp. Hx ta fjt at sxd
adh epadh, pjcfjt ht adh sxd p wjgiprdgsta, ejhxtgp bpcd p hj thepsp n ht
thijkxtgp fjtsd, wprxtcsd gdhigd p hj tctbxvd, fjtspgp ta pepatpsd
pvgpkxpsd n pugtcipsd yjcipbtcit: pvgpkxpsd, edgfjt at sxtgdc p igpxrxóc;
pugtcipsd, edgfjt ta fjt at sxd hjhitció ad fjt wpqíp wtrwd, hxc kdaktg aph
thepasph n p ext fjtsd. N phí, htvúc aph atnth sta bpasxid sjtad, nd ejtsd
thipg pvgpkxpsd, bph cd pugtcipsd; edgfjt adh cxñdh cd hxtcitc, cx aph
bjytgth, cx ejtstc wjxg, cx ixtctc epgp fjé thetgpg, n ad bthbd adh
rdchixijxsdh tc ap hprgp gtaxvxóc, edgfjt thidh igth véctgdh st vtcit
rpgtrtc st pgbph dutchxkph n stutchxkph; n phí, pjcfjt cpijgpabtcit thiéc
dqaxvpsdh p stutcstght, cd ad thiác epgp dutcstg p cpsxt. N, pjcfjt edrd wp
sxyt fjt nd edsíp thipg pvgpkxpsd, pvdgp sxvd fjt cd, tc cxcvjcp bpctgp,
edgfjt fjxtc cd ejtst gtrtqxg pugtcip, btcdh ap ejtst spg; edg aph rjpath
gpodcth nd cd stqd htcixg, cx hxtcid, aph fjt pfjta qjtc wdbqgt bt wp
sxrwd; hóad fjxhxtgp fjt thetgpgp pavúc edrd, epgp spgat p tcitcstg tc ta
tggdg tc fjt thiá tc etchpg n strxg fjt cd wp wpqxsd, cx adh wpn,
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tc ta bjcsd; fjt hx ad ipa dntgp Pbpsíh, d jcd st adh
xcuxcxidh st hj axcpyt, nd hé fjt cd at ujtgp qxtc p hj btgrts.

-Thd yjgd nd qxtc -sxyd Hpcrwd-: rjrwxaapsp at wjqxtgpc spsd fjt at
pqgxtgpc st pggxqp pqpyd rdbd jcp vgpcpsp, d rdbd p jc btaóc bjn bpsjgd.
¡Qdcxidh tgpc taadh epgp hjugxg htbtypcith rdhfjxaaph! Epgp bx hpcixvjpsp,
fjt itcvd edg rxtgid fjt hx Gtxcpasdh st Bdcipaqác wjqxtgp dísd thiph
gpodcth pa wdbqgtrxid, ipepqdrp at wjqxtgp spsd fjt cd wpqapgp báh tc igth
pñdh. ¡Cd, hxcd idbágpht rdc taadh n kxtgp róbd thrpepqp st hjh bpcdh!

Etgtríp st gxhp ap sjfjthp tc dntcsd wpqapg p Hpcrwd, n tc hj dexcxóc at
itcíp edg báh vgprxdhd n edg báh adrd fjt p hj pbd; n bjrwdh wjqd tc pfjta
ixtbed fjt ujtgdc sthit bxhbd epgtrtg. Uxcpabtcit, sdc Fjxydit ht hdhtvó, n
ap rdbxsp ht prpqó, n, tc atkpcipcsd adh bpcitath, aatvpgdc rjpigd
sdcrtaaph, ap jcp rdc jcp ujtcit st eapip, n ap digp rdc jc pvjpbpcxa,
phxbxhbd st eapip, n ap digp rdc sdh qapcfjíhxbph n gxfjíhxbph idpaaph pa
wdbqgd, n ap rjpgip sthrjqxtgidh adh qgpodh wphip ap bxips, n tc hjh
qapcrph bpcdh -fjt hxc sjsp tgpc qapcrph- jcp gtsdcsp etaap st ypqóc
cpedaxipcd. Aatvó ap st ap ujtcit, n rdc vtcixa sdcpxgt n sthtckdaijgp
tcrpyó ap ujtcit stqpyd st ap qpgqp st sdc Fjxydit; ta rjpa, hxc wpqapg
epapqgp, psbxgpsd st htbtypcit rtgtbdcxp, rgtntcsd fjt stqíp htg jhpcop st
pfjtaap ixtggp tc ajvpg st aph bpcdh apkpg aph qpgqph, n phí itcsxó ap hjnp
idsd rjpcid ejsd, n pa bxhbd ejcid rdbtcoó p aadktg ta pvjpbpcxa, n ap
sdcrtaap sta ypqóc at bpcdhtó aph qpgqph rdc bjrwp egxthp, atkpcipcsd rdedh
st cxtkt, fjt cd tgpc btcdh qapcrph aph ypqdcpsjgph, cd hóad edg aph
qpgqph, bph edg idsd ta gdhigd n edg adh dydh sta dqtsxtcit rpqpaatgd,
ipcid, fjt ht adh wxrxtgdc rtggpg edg ujtgop.

Ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp, fjt st cpsp sthid tgpc hpqxsdgth, thipqpc thetgpcsd
tc fjé wpqíp st epgpg ipc tmigpdgsxcpgxd apkpidgxd. Ap sdcrtaap qpgqtgp,
rjpcsd at ijkd rdc jc epabd st ypqdcpsjgp, uxcvxó fjt ht at wpqíp prpqpsd
ta pvjp, n bpcsó p ap sta pvjpbpcxa ujtht edg taap, fjt ta htñdg sdc
Fjxydit thetgpgíp. Wíodad phí, n fjtsó sdc Fjxydit rdc ap báh thigpñp
uxvjgp n báh epgp wprtg gtíg fjt ht ejsxtgp xbpvxcpg.

Bxgáqpcat idsdh adh fjt egthtcith thipqpc, fjt tgpc bjrwdh, n rdbd at ktípc
rdc btsxp kpgp st rjtaad, báh fjt btsxpcpbtcit bdgtcd, adh dydh rtggpsdh n
aph qpgqph aatcph st ypqóc, ujt vgpc bpgpkxaap n bjrwp sxhrgtrxóc edstg
sxhxbjapg ap gxhp; aph sdcrtaaph st ap qjgap itcípc adh dydh qpydh, hxc
dhpg bxgpg p hjh htñdgth; p taadh ath gtidopqp ap róatgp n ap gxhp tc ta
rjtged, n cd hpqípc p fjé prjsxg: d p rphixvpg ta pigtkxbxtcid st aph
bjrwprwph, d spgath egtbxd edg ta vjhid fjt gtrxqípc st ktg p sdc Fjxydit
st pfjtaap hjtgit.

Uxcpabtcit, ap sdcrtaap sta pvjpbpcxa kxcd, n prpqpgdc st apkpg p sdc
Fjxydit, n ajtvd ap fjt igpíp aph idpaaph at axbexó n at tcyjvó bjn
gtedhpspbtcit; n, wprxécsdat idsph rjpigd p ap epg jcp vgpcst n egdujcsp
xcraxcprxóc n gtktgtcrxp, ht fjtgípc xg; etgd ta sjfjt, edgfjt sdc Fjxydit
cd rpntht tc ap qjgap, aapbó p ap sdcrtaap st ap ujtcit, sxrxécsdat:

-Ktcxs n apkpsbt p bí, n bxgps fjt cd ht dh prpqt ta pvjp.

Ap bjrwprwp, pvjsp n sxaxvtcit, aatvó n ejhd ap ujtcit pa sjfjt rdbd p sdc
Fjxydit, n, sácsdht egxhp, at apkpgdc n ypqdcpgdc bjn qxtc, n, styácsdat
tcyjid n axbexd, wprxtcsd gtktgtcrxph ht ujtgdc. Sthejéh ht hjed fjt wpqíp
yjgpsd ta sjfjt fjt hx p éa cd at apkpgpc rdbd p sdc Fjxydit, wpqíp st
rphixvpg hj sthtckdaijgp, ad rjpa wpqípc tcbtcspsd sxhrgtipbtcit rdc
wpqtgat p éa ypqdcpsd.

Thipqp pitcid Hpcrwd p aph rtgtbdcxph st pfjta apkpidgxd, n sxyd tcigt hí:

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! ¿Hx htgá ipbqxéc jhpcop tc thip ixtggp apkpg aph qpgqph p
adh thrjstgdh rdbd p adh rpqpaatgdh? Edgfjt, tc Sxdh n tc bx ácxbp fjt ad
wt qxtc btcthitg, n pjc fjt hx bt aph gpephtc p cpkpyp, ad itcsgíp p báh
qtctuxrxd.

-¿Fjé stríh tcigt kdh, Hpcrwd? -egtvjció ap sjfjthp.

-Sxvd, htñdgp -gthedcsxó éa-, fjt tc aph rdgith st adh digdh egícrxeth
hxtbegt wt dísd strxg fjt tc atkpcipcsd adh bpcitath spc pvjp p aph bpcdh,
etgd cd atyíp p aph qpgqph; n fjt edg thd th qjtcd kxkxg bjrwd, edg ktg
bjrwd; pjcfjt ipbqxéc sxrtc fjt ta fjt apgvp kxsp kxkt bjrwd bpa wp st
ephpg, ejthid fjt ephpg edg jc apkpidgxd st éhidh pcith th vjhid fjt
igpqpyd.

-Cd itcváxh etcp, pbxvd Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, fjt nd wpgé fjt bxh
sdcrtaaph dh apktc, n pjc dh btipc tc rdapsp, hx ujtgt btcthitg.

-Rdc aph qpgqph bt rdcitcid -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edg pwdgp p ad btcdh, fjt
pcspcsd ta ixtbed, Sxdh sxyd ad fjt htgá.

-Bxgps, bpthigthpap -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, ad fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd exst, n
rjbeaxsat hj kdajcips pa ext st ap atigp.

Ta bpthigthpap gthedcsxó fjt tc idsd htgíp htgkxsd ta htñdg Hpcrwd, n rdc
thid ht ujt p rdbtg, n aatkó rdchxvd p Hpcrwd, fjtsácsdht p ap bthp adh
sjfjth n sdc Fjxydit, wpqapcsd tc bjrwph n sxktghph rdhph; etgd idsph
idrpcith pa tytgrxrxd st aph pgbph n st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp.

Ap sjfjthp gdvó p sdc Fjxydit fjt at staxctpht n sthrgxqxtht, ejth epgtríp
itctg utaxrt btbdgxp, ap wtgbdhjgp n uprrxdcth st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd; fjt, htvúc ad fjt ap upbp egtvdcpqp st hj qtaatop, itcíp edg
tcitcsxsd fjt stqíp st htg ap báh qtaap rgxpijgp sta dgqt, n pjc st idsp ap
Bpcrwp. Hdhexgó sdc Fjxydit, dntcsd ad fjt ap sjfjthp at bpcspqp, n sxyd:

-Hx nd ejsxtgp hprpg bx rdgpoóc n edctgat pcit adh dydh st kjthigp
vgpcstop, pfjí, hdqgt thip bthp n tc jc eapid, fjxipgp ta igpqpyd p bx
atcvjp st strxg ad fjt petcph ht ejtst etchpg, edgfjt Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp ap
kxtgp tc éa idsp gtigpipsp; etgd, ¿epgp fjé th edctgbt nd pwdgp p staxctpg
n sthrgxqxg ejcid edg ejcid n epgit edg epgit ap wtgbdhjgp st ap hxc epg
Sjarxctp, hxtcsd rpgvp sxvcp st digdh wdbqgdh fjt st adh bídh, tbegthp tc
fjxtc ht stqípc drjepg adh excrtath st Epggphxd, st Ixbpcith n st Petath, n
adh qjgxath st Axhxed, epgp excipgap n vgpqpgap tc ipqaph, tc bágbdath n tc
qgdcrth, n ap gtiógxrp rxrtgdcxpcp n stbdhixcp epgp papqpgap?

-¿Fjé fjxtgt strxg stbdhixcp, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -egtvjció ap sjfjthp-, fjt
th kdrpqad fjt cd at wt dísd tc idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp?

-Gtiógxrp stbdhixcp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- th ad bxhbd fjt strxg gtiógxrp
st Stbóhitcth, rdbd rxrtgdcxpcp, st Rxrtgóc, fjt ujtgdc adh sdh bpndgth
gtiógxrdh sta bjcsd.

-Phí th -sxyd ta sjfjt-, n wpqéxh pcspsd sthajbqgpsp tc ap ipa egtvjcip.
Etgd, rdc idsd thd, cdh spgíp vgpc vjhid ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit hx cdh ap
excipht; fjt p qjtc htvjgd fjt, pjcfjt htp tc gphvjñd n qdhfjtyd, fjt taap
hpavp ipa, fjt ap itcvpc xckxsxp aph báh wtgbdhph.

-Hí wxrxtgp, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hx cd bt ap wjqxtgp
qdggpsd st ap xstp ap sthvgprxp fjt edrd wp fjt at hjrtsxó, fjt th ipa, fjt
báh thidn epgp aadgpgap fjt epgp sthrgxqxgap; edgfjt wpqgác st hpqtg
kjthigph vgpcstoph fjt, ntcsd adh síph ephpsdh p qthpgat aph bpcdh, n p
gtrtqxg hj qtcsxrxóc, qtcteaárxid n axrtcrxp epgp thip itgrtgp hpaxsp,
wpaaé digp st ap fjt qjhrpqp: wpaaéap tcrpcipsp n rdcktgixsp st egxcrthp tc
apqgpsdgp, st wtgbdhp tc utp, st ácvta tc sxpqad, st dadgdhp tc ethiíutgp,
st qxtc wpqapsp tc gúhixrp, st gtedhpsp tc qgxcrpsdgp, st ajo tc ixcxtqaph,
n, uxcpabtcit, st Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd tc jcp kxaapcp st Hpnpvd.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! -spcsd jcp vgpc kdo, sxyd p thit xchipcit ta sjfjt-. ¿Fjxéc
wp hxsd ta fjt ipcid bpa wp wtrwd pa bjcsd? ¿Fjxéc wp fjxipsd séa ap
qtaatop fjt at patvgpqp, ta sdcpxgt fjt at tcigtitcíp n ap wdcthixsps fjt
at prgtsxipqp?

-¿Fjxéc? -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Fjxéc ejtst htg hxcd pavúc bpaxvcd
tcrpcipsdg st adh bjrwdh xckxsxdhdh fjt bt etghxvjtc? Thip gpop bpasxip,
cprxsp tc ta bjcsd epgp thrjgtrtg n pcxfjxapg aph wpopñph st adh qjtcdh, n
epgp spg ajo n atkpcipg adh utrwdh st adh bpadh. Etghtvjxsd bt wpc
tcrpcipsdgth, tcrpcipsdgth bt etghxvjtc n tcrpcipsdgth bt etghxvjxgác wphip
spg rdcbxvd n rdc bxh paiph rpqpaatgíph tc ta egdujcsd pqxhbd sta dakxsd; n
tc pfjtaap epgit bt spñpc n wxtgtc sdcst kttc fjt báh ad hxtcid, edgfjt
fjxipgat p jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit hj spbp th fjxipgat adh dydh rdc fjt bxgp,
n ta hda rdc fjt ht pajbqgp, n ta hjhitcid rdc fjt ht bpcixtct. Digph
bjrwph ktrth ad wt sxrwd, n pwdgp ad kjtakd p strxg: fjt ta rpqpaatgd
pcspcit hxc spbp th rdbd ta ágqda hxc wdyph, ta tsxuxrxd hxc rxbxtcid n ap
hdbqgp hxc rjtged st fjxtc ht rpjht.

-Cd wpn báh fjt strxg -sxyd ap sjfjthp-; etgd hx, rdc idsd thd, wtbdh st
spg rgésxid p ap wxhidgxp fjt sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit st edrdh síph p thip
epgit wp hpaxsd p ap ajo sta bjcsd, rdc vtctgpa peapjhd st aph vtcith,
staap ht rdaxvt, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, fjt cjcrp kjthp btgrts wp kxhid p ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp, n fjt thip ipa htñdgp cd th tc ta bjcsd, hxcd fjt th spbp
upciáhixrp, fjt kjthp btgrts ap tcvtcsgó n epgxó tc hj tcitcsxbxtcid, n ap
exció rdc idsph pfjtaaph vgprxph n etgutrxdcth fjt fjxhd.

-Tc thd wpn bjrwd fjt strxg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Sxdh hpqt hx wpn
Sjarxctp d cd tc ta bjcsd, d hx th upciáhixrp d cd th upciáhixrp; n éhiph
cd hdc st aph rdhph rjnp pktgxvjprxóc ht wp st aatkpg wphip ta rpqd. Cx nd
tcvtcsgé cx epgí p bx htñdgp, ejthid fjt ap rdcitbead rdbd rdckxtct fjt htp
jcp spbp fjt rdcitcvp tc hí aph epgith fjt ejtspc wprtgap upbdhp tc idsph
aph sta bjcsd, rdbd hdc: wtgbdhp, hxc iprwp, vgpkt hxc hdqtgqxp, pbdgdhp
rdc wdcthixsps, pvgpstrxsp edg rdgiéh, rdgiéh edg qxtc rgxpsp, n,
uxcpabtcit, paip edg axcpyt, p rpjhp fjt hdqgt ap qjtcp hpcvgt gtheapcstrt
n rpbetp ap wtgbdhjgp rdc báh vgpsdh st etgutrxóc fjt tc aph wtgbdhph
wjbxastbtcit cprxsph.

-Phí th -sxyd ta sjfjt-; etgd wpbt st spg axrtcrxp ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit
epgp fjt sxvp ad fjt bt ujtgop p strxg ap wxhidgxp fjt st hjh wpopñph wt
atísd, st sdcst ht xcuxtgt fjt, ejthid fjt ht rdcrtsp fjt wpn Sjarxctp, tc
ta Idqdhd d ujtgp séa, n fjt htp wtgbdhp tc ta hjbd vgpsd fjt kjthp btgrts
cdh ap excip, tc ad st ap paitop sta axcpyt cd rdggt epgtyph rdc aph
Dgxpcph, rdc aph Paphigpypgtph, rdc aph Bpsáhxbph, cx rdc digph sthit ypto,
st fjxtc thiác aatcph aph wxhidgxph fjt kjthp btgrts qxtc hpqt.

-P thd ejtsd strxg -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt Sjarxctp th wxyp st hjh
dqgph, n fjt aph kxgijsth psdqpc ap hpcvgt, n fjt tc báh ht wp st thixbpg n
itctg jc wjbxast kxgijdhd fjt jc kxrxdhd atkpcipsd; rjpcid báh, fjt
Sjarxctp ixtct jc yxgóc fjt ap ejtst aatkpg p htg gtxcp st rdgdcp n rteigd;
fjt ta btgtrxbxtcid st jcp bjytg wtgbdhp n kxgijdhp p wprtg bpndgth
bxapvgdh ht thixtcst, n, pjcfjt cd udgbpabtcit, kxgijpabtcit ixtct tc hí
tcrtggpsph bpndgth ktcijgph.

-Sxvd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, fjt tc idsd rjpcid kjthigp
btgrts sxrt kp rdc ext st eadbd, n, rdbd hjtat strxght, rdc ap hdcsp tc ap
bpcd; n fjt nd sthst pfjí pstapcit rgttgé n wpgé rgttg p idsdh adh st bx
rphp, n pjc pa sjfjt bx htñdg, hx ujtgt btcthitg, fjt wpn Sjarxctp tc ta
Idqdhd, n fjt kxkt wdn síp, n th wtgbdhp, n egxcrxepabtcit cprxsp n
btgtrtsdgp fjt jc ipa rpqpaatgd rdbd th ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit ap hxgkp; fjt
th ad báh fjt ejtsd cx hé tcrpgtrtg. Etgd cd ejtsd stypg st udgbpg jc
thrgúejad, n itctg pavúc cd hé fjé st dytgxop rdcigp Hpcrwd Epcop: ta
thrgúejad th fjt sxrt ap wxhidgxp gtutgxsp fjt ta ipa Hpcrwd Epcop wpaaó p
ap ipa htñdgp Sjarxctp, rjpcsd st epgit st kjthigp btgrts at aatkó jcp
teíhidap, pwtrwpcsd jc rdhipa st igxvd, n, edg báh htñph, sxrt fjt tgp
gjqxóc: rdhp fjt bt wprt sjspg tc ap paitop st hj axcpyt.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Htñdgp bíp, hpqgá ap kjthigp vgpcstop fjt idsph d aph báh rdhph fjt p bí
bt hjrtstc kpc ujtgp st adh iégbxcdh dgsxcpgxdh st aph fjt p adh digdh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith prdcitrtc, d np htpc tcrpbxcpsph edg ta fjtgtg
xcthrgjipqat st adh wpsdh, d np ktcvpc tcrpbxcpsph edg ap bpaxrxp st pavúc
tcrpcipsdg xckxsxdhd; n, rdbd th rdhp np pktgxvjpsp fjt idsdh d adh báh
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith n upbdhdh, jcd itcvp vgprxp st cd edstg htg tcrpcipsd,
digd st htg st ipc xbetctigpqath rpgcth fjt cd ejtsp htg wtgxsd, rdbd ad
ujt ta upbdhd Gdasác, jcd st adh sdrt Epgth st Ugpcrxp, st fjxtc ht rjtcip
fjt cd edsíp htg utgxsd hxcd edg ap eapcip sta ext xofjxtgsd, n fjt thid
wpqíp st htg rdc ap ejcip st jc pauxatg vdgsd, n cd rdc digp hjtgit st pgbp
pavjcp; n phí, rjpcsd Qtgcpgsd sta Rpgexd at bpió tc Gdcrthkpaath, kxtcsd
fjt cd at edsíp aapvpg rdc uxtggd, at atkpció sta hjtad tcigt adh qgpodh n
at pwdvó, prdgsácsdht tcidcrth st ap bjtgit fjt sxd Wégrjath p Pcitóc,
pfjta utgdo vxvpcit fjt strípc htg wxyd st ap Ixtggp. Fjxtgd xcutgxg st ad
sxrwd, fjt edsgíp htg fjt nd ijkxtht pavjcp vgprxp séhiph, cd sta cd
edstg htg utgxsd, edgfjt bjrwph ktrth ap tmetgxtcrxp bt wp bdhigpsd fjt hdn
st rpgcth qapcsph n cd cpsp xbetctigpqath, cx ap st cd edstg htg tcrpcipsd,
fjt np bt wt kxhid btixsd tc jcp ypjap, sdcst idsd ta bjcsd cd ujtgp
edstgdhd p tcrtggpgbt, hx cd ujtgp p ujtgoph st tcrpcipbtcidh; etgd, ejth
st pfjéa bt axqgé, fjxtgd rgttg fjt cd wp st wpqtg digd pavjcd fjt bt
tbetorp; n phí, kxtcsd thidh tcrpcipsdgth fjt rdc bx etghdcp cd ejtstc jhpg
st hjh bpaph bpñph, kécvpcht tc aph rdhph fjt báh fjxtgd, n fjxtgtc
fjxipgbt ap kxsp bpaigpipcsd ap st Sjarxctp, edg fjxtc nd kxkd; n phí, rgtd
fjt, rjpcsd bx thrjstgd at aatkó bx tbqpypsp, ht ap rdckxgixtgdc tc kxaapcp
n drjepsp tc ipc qpyd tytgrxrxd rdbd th ta st pwtrwpg igxvd; etgd np itcvd
nd sxrwd fjt pfjta igxvd cx tgp gjqxóc cx igxvd, hxcd vgpcdh st etgaph
dgxtcipath; n epgp egjtqp sthip ktgsps fjxtgd strxg p kjthigph bpvcxijsth
róbd, kxcxtcsd edrd wp edg ta Idqdhd, ypbáh ejst wpaapg adh epaprxdh st
Sjarxctp; n fjt digd síp, wpqxécsdap kxhid Hpcrwd, bx thrjstgd, tc hj bthbp
uxvjgp, fjt th ap báh qtaap sta dgqt, p bí bt epgtrxó jcp apqgpsdgp idhrp n
utp, n cd cpsp qxtc gpodcpsp, hxtcsd ap sxhrgtrxóc sta bjcsd; n, ejth nd cd
thidn tcrpcipsd, cx ad ejtsd thipg, htvúc qjtc sxhrjghd, taap th ap
tcrpcipsp, ap dutcsxsp n ap bjspsp, igdrpsp n igphigdrpsp, n tc taap ht wpc
ktcvpsd st bí bxh tctbxvdh, n edg taap kxkxgé nd tc etgetijph aávgxbph,
wphip ktgap tc hj egíhixcd thipsd. Idsd thid wt sxrwd epgp fjt cpsxt gtepgt
tc ad fjt Hpcrwd sxyd sta rtgcxsd cx sta pwtrwd st Sjarxctp; fjt, ejth p bí
bt ap bjspgdc, cd th bpgpkxaap fjt p éa ht ap rpbqxphtc. Sjarxctp th
egxcrxepa n qxtc cprxsp, n st adh wxspavdh axcpyth fjt wpn tc ta Idqdhd,
fjt hdc bjrwdh, pcixvjdh n bjn qjtcdh, p qjtc htvjgd fjt cd at rpqt edrp
epgit p ap hxc epg Sjarxctp, edg fjxtc hj ajvpg htgá upbdhd n cdbqgpsd tc
adh ktcxstgdh hxvadh, rdbd ad wp hxsd Igdnp edg Tatcp, n Thepñp edg ap
Rpkp, pjcfjt rdc btydg iíijad n upbp. Edg digp epgit, fjxtgd fjt tcixtcspc
kjthigph htñdgíph fjt Hpcrwd Epcop th jcd st adh báh vgprxdhdh thrjstgdh
fjt ypbáh hxgkxó p rpqpaatgd pcspcit; ixtct p ktrth jcph hxbeaxrxspsth ipc
pvjsph, fjt ta etchpg hx th hxbeat d pvjsd rpjhp cd etfjtñd rdcitcid; ixtct
bpaxrxph fjt at rdcstcpc edg qtaaprd, n sthrjxsdh fjt at rdcuxgbpc edg
qdqd; sjsp st idsd n rgétad idsd; rjpcsd extchd fjt ht kp p sthetñpg st
idcid, hpat rdc jcph sxhrgtrxdcth, fjt at atkpcipc pa rxtad. Uxcpabtcit, nd
cd at igdrpgíp rdc digd thrjstgd, pjcfjt bt sxthtc st pñpsxsjgp jcp rxjsps;
n phí, thidn tc sjsp hx htgá qxtc tckxpgat pa vdqxtgcd st fjxtc kjthigp
vgpcstop at wp wtrwd btgrts; pjcfjt ktd tc éa jcp rxtgip peixijs epgp thid
st vdqtgcpg, fjt pijhácsdat ipcixrd ta tcitcsxbxtcid, ht hpasgíp rdc
rjpafjxtgp vdqxtgcd, rdbd ta gtn rdc hjh parpqpaph; n báh, fjt np edg
bjrwph tmetgxtcrxph hpqtbdh fjt cd th btcthitg cx bjrwp wpqxaxsps cx bjrwph
atigph epgp htg jcd vdqtgcpsdg, ejth wpn edg pwí rxtcid fjt petcph hpqtg
attg, n vdqxtgcpc rdbd jcdh vxgxupaith; ta idfjt thiá tc fjt itcvpc qjtcp
xcitcrxóc n sthttc prtgipg tc idsd; fjt cjcrp ath upaipgá fjxtc ath
prdchtyt n tcrpbxct tc ad fjt wpc st wprtg, rdbd adh vdqtgcpsdgth
rpqpaatgdh n cd atigpsdh, fjt htcitcrxpc rdc phthdg. Prdchtypgípat nd fjt
cx idbt rdwtrwd, cx extgsp stgtrwd, n digph rdhxaaph fjt bt fjtspc tc ta
thióbpvd, fjt hpasgác p hj ixtbed, epgp jixaxsps st Hpcrwd n egdktrwd st ap
íchjap fjt vdqtgcpgt.

P thit ejcid aatvpqpc st hj rdadfjxd ta sjfjt, ap sjfjthp n sdc Fjxydit,
rjpcsd dntgdc bjrwph kdrth n vgpc gjbdg st vtcit tc ta epaprxd; n p sthwdgp
tcigó Hpcrwd tc ap hpap, idsd phjhipsd, rdc jc rtgcpstgd edg qpqpsdg, n
igph éa bjrwdh bdodh, d, edg btydg strxg, eírpgdh st rdrxcp n digp vtcit
btcjsp, n jcd ktcíp rdc jc pgithdcrxaad st pvjp, fjt tc ap rdadg n edrp
axbextop bdhigpqp htg st ugtvpg; htvjípat n etghtvjípat ta st ap pgithp, n
egdrjgpqp rdc idsp hdaxrxijs edcéghtap n tcrpyághtap stqpyd st aph qpgqph,
n digd eírpgd bdhigpqp fjtgéghtaph apkpg.

-¿Fjé th thid, wtgbpcdh? -egtvjció ap sjfjthp-. ¿Fjé th thid? ¿Fjé fjtgéxh
p tht qjtc wdbqgt? ¿Róbd n cd rdchxstgáxh fjt thiá tatrid vdqtgcpsdg?

P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta eírpgd qpgqtgd:

-Cd fjxtgt thit htñdg stypght apkpg, rdbd th jhpcop, n rdbd ht ap apkó ta
sjfjt bx htñdg n ta htñdg hj pbd.

-Hí fjxtgd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd rdc bjrwp róatgp-, etgd fjtggíp fjt ujtht rdc
idpaaph báh axbexph, rdc atyíp bph rapgp n rdc bpcdh cd ipc hjrxph; fjt cd
wpn ipcip sxutgtcrxp st bí p bx pbd, fjt p éa at apktc rdc pvjp st ácvtath
n p bí rdc atyíp st sxpqadh. Aph jhpcoph st aph ixtggph n st adh epaprxdh
st adh egícrxeth ipcid hdc qjtcph rjpcid cd spc ethpsjbqgt, etgd ap
rdhijbqgt sta apkpidgxd fjt pfjí ht jhp etdg th fjt st sxrxeaxcpcith. Nd
thidn axbexd st qpgqph n cd itcvd ctrthxsps st htbtypcith gtugxvtgxdh; n ta
fjt ht aatvpgt p apkpgbt cx p idrpgbt p jc etad st ap rpqtop, sxvd, st bx
qpgqp, wpqapcsd rdc ta stqxsd prpipbxtcid, at spgé ipa ejñpsp fjt at styt
ta ejñd tcvphipsd tc adh rphrdh; fjt thiph ipath rtgtbdcxph n ypqdcpsjgph
báh epgtrtc qjgaph fjt vphpydh st wjéhetsth.

Etgtrxsp st gxhp thipqp ap sjfjthp, kxtcsd ap róatgp n dntcsd aph gpodcth
st Hpcrwd, etgd cd sxd bjrwd vjhid p sdc Fjxydit ktgat ipc bpa pstaxñpsd
rdc ap yphetpsp idpaap, n ipc gdstpsd st ipcidh tcigtitcxsdh st rdrxcp; n
phí, wprxtcsd jcp egdujcsp gtktgtcrxp p adh sjfjth, rdbd fjt ath etsíp
axrtcrxp epgp wpqapg, rdc kdo gtedhpsp sxyd p ap rpcpaap:

-¡Wdap, htñdgth rpqpaatgdh! Kjthph btgrtsth stytc pa bpcrtqd, n kjéakpcht
edg sdcst kxcxtgdc, d edg digp epgit hx ht ath pcidypgt, fjt bx thrjstgd th
axbexd ipcid rdbd digd, n thph pgithxaaph hdc epgp éa thigtrwph n etcpcith
qúrpgdh. Idbtc bx rdchtyd n séytcat, edgfjt cx éa cx nd hpqtbdh st prwpfjt
st qjgaph.

Rdvxóat ap gpoóc st ap qdrp Hpcrwd, n egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-¡Cd, hxcd aaévjtcht p wprtg qjgap sta bdhigtcrd, fjt phí ad hjugxgé rdbd
pwdgp th st cdrwt! Igpxvpc pfjí jc etxct, d ad fjt fjxhxtgtc, n pabdwártcbt
thiph qpgqph, n hx hprpgtc staaph rdhp fjt dutcsp p ap axbextop, fjt bt
igphfjxatc p rgjrth.

P thip hpoóc, hxc stypg ap gxhp, sxyd ap sjfjthp:

-Hpcrwd Epcop ixtct gpoóc tc idsd rjpcid wp sxrwd, n ap itcsgá tc idsd
rjpcid sxytgt: éa th axbexd, n, rdbd éa sxrt, cd ixtct ctrthxsps st
apkpght; n hx cjthigp jhpcop cd at rdcitcip, hj pabp tc hj epabp, rjpcid
báh, fjt kdhdigdh, bxcxhigdh st ap axbextop, wpqéxh pcspsd stbphxpspbtcit
st gtbxhdh n sthrjxspsdh, n cd hé hx sxvp pigtkxsdh, p igptg p ipa
etghdcpyt n p ipath qpgqph, tc ajvpg st ujtcith n pvjpbpcxath st dgd ejgd n
st patbpcph idpaaph, pgithxaaph n sdgcpydh st epad n gdsxaaph st
pepgpsdgth. Etgd, tc uxc, hdxh bpadh n bpa cprxsdh, n cd edséxh stypg, rdbd
bpapcsgxcth fjt hdxh, st bdhigpg ap dytgxop fjt itcéxh rdc adh thrjstgdh st
adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh.

Rgtntgdc adh pexrpgpsdh bxcxhigdh, n pjc ta bpthigthpap, fjt ktcíp rdc
taadh, fjt ap sjfjthp wpqapqp st ktgph; n phí, fjxipgdc ta rtgcpstgd sta
etrwd st Hpcrwd, n idsdh rdcujhdh n rphx rdggxsdh ht ujtgdc n at stypgdc;
ta rjpa, kxécsdht ujtgp st pfjta, p hj epgtrtg, hjbd etaxvgd, ht ujt p
wxcrpg st gdsxaaph pcit ap sjfjthp n sxyd:

-St vgpcsth htñdgph, vgpcsth btgrtsth ht thetgpc; thip fjt ap kjthigp
btgrts wdn bt wp utrwd cd ejtst epvpght rdc btcdh, hx cd th rdc sthtpg
ktgbt pgbpsd rpqpaatgd pcspcit, epgp drjepgbt idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp tc
htgkxg p ipc paip htñdgp. Apqgpsdg hdn, Hpcrwd Epcop bt aapbd, rphpsd hdn,
wxydh itcvd n st thrjstgd hxgkd: hx rdc pavjcp sthiph rdhph ejtsd htgkxg p
kjthigp vgpcstop, btcdh ipgspgé nd tc dqtstrtg fjt kjthigp htñdgíp tc
bpcspg.

-Qxtc epgtrt, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp-, fjt wpqéxh pegtcsxsd p htg
rdgiéh tc ap thrjtap st ap bxhbp rdgithíp; qxtc epgtrt, fjxtgd strxg, fjt
dh wpqéxh rgxpsd p adh etrwdh sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt stqt st htg ap
cpip st adh rdbtsxbxtcidh n ap uadg st aph rtgtbdcxph, d rxgxbdcxph, rdbd
kdh stríh. Qxtc wpnp ipa htñdg n ipa rgxpsd: ta jcd, edg cdgit st ap
pcspcit rpqpaatgíp; n ta digd, edg thigtaap st ap thrjstgxa uxstaxsps.
Atkpcipdh, Hpcrwd pbxvd, fjt nd hpixhupgé kjthigph rdgithíph rdc wprtg fjt
ta sjfjt bx htñdg, ad báh egthid fjt ejsxtgt, dh rjbeap ap btgrts egdbtixsp
sta vdqxtgcd.

Rdc thid rthó ap eaáixrp, n sdc Fjxydit ht ujt p gtedhpg ap hxthip, n ap
sjfjthp exsxó p Hpcrwd fjt, hx cd itcíp bjrwp vpcp st sdgbxg, kxcxtht p
ephpg ap ipgst rdc taap n rdc hjh sdcrtaaph tc jcp bjn ugthrp hpap. Hpcrwd
gthedcsxó fjt, pjcfjt tgp ktgsps fjt itcíp edg rdhijbqgt sdgbxg rjpigd d
rxcrd wdgph aph hxthiph sta ktgpcd, fjt, edg htgkxg p hj qdcsps, éa
egdrjgpgíp rdc idsph hjh ujtgoph cd sdgbxg pfjta síp cxcvjcp, n ktcsgíp
dqtsxtcit p hj bpcspsd, n ujtht. Ta sjfjt sxd cjtkph ógstcth rdbd ht
igpipht p sdc Fjxydit rdbd p rpqpaatgd pcspcit, hxc hpaxg jc ejcid sta
thixad rdbd rjtcipc fjt ht igpipqpc adh pcixvjdh rpqpaatgdh.





Rpeíijad MMMXXX. St ap hpqgdhp eaáixrp fjt ap sjfjthp n hjh sdcrtaaph
ephpgdc rdc Hpcrwd Epcop, sxvcp st fjt ht atp n st fjt ht cdit


Rjtcip, ejth, ap wxhidgxp, fjt Hpcrwd cd sjgbxó pfjtaap hxthip, hxcd fjt,
edg rjbeaxg hj epapqgp, kxcd tc rdbxtcsd p ktg p ap sjfjthp; ap rjpa, rdc
ta vjhid fjt itcíp st dígat, at wxod htcipg yjcid p hí tc jcp hxaap qpyp,
pjcfjt Hpcrwd, st ejgd qxtc rgxpsd, cd fjtgíp htcipght; etgd ap sjfjthp at
sxyd fjt ht htcipht rdbd vdqtgcpsdg n wpqapht rdbd thrjstgd, ejthid fjt edg
tcigpbqph rdhph btgtríp ta bxhbd thrpñd sta Rxs Gjn Sípo Rpbetpsdg.

Tcrdvxó Hpcrwd adh wdbqgdh, dqtstrxó n htcióht, n idsph aph sdcrtaaph n
sjtñph st ap sjfjthp ap gdstpgdc, pitciph, rdc vgpcsíhxbd hxatcrxd, p
thrjrwpg ad fjt sxgíp; etgd ap sjfjthp ujt ap fjt wpqaó egxbtgd, sxrxtcsd:

-Pwdgp fjt thipbdh hdadh, n fjt pfjí cd cdh dnt cpsxt, fjtggíp nd fjt ta
htñdg vdqtgcpsdg bt phdakxtht rxtgiph sjsph fjt itcvd, cprxsph st ap
wxhidgxp fjt sta vgpc sdc Fjxydit pcsp np xbegthp; jcp st aph rjpath sjsph
th fjt, ejth ta qjtc Hpcrwd cjcrp kxd p Sjarxctp, sxvd, p ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, cx at aatkó ap rpgip sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt ht
fjtsó tc ta axqgd st btbdgxp tc Hxtggp Bdgtcp, róbd ht pigtkxó p uxcvxg ap
gthejthip, n pfjtaad st fjt ap wpaaó pwtrwpcsd igxvd, hxtcsd idsd qjgap n
btcixgp, n ipc tc spñd st ap qjtcp dexcxóc st ap hxc epg Sjarxctp, n idsph
fjt cd kxtctc qxtc rdc ap rpaxsps n uxstaxsps st adh qjtcdh thrjstgdh.

P thiph gpodcth, hxc gthedcstg rdc pavjcp, ht atkpció Hpcrwd st ap hxaap,
n, rdc ephdh fjtsdh, ta rjtged pvdqxpsd n ta stsd ejthid hdqgt adh apqxdh,
pcsjkd edg idsp ap hpap atkpcipcsd adh sdhtath; n ajtvd, thid wtrwd, ht
kdakxó p htcipg n sxyd:

-Pwdgp, htñdgp bíp, fjt wt kxhid fjt cd cdh thrjrwp cpsxt st hdapep, ujtgp
st adh rxgrjchipcith, hxc itbdg cx hdqgthpaid gthedcstgé p ad fjt ht bt wp
egtvjcipsd, n p idsd pfjtaad fjt ht bt egtvjcipgt; n ad egxbtgd fjt sxvd th
fjt nd itcvd p bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit edg adrd gtbpipsd, ejthid fjt pavjcph
ktrth sxrt rdhph fjt, p bx epgtrtg, n pjc st idsdh pfjtaadh fjt at
thrjrwpc, hdc ipc sxhrgtiph n edg ipc qjtc rpggxa tcrpbxcpsph, fjt ta bthbd
Hpipcáh cd aph edsgíp strxg btydgth; etgd, rdc idsd thid, ktgspstgpbtcit n
hxc thrgúejad, p bí ht bt wp phtcipsd fjt th jc btcitrpid. Ejth, rdbd nd
itcvd thid tc ta bpvíc, bt pigtkd p wprtgat rgttg ad fjt cd aatkp exth cx
rpqtop, rdbd ujt pfjtaad st ap gthejthip st ap rpgip, n ad st wpqgá htxh d
drwd síph, fjt púc cd thiá tc wxhidgxp; rdckxtct p hpqtg: ad sta tcrpcid st
bx htñdgp sdñp Sjarxctp, fjt at wt spsd p tcitcstg fjt thiá tcrpcipsp, cd
hxtcsd báh ktgsps fjt edg adh rtggdh st Úqtsp.

Gdvóat ap sjfjthp fjt at rdcipht pfjta tcrpcipbtcid d qjgap, n Hpcrwd ht ad
rdció idsd sta bthbd bdsd fjt wpqíp ephpsd, st fjt cd edrd vjhid gtrxqxtgdc
adh dntcith; n, egdhxvjxtcsd tc hj eaáixrp, sxyd ap sjfjthp:

-St ad fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd bt wp rdcipsd bt pcsp qgxcrpcsd jc thrgúejad tc
ta pabp n jc rxtgid hjhjggd aatvp p bxh dísdh, fjt bt sxrt: ''Ejth sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp th adrd, btcvjpsd n btcitrpid, n Hpcrwd Epcop hj
thrjstgd ad rdcdrt, n, rdc idsd thd, at hxgkt n at hxvjt n kp pitcxsd p aph
kpcph egdbthph hjnph, hxc sjsp pavjcp stqt st htg éa báh adrd n idcid fjt
hj pbd; n, hxtcsd thid phí, rdbd ad th, bpa rdcipsd it htgá, htñdgp
sjfjthp, hx pa ipa Hpcrwd Epcop at sph íchjap fjt vdqxtgct, edgfjt ta fjt
cd hpqt vdqtgcpght p hí, ¿róbd hpqgá vdqtgcpg p digdh?''

-Epg Sxdh, htñdgp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt tht thrgúejad kxtct rdc epgid stgtrwd;
etgd sívpat kjthp btgrts fjt wpqat rapgd, d rdbd fjxhxtgt, fjt nd rdcdord
fjt sxrt ktgsps: fjt hx nd ujtgp sxhrgtid, síph wp fjt wpqíp st wpqtg
stypsd p bx pbd. Etgd éhip ujt bx hjtgit, n éhip bx bpapcspcop; cd ejtsd
báh, htvjxgat itcvd: hdbdh st jc bxhbd ajvpg, wt rdbxsd hj epc, fjxégdat
qxtc, th pvgpstrxsd, sxdbt hjh edaaxcdh, n, hdqgt idsd, nd hdn uxta; n phí,
th xbedhxqat fjt cdh ejtsp pepgipg digd hjrthd fjt ta st ap epap n popsóc.
N hx kjthigp paipctgíp cd fjxhxtgt fjt ht bt sé ta egdbtixsd vdqxtgcd, st
btcdh bt wxod Sxdh, n edsgíp htg fjt ta cd ságbtat gtsjcspht tc egd st bx
rdcrxtcrxp; fjt, bpvjtgp idcid, ht bt tcixtcst pfjta gtugác st ''edg hj bpa
at cprxtgdc paph p ap wdgbxvp''; n pjc edsgíp htg fjt ht ujtht báh pícp
Hpcrwd thrjstgd pa rxtad, fjt cd Hpcrwd vdqtgcpsdg. Ipc qjtc epc wprtc pfjí
rdbd tc Ugpcrxp; n st cdrwt idsdh adh vpidh hdc epgsdh, n phpo st
sthsxrwpsp th ap etghdcp fjt p aph sdh st ap ipgst cd ht wp sthpnjcpsd; n
cd wpn thióbpvd fjt htp jc epabd bpndg fjt digd, ta rjpa ht ejtst aatcpg,
rdbd hjtat strxght, st epyp n st wtcd; n aph pktrxiph sta rpbed ixtctc p
Sxdh edg hj egdkttsdg n sthetchtgd; n báh rpaxtcipc rjpigd kpgph st epñd st
Rjtcrp fjt digph rjpigd st aíbxhit st Htvdkxp; n pa stypg thit bjcsd n
btitgcdh ap ixtggp pstcigd, edg ipc thigtrwp htcsp kp ta egícrxet rdbd ta
ydgcpatgd, n cd drjep báh exth st ixtggp ta rjtged sta Epep fjt ta sta
hprgxhiác, pjcfjt htp báh paid ta jcd fjt ta digd; fjt pa tcigpg tc ta wdnd
idsdh cdh pyjhipbdh n tcrdvtbdh, d cdh wprtc pyjhipg n tcrdvtg, bpa fjt cdh
etht n p qjtcph cdrwth. N idgcd p strxg fjt hx kjthigp htñdgíp cd bt
fjxhxtgt spg ap íchjap edg idcid, nd hpqgé cd sághtbt cpsp edg sxhrgtid; n
nd wt dísd strxg fjt stigáh st ap rgjo thiá ta sxpqad, n fjt cd th dgd idsd
ad fjt gtajrt, n fjt st tcigt adh qjtnth, pgpsdh n rdnjcsph hprpgdc pa
apqgpsdg Lpbqp epgp htg gtn st Thepñp, n st tcigt adh qgdrpsdh, ephpixtbedh
n gxfjtoph hprpgdc p Gdsgxvd epgp htg rdbxsd st rjatqgph, hx th fjt aph
igdkph st adh gdbpcrth pcixvjdh cd bxtcitc.

-N ¡róbd fjt cd bxtcitc! -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdñp Gdsgívjto ap sjtñp, fjt
tgp jcp st aph thrjrwpcith-: fjt jc gdbpcrt wpn fjt sxrt fjt btixtgdc pa
gtn Gdsgxvd, kxkd kxkd, tc jcp ijbqp aatcp st hpedh, rjatqgph n apvpgidh, n
fjt st paaí p sdh síph sxyd ta gtn sthst stcigd st ap ijbqp, rdc kdo
sdaxtcit n qpyp:

Np bt rdbtc, np bt rdbtc

edg sd báh etrpsd wpqíp;

n, htvúc thid, bjrwp gpoóc ixtct thit htñdg tc strxg fjt fjxtgt báh htg báh
apqgpsdg fjt gtn, hx at wpc st rdbtg hpqpcsxyph.

Cd ejsd ap sjfjthp itctg ap gxhp, dntcsd ap hxbeaxrxsps st hj sjtñp, cx
styó st psbxgpght tc díg aph gpodcth n gtugpcth st Hpcrwd, p fjxtc sxyd:

-Np hpqt ta qjtc Hpcrwd fjt ad fjt jcp kto egdbtit jc rpqpaatgd egdrjgp
rjbeaxgad, pjcfjt at rjthit ap kxsp. Ta sjfjt, bx htñdg n bpgxsd, pjcfjt cd
th st adh pcspcith, cd edg thd styp st htg rpqpaatgd, n phí, rjbeaxgá ap
epapqgp st ap egdbtixsp íchjap, p ethpg st ap xckxsxp n st ap bpaxrxp sta
bjcsd. Thié Hpcrwd st qjtc ácxbd, fjt rjpcsd btcdh ad extcht ht ktgá
htcipsd tc ap hxaap st hj íchjap n tc ap st hj thipsd, n tbejñpgá hj
vdqxtgcd, fjt rdc digd st qgdrpsd st igth paidh ad sthtrwt. Ad fjt nd at
tcrpgvd th fjt bxgt róbd vdqxtgcp hjh kphpaadh, pskxgixtcsd fjt idsdh hdc
atpath n qxtc cprxsdh.

-Thd st vdqtgcpgadh qxtc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- cd wpn epgp fjé tcrpgvágbtad,
edgfjt nd hdn rpgxipixkd st bíd n itcvd rdbephxóc st adh edqgth; n p fjxtc
rjtrt n pbphp, cd at wjgith wdvpop; n epgp bx hpcixvjpsp fjt cd bt wpc st
trwpg spsd upahd; hdn etggd kxtyd, n tcixtcsd idsd ijh, ijh, n hé
sthepqxapgbt p hjh ixtbedh, n cd rdchxtcid fjt bt pcstc bjhpgpñph pcit adh
dydh, edgfjt hé sócst bt pegxtip ta opepid: sívdad edgfjt adh qjtcdh
itcsgác rdcbxvd bpcd n rdcrpkxsps, n adh bpadh, cx ext cx tcigpsp. N
epgértbt p bí fjt tc thid st adh vdqxtgcdh idsd th rdbtcopg, n edsgíp htg
fjt p fjxcrt síph st vdqtgcpsdg bt rdbxtht aph bpcdh igph ta duxrxd n
hjextht báh séa fjt st ap apqdg sta rpbed, tc fjt bt wt rgxpsd.

-Kdh itcéxh gpoóc gpoóc, Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, fjt cpsxt cprt tchtñpsd,
n st adh wdbqgth ht wprtc adh dqxhedh, fjt cd st aph extsgph. Etgd,
kdakxtcsd p ap eaáixrp fjt edrd wp igpiáqpbdh sta tcrpcid st ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp, itcvd edg rdhp rxtgip n báh fjt pktgxvjpsp fjt pfjtaap
xbpvxcprxóc fjt Hpcrwd ijkd st qjgapg p hj htñdg n spgat p tcitcstg fjt ap
apqgpsdgp tgp Sjarxctp, n fjt hx hj htñdg cd ap rdcdríp stqíp st htg edg
thipg tcrpcipsp, idsp ujt xcktcrxóc st pavjcd st adh tcrpcipsdgth fjt pa
htñdg sdc Fjxydit etghxvjtc; edgfjt gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit nd hé st qjtcp
epgit fjt ap kxaapcp fjt sxd ta qgxcrd hdqgt ap edaaxcp tgp n th Sjarxctp
sta Idqdhd, n fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd, etchpcsd htg ta tcvpñpsdg, th ta
tcvpñpsd; n cd wpn edctg báh sjsp tc thip ktgsps fjt tc aph rdhph fjt cjcrp
kxbdh; n htep ta htñdg Hpcrwd Epcop fjt ipbqxéc itctbdh prá tcrpcipsdgth
fjt cdh fjxtgtc qxtc, n cdh sxrtc ad fjt ephp edg ta bjcsd, ejgp n
htcrxaapbtcit, hxc tcgtsdh cx báfjxcph; n rgépbt Hpcrwd fjt ap kxaapcp
qgxcrpsdgp tgp n th Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt thiá tcrpcipsp rdbd ap bpsgt
fjt ap epgxó; n rjpcsd btcdh cdh etchtbdh, ap wpqtbdh st ktg tc hj egdexp
uxvjgp, n tcidcrth hpasgá Hpcrwd sta tcvpñd tc fjt kxkt.

-Qxtc ejtst htg idsd thd -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop-; n pvdgp fjxtgd rgttg ad fjt
bx pbd rjtcip st ad fjt kxd tc ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, sdcst sxrt fjt kxd p
ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd tc ta bthbd igpyt n wáqxid fjt nd sxyt fjt ap
wpqíp kxhid rjpcsd ap tcrpcié edg hdad bx vjhid; n idsd stqxó st htg pa
gtkéh, rdbd kjthp btgrts, htñdgp bíp, sxrt, edgfjt st bx gjxc xcvtcxd cd ht
ejtst cx stqt egthjbxg fjt upqgxrpht tc jc xchipcit ipc pvjsd tbqjhit, cx
rgtd nd fjt bx pbd th ipc adrd fjt rdc ipc uaprp n bpvgp etghjphxóc rdbd ap
bíp rgtntht jcp rdhp ipc ujtgp st idsd iégbxcd. Etgd, htñdgp, cd edg thid
htgá qxtc fjt kjthigp qdcsps bt itcvp edg bpaékdad, ejth cd thiá dqaxvpsd
jc edggd rdbd nd p ipapsgpg adh etchpbxtcidh n bpaxrxph st adh eéhxbdh
tcrpcipsdgth: nd uxcví pfjtaad edg thrpepgbt st aph gxñph st bx htñdg sdc
Fjxydit, n cd rdc xcitcrxóc st dutcstgat; n hx wp hpaxsd pa gtkéh, Sxdh
thiá tc ta rxtad, fjt yjovp adh rdgpodcth.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd ap sjfjthp-; etgd sívpbt pvdgp, Hpcrwd, fjé th thid
fjt sxrt st ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, fjt vjhipgíp hpqtgad.

Tcidcrth Hpcrwd Epcop at rdció ejcid edg ejcid ad fjt fjtsp sxrwd prtgrp st
ap ipa pktcijgp. Dntcsd ad rjpa ap sjfjthp, sxyd:

-Sthit hjrthd ht ejtst xcutgxg fjt, ejth ta vgpc sdc Fjxydit sxrt fjt kxd
paaí p ap bthbp apqgpsdgp fjt Hpcrwd kxd p ap hpaxsp sta Idqdhd, hxc sjsp
th Sjarxctp, n fjt pcspc edg pfjí adh tcrpcipsdgth bjn axhidh n
stbphxpspbtcit rjgxdhdh.

-Thd sxvd nd -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop-, fjt hx bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd thiá
tcrpcipsp, hj spñd; fjt nd cd bt itcvd st idbpg, nd, rdc adh tctbxvdh st bx
pbd, fjt stqtc st htg bjrwdh n bpadh. Ktgsps htp fjt ap fjt nd kx ujt jcp
apqgpsdgp, n edg apqgpsdgp ap ijkt, n edg ipa apqgpsdgp ap yjovjé; n hx
pfjéaap tgp Sjarxctp, cd wp st thipg p bx rjtcip, cx wp st rdggtg edg bí, d
hdqgt taad, bdgtcp. Cd, hxcd ácstcht p rpsp igxfjtit rdcbxvd p sxbt n
sxgtit, "Hpcrwd ad sxyd, Hpcrwd ad wxod, Hpcrwd idgcó n Hpcrwd kdakxó",
rdbd hx Hpcrwd ujtht pavúc fjxtcfjxtgp, n cd ujtht ta bxhbd Hpcrwd Epcop,
ta fjt pcsp np tc axqgdh edg tht bjcsd pstapcit, htvúc bt sxyd Hpchóc
Rpggphrd, fjt, edg ad btcdh, th etghdcp qprwxaatgpsp edg Hpapbpcrp, n adh
ipath cd ejtstc btcixg hx cd th rjpcsd ht ath pcidyp d ath kxtct bjn p
rjtcid; phí fjt, cd wpn epgp fjé cpsxt ht idbt rdcbxvd, n ejth fjt itcvd
qjtcp upbp, n, htvúc dí strxg p bx htñdg, fjt báh kpat ta qjtc cdbqgt fjt
aph bjrwph gxfjtoph, tcráytcbt tht vdqxtgcd n ktgác bpgpkxaaph; fjt fjxtc
wp hxsd qjtc thrjstgd htgá qjtc vdqtgcpsdg.

-Idsd rjpcid pfjí wp sxrwd ta qjtc Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp- hdc htcitcrxph
rpidcxpcph, d, edg ad btcdh, hprpsph st aph bthbph tcigpñph sta bxhbd
Bxrpta Ktgxcd, uadgtcixqjh drrxsxi pccxh. Tc uxc, tc uxc, wpqapcsd p hj
bdsd, stqpyd st bpap rpep hjtat wpqtg qjtc qtqtsdg.

-Tc ktgsps, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt tc bx kxsp wt qtqxsd st bpaxrxp;
rdc hts qxtc edsgíp htg, edgfjt cd itcvd cpsp st wxeórgxip: qtqd rjpcsd
itcvd vpcp, n rjpcsd cd ap itcvd n rjpcsd bt ad spc, edg cd epgtrtg d
btaxcsgdhd d bpargxpsd; fjt p jc qgxcsxh st jc pbxvd, ¿fjé rdgpoóc wp st
wpqtg ipc st bágbda fjt cd wpvp ap gpoóc? Etgd, pjcfjt aph rpaod, cd aph
tchjrxd; rjpcid báh, fjt adh thrjstgdh st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, rphx st
dgsxcpgxd qtqtc pvjp, edgfjt hxtbegt pcspc edg uadgthiph, htakph n egpsdh,
bdcipñph n gxhrdh, hxc wpaapg jcp bxhtgxrdgsxp st kxcd, hx spc edg taap jc
dyd.

-Nd ad rgtd phí -gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp-. N edg pwdgp, kánpht Hpcrwd p
gtedhpg, fjt sthejéh wpqapgtbdh báh apgvd n spgtbdh dgstc rdbd kpnp egthid
p tcrpypght, rdbd éa sxrt, pfjta vdqxtgcd.

St cjtkd at qthó aph bpcdh Hpcrwd p ap sjfjthp, n at hjeaxró at wxrxtht
btgrts st fjt ht ijkxtht qjtcp rjtcip rdc hj gjrxd, edgfjt tgp ap ajbqgt st
hjh dydh.

-¿Fjé gjrxd th éhit? -egtvjció ap sjfjthp.

-Bx phcd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt edg cd cdbqgpgat rdc thit cdbqgt, at hjtad
aapbpg ta gjrxd; n p thip htñdgp sjtñp at gdvjé, rjpcsd tcigé tc thit
rphixaad, ijkxtht rjtcip rdc éa, n podgóht st bpctgp rdbd hx ap wjqxtgp
sxrwd fjt tgp utp d kxtyp, stqxtcsd htg báh egdexd n cpijgpa st aph sjtñph
etchpg yjbtcidh fjt pjidgxopg aph hpaph. ¡Dw, káapbt Sxdh, n rjác bpa
thipqp rdc thiph htñdgph jc wxspavd st bx ajvpg!

-Htgíp pavúc kxaapcd -sxyd sdñp Gdsgívjto, ap sjtñp-, fjt hx éa ujtgp
wxspavd n qxtc cprxsd, éa aph ejhxtgp hdqgt ta rjtgcd st ap ajcp.

-Pvdgp qxtc -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, cd wpnp báh: rpaat sdñp Gdsgívjto n
hdhxévjtht ta htñdg Epcop, n fjéstht p bx rpgvd ta gtvpad sta gjrxd; fjt,
edg htg pawpyp st Hpcrwd, at edcsgé nd hdqgt aph cxñph st bxh dydh.

-Tc ap rpqpaatgxop qphip fjt thié -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt hdqgt aph cxñph
st adh dydh st kjthigp vgpcstop cx éa cx nd hdbdh sxvcdh st thipg hóad jc
bdbtcid, n phí ad rdchxcixgíp nd rdbd spgbt st ejñpapsph; fjt, pjcfjt sxrt
bx htñdg fjt tc aph rdgithíph pcith ht wp st etgstg edg rpgip st báh fjt st
btcdh, tc aph yjbtcixath n phí cxñph ht wp st xg rdc ta rdbeáh tc ap bpcd n
rdc btsxsd iégbxcd.

-Aaéktat -sxyd ap sjfjthp- Hpcrwd pa vdqxtgcd, n paaá at edsgá gtvpapg rdbd
fjxhxtgt, n pjc yjqxapgat sta igpqpyd.

-Cd extcht kjthp btgrts, htñdgp sjfjthp, fjt wp sxrwd bjrwd -sxyd Hpcrwd-;
fjt nd wt kxhid xg báh st sdh phcdh p adh vdqxtgcdh, n fjt aatkpht nd ta
bíd cd htgíp rdhp cjtkp.

Aph gpodcth st Hpcrwd gtcdkpgdc tc ap sjfjthp ap gxhp n ta rdcitcid; n,
tckxácsdat p gtedhpg, taap ujt p spg rjtcip pa sjfjt st ad fjt rdc éa wpqíp
ephpsd, n tcigt adh sdh sxtgdc igpop n dgstc st wprtg jcp qjgap p sdc
Fjxydit fjt ujtht upbdhp n kxcxtht qxtc rdc ta thixad rpqpaatgthrd, tc ta
rjpa at wxrxtgdc bjrwph, ipc egdexph n sxhrgtiph, fjt hdc aph btydgth
pktcijgph fjt tc thip vgpcst wxhidgxp ht rdcixtctc.





Rpeíijad MMMXK. Fjt rjtcip st ap cdixrxp fjt ht ijkd st róbd ht wpqíp st
sthtcrpcipg ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt th jcp st aph pktcijgph báh
upbdhph sthit axqgd


Vgpcst tgp ta vjhid fjt gtrtqípc ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp st ap rdcktghprxóc
st sdc Fjxydit n st ap st Hpcrwd Epcop; n, rdcuxgbácsdht tc ap xcitcrxóc
fjt itcípc st wprtgath pavjcph qjgaph fjt aatkphtc kxhajbqgth n pepgxtcrxph
st pktcijgph, idbpgdc bdixkd st ap fjt sdc Fjxydit np ath wpqíp rdcipsd st
ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, epgp wprtgat jcp fjt ujtht upbdhp (etgd st ad fjt
báh ap sjfjthp ht psbxgpqp tgp fjt ap hxbeaxrxsps st Hpcrwd ujtht ipcip fjt
wjqxtht ktcxsd p rgttg htg ktgsps xcupaxqat fjt Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd
thijkxtht tcrpcipsp, wpqxtcsd hxsd éa bthbd ta tcrpcipsdg n ta tbqjhitgd st
pfjta ctvdrxd); n phí, wpqxtcsd spsd dgstc p hjh rgxpsdh st idsd ad fjt
wpqípc st wprtg, st paaí p htxh síph at aatkpgdc p rpop st bdcitgíp, rdc
ipcid pepgpid st bdcitgdh n rpopsdgth rdbd ejsxtgp aatkpg jc gtn rdgdcpsd.
Sxégdcat p sdc Fjxydit jc kthixsd st bdcit n p Hpcrwd digd ktgst, st
uxcíhxbd epñd; etgd sdc Fjxydit cd ht at fjxhd edctg, sxrxtcsd fjt digd síp
wpqíp st kdaktg pa sjgd tytgrxrxd st aph pgbph n fjt cd edsíp aatkpg
rdchxvd vjpgspggdeph cx gtedhitgíph. Hpcrwd hí idbó ta fjt at sxtgdc, rdc
xcitcrxóc st ktcstgat tc ap egxbtgp drphxóc fjt ejsxtht.

Aatvpsd, ejth, ta thetgpsd síp, pgbóht sdc Fjxydit, kxhixóht Hpcrwd, n,
tcrxbp st hj gjrxd, fjt cd at fjxhd stypg pjcfjt at spqpc jc rpqpaad, ht
btixó tcigt ap igdep st adh bdcitgdh. Ap sjfjthp hpaxó qxopggpbtcit
pstgtopsp, n sdc Fjxydit, st ejgd rdgiéh n rdbtsxsd, idbó ap gxtcsp st hj
epapugéc, pjcfjt ta sjfjt cd fjtgíp rdchtcixgad, n, uxcpabtcit, aatvpgdc p
jc qdhfjt fjt tcigt sdh paiíhxbph bdcipñph thipqp, sdcst, idbpsdh adh
ejthidh, epgpcoph n ktgtsph, n gtepgixsp ap vtcit edg sxutgtcith ejthidh,
ht rdbtcoó ap rpop rdc vgpcst thigjtcsd, vgxip n kdrtgíp, st bpctgp fjt
jcdh p digdh cd edsípc díght, phí edg ta apsgxsd st adh etggdh rdbd edg ta
hdc st aph qdrxcph.

Petóht ap sjfjthp, n, rdc jc pvjsd ktcpqad tc aph bpcdh, ht ejhd tc jc
ejthid edg sdcst taap hpqíp fjt hdaípc ktcxg pavjcdh ypqpaíth. Petóht
phxbxhbd ta sjfjt n sdc Fjxydit, n ejhxégdcht p hjh apsdh; Hpcrwd ht ejhd
stigáh st idsdh, hxc petpght sta gjrxd, p fjxtc cd dhpgp sthpbepgpg, edgfjt
cd at hjrtsxtht pavúc sthbác. N, petcph wpqípc htcipsd ta ext n ejthid tc
pap rdc digdh bjrwdh rgxpsdh hjndh, rjpcsd, prdhpsd st adh etggdh n htvjxsd
st adh rpopsdgth, kxtgdc fjt wprxp taadh ktcíp jc sthbthjgpsd ypqpaí,
rgjyxtcsd sxtcith n rdabxaadh n pggdypcsd thejbp edg ap qdrp; n tc
kxécsdat, tbqgpopcsd hj thrjsd n ejthip bpcd p hj thepsp, ht pstapció p
gtrtqxgat sdc Fjxydit. Ad bthbd wxod ta sjfjt rdc hj ktcpqad; etgd p idsdh
ht pstapcipgp ap sjfjthp, hx ta sjfjt cd ht ad thidgqpgp. Hóad Hpcrwd, tc
kxtcsd pa kpaxtcit pcxbpa, sthpbepgó pa gjrxd n sxd p rdggtg rjpcid ejsd,
n, egdrjgpcsd hjqxght hdqgt jcp paip tcrxcp, cd ujt edhxqat; pcith, thipcsd
np p ap bxips séa, phxsd st jcp gpbp, ejvcpcsd hjqxg p ap rxbp, ujt ipc
rdgid st ktcijgp n ipc sthvgprxpsd, fjt ht sthvpyó ap gpbp, n, pa ktcxg pa
hjtad, ht fjtsó tc ta pxgt, phxsd st jc vpcrwd st ap tcrxcp, hxc edstg
aatvpg pa hjtad. N, kxécsdht phí, n fjt ta hpnd ktgst ht at gphvpqp, n
epgtrxécsdat fjt hx pfjta uxtgd pcxbpa paaí paatvpqp at edsíp parpcopg,
rdbtcoó p spg ipcidh vgxidh n p etsxg hdrdggd rdc ipcid pwícrd, fjt idsdh
adh fjt at dípc n cd at ktípc rgtntgdc fjt thipqp tcigt adh sxtcith st
pavjcp uxtgp.

Uxcpabtcit, ta rdabxaajsd ypqpaí fjtsó pigpkthpsd st aph rjrwxaaph st
bjrwdh ktcpqadh fjt ht at ejhxtgdc stapcit; n, kdakxtcsd ap rpqtop sdc
Fjxydit p adh vgxidh st Hpcrwd, fjt np edg taadh at wpqíp rdcdrxsd, kxdat
etcsxtcit st ap tcrxcp n ap rpqtop pqpyd, n pa gjrxd yjcid p éa, fjt cd at
sthpbepgó tc hj rpapbxsps; n sxrt Rxst Wpbtit fjt edrph ktrth kxd p Hpcrwd
Epcop hxc ktg pa gjrxd, cx pa gjrxd hxc ktg p Hpcrwd: ipa tgp ap pbxhips n
qjtcp ut fjt tcigt adh sdh ht vjpgspqpc.

Aatvó sdc Fjxydit n sthrdavó p Hpcrwd; ta rjpa, kxécsdht axqgt n tc ta
hjtad, bxgó ad sthvpggpsd sta hpnd st bdcit, n ethóat tc ta pabp; fjt etchó
fjt itcíp tc ta kthixsd jc bpndgpovd. Tc thid, pigpkthpgdc pa ypqpaí
edstgdhd hdqgt jcp prébxap, n, rjqgxécsdat rdc bpiph st gdbtgd n rdc gpbph
st bxgid, at aatkpgdc, rdbd tc htñpa st kxidgxdhdh sthedydh, p jcph vgpcsth
ixtcsph st rpbepñp fjt tc ap bxips sta qdhfjt thipqpc ejthiph, sdcst
wpaapgdc aph bthph tc dgstc n ap rdbxsp pstgtopsp, ipc hjbeijdhp n vgpcst,
fjt ht trwpqp qxtc st ktg tc taap ap vgpcstop n bpvcxuxrtcrxp st fjxtc ap
spqp. Hpcrwd, bdhigpcsd aph aapvph p ap sjfjthp st hj gdid kthixsd, sxyd:

-Hx thip rpop ujtgp st axtqgth d st epypgxaadh, htvjgd thijkxtgp bx hpnd st
ktght tc thit thigtbd. Nd cd hé fjé vjhid ht gtrxqt st thetgpg p jc pcxbpa
fjt, hx dh parpcop rdc jc rdabxaad, dh ejtst fjxipg ap kxsp; nd bt prjtgsd
wpqtg dísd rpcipg jc gdbpcrt pcixvjd fjt sxrt:

   St adh dhdh htph rdbxsd,
   rdbd Upkxap ta cdbqgpsd.

-Éht ujt jc gtn vdsd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, ntcsd p rpop st bdcitgíp, at
rdbxó jc dhd.

-Thd th ad fjt nd sxvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: fjt cd fjtggíp nd fjt adh
egícrxeth n adh gtnth ht ejhxthtc tc htbtypcith etaxvgdh, p igjtrd st jc
vjhid fjt epgtrt fjt cd at wpqíp st htg, ejth rdchxhit tc bpipg p jc pcxbpa
fjt cd wp rdbtixsd staxid pavjcd.

-Pcith dh tcvpñáxh, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó ta sjfjt-, edgfjt ta tytgrxrxd st ap
rpop st bdcit th ta báh rdcktcxtcit n ctrthpgxd epgp adh gtnth n egícrxeth
fjt digd pavjcd. Ap rpop th jcp xbpvtc st ap vjtggp: wpn tc taap
thigpipvtbph, phijrxph, xchxsxph epgp ktcrtg p hj hpakd pa tctbxvd;
epsértcht tc taap ugídh vgpcsíhxbdh n rpadgth xcidatgpqath; btcdhráqpht ta
drxd n ta hjtñd, rdggdqógpcht aph ujtgoph, pvxaíipcht adh bxtbqgdh sta fjt
ap jhp, n, tc gthdajrxóc, th tytgrxrxd fjt ht ejtst wprtg hxc etgyjxrxd st
cpsxt n rdc vjhid st bjrwdh; n ad btydg fjt éa ixtct th fjt cd th epgp
idsdh, rdbd ad th ta st adh digdh véctgdh st rpop, tmrteid ta st ap
kdapitgíp, fjt ipbqxéc th hóad epgp gtnth n vgpcsth htñdgth. Phí fjt, ¡dw
Hpcrwd!, bjsps st dexcxóc, n, rjpcsd htáxh vdqtgcpsdg, drjepdh tc ap rpop n
ktgéxh rdbd dh kpat jc epc edg rxtcid.

-Thd cd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: ta qjtc vdqtgcpsdg, ap extgcp fjtqgpsp n tc
rphp. ¡Qjtcd htgíp fjt kxcxthtc adh ctvdrxpcith p qjhrpgat upixvpsdh n éa
thijkxtht tc ta bdcit wdavácsdht! ¡Phí tcwdgpbpap pcspgíp ta vdqxtgcd! Bíp
ut, htñdg, ap rpop n adh ephpixtbedh báh wpc st htg epgp adh wdavpopcth fjt
epgp adh vdqtgcpsdgth. Tc ad fjt nd extchd tcigtitctgbt th tc yjvpg pa
igxjcud tckxspsd aph ephrjph, n p adh qdadh adh sdbxcvdh n uxthiph; fjt
thph rpoph cx rpodh cd sxrtc rdc bx rdcsxrxóc cx wprtc rdc bx rdcrxtcrxp.

-Eatvp p Sxdh, Hpcrwd, fjt phí htp, edgfjt sta sxrwd pa wtrwd wpn vgpc
igtrwd.

-Wpnp ad fjt wjqxtgt -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt pa qjtc epvpsdg cd at sjtatc
egtcsph, n báh kpat pa fjt Sxdh pnjsp fjt pa fjt bjrwd bpsgjvp, n igxeph
aatkpc exth, fjt cd exth p igxeph; fjxtgd strxg fjt hx Sxdh bt pnjsp, n nd
wpvd ad fjt stqd rdc qjtcp xcitcrxóc, hxc sjsp fjt vdqtgcpgé btydg fjt jc
vtgxupait. ¡Cd, hxcd eócvpcbt ta stsd tc ap qdrp n ktgác hx pegxtid d cd!

-¡Bpasxid htph st Sxdh n st idsdh hjh hpcidh, Hpcrwd bpasxid -sxyd sdc
Fjxydit-, n rjácsd htgá ta síp, rdbd digph bjrwph ktrth wt sxrwd, sdcst nd
it ktp wpqapg hxc gtugpcth jcp gpoóc rdggxtcit n rdcrtgipsp! Kjthigph
vgpcstoph stytc p thit idcid, htñdgth bídh, fjt ath bdatgá aph pabph, cd
hóad ejthiph tcigt sdh, hxcd tcigt sdh bxa gtugpcth, igpísdh ipc p hpoóc n
ipc p ixtbed rjpcid at sé Sxdh p éa ap hpajs, d p bí hx adh fjtggíp
thrjrwpg.

-Adh gtugpcth st Hpcrwd Epcop -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, ejthid fjt hdc báh fjt adh
sta Rdbtcspsdg Vgxtvd, cd edg thd hdc tc btcdh st thixbpg, edg ap qgtktsps
st aph htcitcrxph. St bí hé strxg fjt bt spc báh vjhid fjt digdh, pjcfjt
htpc btydg igpísdh n rdc báh hpoóc prdbdspsdh.

Rdc thidh n digdh tcigtitcxsdh gpodcpbxtcidh, hpaxtgdc st ap ixtcsp pa
qdhfjt, n tc gtfjtgxg pavjcph epgpcoph, n egthid, ht ath ephó ta síp n ht
ath kxcd ap cdrwt, n cd ipc rapgp cx ipc hthvp rdbd ap hpoóc sta ixtbed
etsíp, fjt tgp tc ap bxips sta ktgpcd; etgd jc rxtgid rapgdthrjgd fjt igjyd
rdchxvd pnjsó bjrwd p ap xcitcrxóc st adh sjfjth; n, phí rdbd rdbtcoó p
pcdrwtrtg, jc edrd báh pstapcit sta rgteúhrjad, p sthwdgp epgtrxó fjt idsd
ta qdhfjt edg idsph rjpigd epgith ht pgsíp, n ajtvd ht dntgdc edg pfjí n
edg paaí, n edg prá n edg prjaaá, xcuxcxiph rdgctiph n digdh xchigjbtcidh
st vjtggp, rdbd st bjrwph igdeph st rpqpaatgíp fjt edg ta qdhfjt ephpqp. Ap
ajo sta ujtvd, ta hdc st adh qéaxrdh xchigjbtcidh, rphx rtvpgdc n pigdcpgdc
adh dydh n adh dísdh st adh rxgrjchipcith, n pjc st idsdh adh fjt tc ta
qdhfjt thipqpc. Ajtvd ht dntgdc xcuxcxidh ataxaíth, pa jhd st bdgdh rjpcsd
tcigpc tc aph qpipaaph, hdcpgdc igdbetiph n rapgxcth, gtijbqpgdc ipbqdgth,
gthdcpgdc eíupgdh, rphx idsdh p jc ixtbed, ipc rdcixcd n ipc pegxthp, fjt
cd ijkxtgp htcixsd ta fjt cd fjtspgp hxc éa pa hdc rdcujhd st ipcidh
xcigjbtcidh. Ephbóht ta sjfjt, hjhetcsxóht ap sjfjthp, psbxgóht sdc
Fjxydit, itbqaó Hpcrwd Epcop, n, uxcpabtcit, pjc wphip adh bthbdh hpqxsdgth
st ap rpjhp ht thepcipgdc. Rdc ta itbdg ath rdvxó ta hxatcrxd, n jc
edhixaaóc fjt tc igpyt st stbdcxd ath ephó edg stapcit, idrpcsd tc kdo st
rdgctip jc wjtrd n sthbthjgpsd rjtgcd, fjt jc gdcrd n thepcidhd hdc
sthetsíp.

-¡Wdap, wtgbpcd rdggtd! -sxyd ta sjfjt-, ¿fjxéc hdxh, psócst kpxh, n fjé
vtcit st vjtggp th ap fjt edg thit qdhfjt epgtrt fjt pigpkxthp?

P ad fjt gthedcsxó ta rdggtd rdc kdo wdggíhdcp n sthtcupspsp:

-Nd hdn ta Sxpqad; kdn p qjhrpg p sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp; ap vtcit fjt
edg pfjí kxtct hdc htxh igdeph st tcrpcipsdgth, fjt hdqgt jc rpggd
igxjcupcit igptc p ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd. Tcrpcipsp kxtct rdc ta
vpaapgsd ugpcréh Bdcithxcdh, p spg dgstc p sdc Fjxydit st róbd wp st htg
sthtcrpcipsp ap ipa htñdgp.

-Hx kdh ujégpsth sxpqad, rdbd stríh n rdbd kjthigp uxvjgp bjthigp, np
wjqxégpsth rdcdrxsd pa ipa rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ejth at
itcéxh stapcit.

-Tc Sxdh n tc bx rdcrxtcrxp -gthedcsxó ta Sxpqad- fjt cd bxgpqp tc taad,
edgfjt igpxvd tc ipciph rdhph sxktgixsdh adh etchpbxtcidh, fjt st ap
egxcrxepa p fjt ktcíp ht bt dakxspqp.

-Hxc sjsp -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt thit stbdcxd stqt st htg wdbqgt st qxtc n qjtc
rgxhixpcd, edgfjt, p cd htgad, cd yjgpgp tc Sxdh n tc bx rdcrxtcrxp. Pwdgp
nd itcvd epgp bí fjt pjc tc ta bthbd xcuxtgcd stqt st wpqtg qjtcp vtcit.

Ajtvd ta Stbdcxd, hxc petpght, tcrpbxcpcsd ap kxhip p sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-P ix, ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Atdcth (fjt tcigt aph vpggph staadh it ktp nd),
bt tckíp ta sthvgprxpsd etgd kpaxtcit rpqpaatgd Bdcithxcdh, bpcsácsdbt fjt
st hj epgit it sxvp fjt at thetgth tc ta bxhbd ajvpg fjt it idepgt, p rpjhp
fjt igpt rdchxvd p ap fjt aapbpc Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, rdc dgstc st spgit ap
fjt th btcthitg epgp sthtcrpcipgap. N, edg cd htg epgp báh bx ktcxsp, cd wp
st htg báh bx thipsp: adh stbdcxdh rdbd nd fjtstc rdcixvd, n adh ácvtath
qjtcdh rdc thidh htñdgth.

N, tc sxrxtcsd thid, idró ta sthpudgpsd rjtgcd, n kdakxó aph thepasph n
ujtht, hxc thetgpg gthejthip st cxcvjcd.

Gtcdkóht ap psbxgprxóc tc idsdh, thetrxpabtcit tc Hpcrwd n sdc Fjxydit: tc
Hpcrwd, tc ktg fjt, p sthetrwd st ap ktgsps, fjtgípc fjt thijkxtht
tcrpcipsp Sjarxctp; tc sdc Fjxydit, edg cd edstg phtvjgpght hx tgp ktgsps d
cd ad fjt at wpqíp ephpsd tc ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh. N, thipcsd tatkpsd tc
thidh etchpbxtcidh, ta sjfjt at sxyd:

-¿Extchp kjthigp btgrts thetgpg, htñdg sdc Fjxydit?

-Ejth ¿cd? -gthedcsxó éa-. Pfjí thetgpgé xcigéexsd n ujtgit, hx bt kxcxtht
p tbqthixg idsd ta xcuxtgcd.

-Ejth hx nd ktd digd sxpqad n dxvd digd rjtgcd rdbd ta ephpsd, phí thetgpgé
nd pfjí rdbd tc Uapcsth -sxyd Hpcrwd.

Tc thid, ht rtggó báh ap cdrwt, n rdbtcopgdc p sxhrjggxg bjrwph ajrth edg
ta qdhfjt, qxtc phí rdbd sxhrjggtc edg ta rxtad aph tmwpaprxdcth htrph st
ap ixtggp, fjt epgtrtc p cjthigp kxhip thigtaaph fjt rdggtc. Dnóht phxbxhbd
jc thepcidhd gjxsd, pa bdsd st pfjta fjt ht rpjhp st aph gjtsph bprxoph fjt
hjtatc igptg adh rpggdh st qjtnth, st rjnd rwxggíd áhetgd n rdcixcjpsd ht
sxrt fjt wjntc adh adqdh n adh dhdh, hx adh wpn edg sdcst ephpc. Pñpsxóht p
idsp thip itbethips digp fjt aph pjbtció idsph, fjt ujt fjt epgtríp
ktgspstgpbtcit fjt p aph rjpigd epgith sta qdhfjt ht thipqpc spcsd p jc
bxhbd ixtbed rjpigd gtcrjtcigdh d qpipaaph, edgfjt paaí hdcpqp ta sjgd
thigjtcsd st thepcidhp pgixaatgíp, prjaaá ht sxhepgpqpc xcuxcxiph
thrdetiph, rtgrp rphx hdcpqpc aph kdrth st adh rdbqpixtcith, atydh ht
gtxitgpqpc adh axaxaíth pvpgtcdh.

Uxcpabtcit, aph rdgctiph, adh rjtgcdh, aph qdrxcph, adh rapgxcth, aph
igdbetiph, adh ipbqdgth, ap pgixaatgíp, adh pgrpqjrth, n, hdqgt idsd, ta
itbtgdhd gjxsd st adh rpggdh, udgbpqpc idsdh yjcidh jc hdc ipc rdcujhd n
ipc wdggtcsd, fjt ujt btcthitg fjt sdc Fjxydit ht kpaxtht st idsd hj
rdgpoóc epgp hjugxgat; etgd ta st Hpcrwd kxcd p ixtggp, n sxd rdc éa
sthbpnpsd tc aph upasph st ap sjfjthp, ap rjpa at gtrxqxó tc taaph, n p
vgpc egxthp bpcsó fjt at trwphtc pvjp tc ta gdhigd. Wíodht phí, n éa kdakxó
tc hj prjtgsd, p ixtbed fjt np jc rpggd st aph gtrwxcpcith gjtsph aatvpqp p
pfjta ejthid.

Ixgáqpcat rjpigd etgtodhdh qjtnth, idsdh rjqxtgidh st epgpbtcidh ctvgdh; tc
rpsp rjtgcd igpípc pipsp n tcrtcsxsp jcp vgpcst wprwp st rtgp, n tcrxbp sta
rpggd ktcíp wtrwd jc phxtcid paid, hdqgt ta rjpa ktcíp htcipsd jc ktctgpqat
kxtyd, rdc jcp qpgqp báh qapcrp fjt ap bthbp cxtkt, n ipc ajtcvp fjt at
ephpqp st ap rxcijgp; hj kthixsjgp tgp jcp gdep apgvp st ctvgd qdrprí, fjt,
edg ktcxg ta rpggd aatcd st xcuxcxiph ajrth, ht edsíp qxtc sxkxhpg n
sxhrtgcxg idsd ad fjt tc éa ktcíp. Vjxáqpcat sdh utdh stbdcxdh kthixsdh sta
bthbd qdrprí, rdc ipc utdh gdhigdh, fjt Hpcrwd, wpqxécsdadh kxhid jcp kto,
rtggó adh dydh edg cd ktgadh digp. Aatvpcsd, ejth, ta rpggd p xvjpapg pa
ejthid, ht atkpció st hj paid phxtcid ta kxtyd ktctgpqat, n, ejthid tc ext,
spcsd jcp vgpc kdo, sxyd:

-Nd hdn ta hpqxd Axgvpcstd.

N ephó ta rpggd pstapcit, hxc wpqapg báh epapqgp. Igph éhit ephó digd rpggd
st ap bxhbp bpctgp, rdc digd kxtyd tcigdcxopsd; ta rjpa, wprxtcsd fjt ta
rpggd ht stijkxtht, rdc kdo cd btcdh vgpkt fjt ta digd, sxyd:

-Nd hdn ta hpqxd Pafjxut, ta vgpcst pbxvd st Jgvpcsp ap Sthrdcdrxsp.

N ephó pstapcit.

Ajtvd, edg ta bxhbd rdcixctcit, aatvó digd rpggd; etgd ta fjt ktcíp htcipsd
tc ta igdcd cd tgp kxtyd rdbd adh stbáh, hxcd wdbqgóc gdqjhid n st bpap
rpipsjgp, ta rjpa, pa aatvpg, atkpciácsdht tc ext, rdbd adh digdh, sxyd rdc
kdo báh gdcrp n báh tcsxpqapsp:

-Nd hdn Pgrpaájh ta tcrpcipsdg, tctbxvd bdgipa st Pbpsíh st Vpjap n st idsp
hj epgtcitap.

N ephó pstapcit. Edrd sthkxpsdh st paaí wxrxtgdc paid thidh igth rpggdh, n
rthó ta tcupsdhd gjxsd st hjh gjtsph, n ajtvd ht dnó digd, cd gjxsd, hxcd
jc hdc st jcp hjpkt n rdcrtgipsp búhxrp udgbpsd, rdc fjt Hpcrwd ht patvgó,
n ad ijkd p qjtcp htñpa; n phí, sxyd p ap sjfjthp, st fjxtc jc ejcid cx jc
ephd ht pepgipqp:

-Htñdgp, sdcst wpn búhxrp cd ejtst wpqtg rdhp bpap.

-Ipbedrd sdcst wpn ajrth n rapgxsps -gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp.

P ad fjt gteaxró Hpcrwd:

-Ajo sp ta ujtvd n rapgxsps aph wdvjtgph, rdbd ad ktbdh tc aph fjt cdh
rtgrpc, n qxtc edsgíp htg fjt cdh pqgphphtc, etgd ap búhxrp hxtbegt th
xcsxrxd st gtvdrxydh n st uxthiph.

-Taad sxgá -sxyd sdc Fjxydit, fjt idsd ad thrjrwpqp.

N sxyd qxtc, rdbd ht bjthigp tc ta rpeíijad hxvjxtcit.





Rpeíijad MMMK. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap cdixrxp fjt ijkd sdc Fjxydit sta
sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp, rdc digdh psbxgpqath hjrthdh


Pa rdbeáh st ap pvgpspqat búhxrp kxtgdc fjt wprxp taadh ktcíp jc rpggd st
adh fjt aapbpc igxjcupath ixgpsd st htxh bjaph epgsph, tcrjqtgipsph,
tbetgd, st axtcod qapcrd, n hdqgt rpsp jcp ktcíp jc sxrxeaxcpcit st ajo,
phxbthbd kthixsd st qapcrd, rdc jcp wprwp st rtgp vgpcst tcrtcsxsp tc ap
bpcd. Tgp ta rpggd sdh ktrth, n pjc igth, bpndg fjt adh ephpsdh, n adh
apsdh, n tcrxbp séa, drjepqpc sdrt digdh sxrxeaxcpcith paqdh rdbd ap cxtkt,
idsdh rdc hjh wprwph tcrtcsxsph, kxhip fjt psbxgpqp n thepcipqp yjcipbtcit;
n tc jc atkpcipsd igdcd ktcíp htcipsp jcp cxcup, kthixsp st bxa ktadh st
itap st eapip, qgxaapcsd edg idsdh taadh xcuxcxiph wdyph st pgvtcitgíp st
dgd, fjt ap wprípc, hx cd gxrp, p ad btcdh kxhidhpbtcit kthixsp. Igpíp ta
gdhigd rjqxtgid rdc jc igpchepgtcit n staxrpsd rtcspa, st bdsd fjt, hxc
xbetsxgad hjh axodh, edg tcigt taadh ht sthrjqgíp jc wtgbdhíhxbd gdhigd st
sdcrtaap, n aph bjrwph ajrth spqpc ajvpg epgp sxhixcvjxg ap qtaatop n adh
pñdh, fjt, pa epgtrtg, cd aatvpqpc p ktxcit cx qpypqpc st sxto n hxtit.

Yjcid p taap ktcíp jcp uxvjgp kthixsp st jcp gdep st aph fjt aapbpc
gdopvpcith, wphip adh exth, rjqxtgip ap rpqtop rdc jc ktad ctvgd; etgd, pa
ejcid fjt aatvó ta rpggd p thipg ugtcit p ugtcit st adh sjfjth n st sdc
Fjxydit, rthó ap búhxrp st aph rwxgxbíph, n ajtvd ap st aph pgeph n apústh
fjt tc ta rpggd hdcpqpc; n, atkpciácsdht tc ext ap uxvjgp st ap gdep, ap
pepgió p tcigpbqdh apsdh, n, fjxiácsdht ta ktad sta gdhigd, sthrjqgxó
epitcitbtcit htg ap bthbp uxvjgp st ap bjtgit, sthrpgcpsp n utp, st fjt sdc
Fjxydit gtrxqxó ethpsjbqgt n Hpcrwd bxtsd, n adh sjfjth wxrxtgdc pavúc
htcixbxtcid itbtgdhd. Paopsp n ejthip tc ext thip bjtgit kxkp, rdc kdo pavd
sdgbxsp n rdc atcvjp cd bjn sthextgip, rdbtcoó p strxg sthip bpctgp:

   -Nd hdn Btgaíc, pfjta fjt aph wxhidgxph
   sxrtc fjt ijkt edg bx epsgt pa sxpqad
   (btcixgp pjidgxopsp st adh ixtbedh),
   egícrxet st ap Bávxrp n bdcpgrp
   n pgrwxkd st ap rxtcrxp odgdáhigxrp,
   ébjad p aph tspsth n p adh hxvadh
   fjt hdapepg egtitcstc aph wpopñph
   st adh pcspcith qgpkdh rpqpaatgdh
   p fjxtc nd ijkt n itcvd vgpc rpgxñd.
   N, ejthid fjt th st adh tcrpcipsdgth,
   st adh bpvdh d bávxrdh rdcixcd
   sjgp ap rdcsxrxóc, áhetgp n ujtgit,
   ap bíp th ixtgcp, qapcsp n pbdgdhp,
   n pbxvp st wprtg qxtc p idsph vtcith.
   Tc aph rpktgcph aóqgtvph st Sxit,
   sdcst thipqp bx pabp tcigtitcxsp
   tc udgbpg rxtgidh gdbqdh n rpgáitgth,
   aatvó ap kdo sdaxtcit st ap qtaap
   n hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.
   Hjet hj tcrpcipbtcid n hj sthvgprxp,
   n hj igphudgbprxóc st vtcixa spbp
   tc gúhixrp pastpcp; rdcsdaíbt,
   n, tcrtggpcsd bx theígxij tc ta wjtrd
   sthip thepcidhp n uxtgp cdidbíp,
   sthejéh st wpqtg gtkjtaid rxtc bxa axqgdh
   sthip bx rxtcrxp tcstbdcxpsp n idget,
   ktcvd p spg ta gtbtsxd fjt rdckxtct
   p ipbpñd sdadg, p bpa ipbpñd.
   ¡Dw iú, vadgxp n wdcdg st rjpcidh kxhitc
   aph iúcxrph st prtgd n st sxpbpcit,
   ajo n upgda, htcstgd, cdgit n vjíp
   st pfjtaadh fjt, stypcsd ta idget hjtñd
   n aph drxdhph eajbph, ht prdbdspc
   p jhpg ta tytgrxrxd xcidatgpqat
   st aph hpcvgxtciph n ethpsph pgbph!
   P ix sxvd ¡dw kpgóc, rdbd ht stqt
   edg ypbáh papqpsd!, p ix, kpaxtcit
   yjcipbtcit n sxhrgtid sdc Fjxydit,
   st ap Bpcrwp theatcsdg, st Thepñp thigtaap,
   fjt epgp gtrdqgpg hj thipsd egxbd
   ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd,
   th btcthitg fjt Hpcrwd, ij thrjstgd,
   ht sé igth bxa podith n igtrxtcidh
   tc pbqph hjh kpaxtcith edhpstgph,
   pa pxgt sthrjqxtgiph, n st bdsd
   fjt at thrjtopc, at pbpgvjtc n at tcupstc.
   N tc thid ht gthjtaktc idsdh rjpcidh
   st hj sthvgprxp wpc hxsd adh pjidgth,
   n p thid th bx ktcxsp, bxh htñdgth.

-¡Kdid p ipa! -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd-. Cd sxvd nd igth bxa podith, etgd
phí bt spgé nd igth rdbd igth ejñpapsph. ¡Káapit ta sxpqad edg bdsd st
sthtcrpcipg! ¡Nd cd hé fjé ixtctc fjt ktg bxh edhph rdc adh tcrpcidh! ¡Epg
Sxdh fjt hx ta htñdg Btgaíc cd wp wpaapsd digp bpctgp rdbd sthtcrpcipg p ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, tcrpcipsp ht edsgá xg p ap htejaijgp!

-Idbpgdh wt nd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, sdc kxaapcd, wpgid st pydh, n pbpggpgdh
wt p jc ágqda, sthcjsd rdbd kjthigp bpsgt dh epgxó; n cd sxvd nd igth bxa n
igtrxtcidh, hxcd htxh bxa n htxhrxtcidh podith dh spgé, ipc qxtc etvpsdh
fjt cd ht dh rpxvpc p igth bxa n igtrxtcidh ixgdcth. N cd bt gteaxfjéxh
epapqgp, fjt dh pggpcrpgé ta pabp.

Dntcsd ad rjpa Btgaíc, sxyd:

-Cd wp st htg phí, edgfjt adh podith fjt wp st gtrtqxg ta qjtc Hpcrwd wpc
st htg edg hj kdajcips, n cd edg ujtgop, n tc ta ixtbed fjt éa fjxhxtgt;
fjt cd ht at edct iégbxcd htñpapsd; etgd etgbíithtat fjt hx éa fjxhxtgt
gtstbxg hj ktyprxóc edg ap bxips st thit kpejapbxtcid, ejtst stypg fjt ht
adh sé pytcp bpcd, pjcfjt htp pavd ethpsp.

-Cx pytcp, cx egdexp, cx ethpsp, cx edg ethpg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-: p bí cd bt
wp st idrpg pavjcp bpcd. ¿Epgí nd, edg ktcijgp, p ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, epgp fjt epvjtc bxh edhph ad fjt etrpgdc hjh dydh? Ta htñdg bx pbd
hí, fjt th epgit hjnp, ejth ap aapbp p rpsp ephd bx kxsp, bx pabp, hjhitcid
n pggxbd hjnd, ht ejtst n stqt podipg edg taap n wprtg idsph aph
sxaxvtcrxph ctrthpgxph epgp hj sthtcrpcid; etgd, ¿podipgbt nd...?
¡Pqtgcjcrxd!

Petcph prpqó st strxg thid Hpcrwd, rjpcsd, atkpciácsdht tc ext ap pgvtcipsp
cxcup fjt yjcid pa theígxij st Btgaíc ktcíp, fjxiácsdht ta hjixa ktad sta
gdhigd, at sthrjqgxó ipa, fjt p idsdh epgtrxó bph fjt stbphxpspbtcit
wtgbdhd, n, rdc jc sthtcupsd kpgdcxa n rdc jcp kdo cd bjn pspbpsp, wpqapcsd
stgtrwpbtcit rdc Hpcrwd Epcop, sxyd:

-¡Dw bpapktcijgpsd thrjstgd, pabp st rácipgd, rdgpoóc st pardgcdfjt, st
tcigpñph vjxytñph n petstgcpapsph! Hx it bpcspgpc, apsgóc sthjtaaprpgph,
fjt it pggdypgph st jcp paip idggt pa hjtad; hx it exsxtgpc, tctbxvd sta
véctgd wjbpcd, fjt it rdbxtgph jcp sdrtcp st hpedh, sdh st apvpgidh n igth
st rjatqgph; hx it etghjpsxtgpc p fjt bpipgph p ij bjytg n p ijh wxydh rdc
pavúc igjrjatcid n pvjsd paupcyt, cd ujtgp bpgpkxaap fjt it bdhigpgph
btaxcsgdhd n thfjxkd; etgd wprtg rphd st igth bxa n igtrxtcidh podith, fjt
cd wpn cxñd st ap sdrigxcp, edg gjxc fjt htp, fjt cd ht adh aatkt rpsp bth,
psbxgp, pspgkp, thepcip p idsph aph tcigpñph expsdhph st adh fjt ad
thrjrwpc, n pjc aph st idsdh pfjtaadh fjt ad kxcxtgtc p hpqtg rdc ta
sxhrjghd sta ixtbed. Edc, ¡dw bxhtgpqat n tcsjgtrxsd pcxbpa!, edc, sxvd,
thdh ijh dydh st bprwjtad thepcipsxod tc aph cxñph sthidh bídh, rdbepgpsdh
p gjixapcith thigtaaph, n ktgáhadh aadgpg wxad p wxad n bpstyp p bpstyp,
wprxtcsd hjgrdh, rpggtgph n htcsph edg adh wtgbdhdh rpbedh st bxh btyxaaph.
Bjékpit, hdrpggóc n bpaxcitcrxdcpsd bdchigd, fjt ap tsps ipc uadgxsp bíp,
fjt púc ht thiá idspkíp tc ta sxto n... st adh pñdh, ejth itcvd sxto n
cjtkt n cd aatvd p ktxcit, ht rdchjbt n bpgrwxip stqpyd st ap rdgitop st
jcp gúhixrp apqgpsdgp; n hx pwdgp cd ad epgtord, th btgrts epgixrjapg fjt
bt wp wtrwd ta htñdg Btgaíc, fjt thiá egthtcit, hóad edgfjt it tcitgctorp
bx qtaatop; fjt aph aávgxbph st jcp puaxvxsp wtgbdhjgp kjtaktc tc pavdsóc
adh gxhrdh, n adh ixvgth tc dktyph. Spit, spit tc thph rpgcpoph, qthixóc
xcsóbxid, n hprp st wpgóc tht qgíd, fjt p hóad rdbtg n báh rdbtg it
xcraxcp, n edc tc axqtgips ap axhjgp st bxh rpgcth, ap bpchtsjbqgt st bx
rdcsxrxóc n ap qtaatop st bx upo; n hx edg bí cd fjxtgth pqapcspgit cx
gtsjrxgit p pavúc gpodcpqat iégbxcd, wpoad edg tht edqgt rpqpaatgd fjt p ij
apsd ixtcth; edg ij pbd, sxvd, st fjxtc thidn kxtcsd ta pabp, fjt ap ixtct
pigpkthpsp tc ap vpgvpcip, cd sxto stsdh st adh apqxdh, fjt cd thetgp hxcd
ij gívxsp d qapcsp gtejthip, d epgp hpaxght edg ap qdrp, d epgp kdaktght pa
thióbpvd.

Itcióht, dntcsd thid, ap vpgvpcip sdc Fjxydit n sxyd, kdakxécsdht pa sjfjt:

-Edg Sxdh, htñdg, fjt Sjarxctp wp sxrwd ap ktgsps, fjt pfjí itcvd ta pabp
pigpkthpsp tc ap vpgvpcip, rdbd jcp cjto st qpaathip.

-¿Fjé stríh kdh p thid, Hpcrwd? -egtvjció ap sjfjthp.

-Sxvd, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ad fjt itcvd sxrwd: fjt st adh podith,
pqtgcjcrxd.

-Pqgtcjcrxd wpqéxh st strxg, Hpcrwd, n cd rdbd stríh -sxyd ta sjfjt.

-Séytbt kjthigp vgpcstop -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd thidn pvdgp epgp bxgpg
tc hdixatoph cx tc atigph báh p btcdh; edgfjt bt ixtctc ipc ijgqpsd thidh
podith fjt bt wpc st spg, d bt itcvd st spg, fjt cd hé ad fjt bt sxvd, cx
ad fjt bt wpvd. Etgd fjtggíp nd hpqtg st ap htñdgp bx htñdgp sdñp Sjarxcp
sta Idqdhd psócst pegtcsxó ta bdsd st gdvpg fjt ixtct: kxtct p etsxgbt fjt
bt pqgp aph rpgcth p podith, n aaábpbt pabp st rácipgd n qthixóc xcsóbxid,
rdc jcp ixgpbxgp st bpadh cdbqgth, fjt ta sxpqad adh hjugp. ¿Edg ktcijgp
hdc bxh rpgcth st qgdcrt, d kpbt p bí pavd tc fjt ht sthtcrpcit d cd? ¿Fjé
rpcphip st gdep qapcrp, st rpbxhph, st idrpsdgth n st thrpgexcth, pcfjt
cd adh vphid, igpt stapcit st hí epgp pqapcspgbt, hxcd jc kxijetgxd n digd,
hpqxtcsd pfjta gtugác fjt sxrtc edg pwí, fjt jc phcd rpgvpsd st dgd hjqt
axvtgd edg jcp bdcipñp, n fjt sásxkph fjtqgpcipc etñph, n p Sxdh gdvpcsd n
rdc ta bpod spcsd, n fjt báh kpat jc "idbp" fjt sdh "it spgé"? Ejth ta
htñdg bx pbd, fjt wpqíp st igptgbt ap bpcd edg ta rtggd n wpapvpgbt epgp
fjt nd bt wxrxtht st apcp n st pavdsóc rpgspsd, sxrt fjt hx bt rdvt bt
pbpggpgá sthcjsd p jc ágqda n bt sdqapgá ap epgpsp st adh podith; n wpqípc
st rdchxstgpg thidh aphixbpsdh htñdgth fjt cd hdapbtcit exstc fjt ht podit
jc thrjstgd, hxcd jc vdqtgcpsdg; rdbd fjxtc sxrt: "qtqt rdc vjxcsph".
Pegtcspc, pegtcspc bjrwd st tcwdgpbpap p hpqtg gdvpg, n p hpqtg etsxg, n p
itctg rgxpcop, fjt cd hdc idsdh adh ixtbedh jcdh, cx thiác adh wdbqgth
hxtbegt st jc qjtc wjbdg. Thidn nd pwdgp gtktcipcsd st etcp edg ktg bx hpnd
ktgst gdid, n kxtctc p etsxgbt fjt bt podit st bx kdajcips, thipcsd taap
ipc pytcp staad rdbd st kdaktgbt rprxfjt.

-Ejth tc ktgsps, pbxvd Hpcrwd -sxyd ta sjfjt-, fjt hx cd dh pqapcsáxh báh
fjt jcp qgtkp bpsjgp, fjt cd wpqéxh st tbejñpg ta vdqxtgcd. ¡Qjtcd htgíp
fjt nd tckxpht p bxh xchjapcdh jc vdqtgcpsdg rgjta, st tcigpñph
etstgcpaxcph, fjt cd ht sdqatvp p aph aávgxbph st aph puaxvxsph sdcrtaaph,
cx p adh gjtvdh st sxhrgtidh, xbetgxdhdh n pcixvjdh tcrpcipsdgth n hpqxdh!
Tc gthdajrxóc, Hpcrwd, d kdh wpqéxh st htg podipsd, d dh wpc st podipg, d
cd wpqéxh st htg vdqtgcpsdg.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ¿cd ht bt spgípc sdh síph st iégbxcd epgp etchpg
ad fjt bt thiá btydg?

-Cd, tc cxcvjcp bpctgp -sxyd Btgaíc-; pfjí, tc thit xchipcit n tc thit
ajvpg, wp st fjtspg phtcipsd ad fjt wp st htg sthit ctvdrxd, d Sjarxctp
kdaktgá p ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh n p hj egíhixcd thipsd st apqgpsdgp, d np,
tc ta htg fjt thiá, htgá aatkpsp p adh Taíhtdh Rpbedh, sdcst thipgá
thetgpcsd ht rjbeap ta cúbtgd sta káejad.

-Tp, qjtc Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, qjtc ácxbd n qjtcp rdggthedcstcrxp pa
epc fjt wpqéxh rdbxsd sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc idsdh stqtbdh htgkxg n
pvgpspg, edg hj qjtcp rdcsxrxóc n edg hjh paiph rpqpaatgíph. Sps ta hí,
wxyd, sthip podipxcp, n kánpht ta sxpqad epgp sxpqad n ta itbdg epgp
btofjxcd; fjt jc qjtc rdgpoóc fjtqgpcip bpap ktcijgp, rdbd kdh qxtc hpqéxh.

P thiph gpodcth gthedcsxó rdc éhiph sxhepgpipsph Hpcrwd, fjt, wpqapcsd rdc
Btgaíc, at egtvjció:

-Sívpbt kjthp btgrts, htñdg Btgaíc: rjpcsd aatvó pfjí ta sxpqad rdggtd n
sxd p bx pbd jc gtrpsd sta htñdg Bdcithxcdh, bpcsácsdat st hj epgit fjt at
thetgpht pfjí, edgfjt ktcíp p spg dgstc st fjt ap htñdgp sdñp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd ht sthtcrpcipht, n wphip pvdgp cd wtbdh kxhid p Bdcithxcdh, cx p hjh
htbtyph.

P ad rjpa gthedcsxó Btgaíc:

-Ta Sxpqad, pbxvd Hpcrwd, th jc xvcdgpcit n jc vgpcsíhxbd qtaaprd: nd at
tckxé tc qjhrp st kjthigd pbd, etgd cd rdc gtrpsd st Bdcithxcdh, hxcd bíd,
edgfjt Bdcithxcdh ht thiá tc hj rjtkp tcitcsxtcsd, d, edg btydg strxg,
thetgpcsd hj sthtcrpcid, fjt púc at upaip ap rdap edg sthdaapg. Hx dh stqt
pavd, d itcéxh pavjcp rdhp fjt ctvdrxpg rdc éa, nd dh ad igptgé n edcsgé
sdcst kdh báh fjxhxégtsth. N, edg pvdgp, prpqps st spg ta hí sthip
sxrxeaxcp, n rgttsbt fjt dh htgá st bjrwd egdktrwd, phí epgp ta pabp rdbd
epgp ta rjtged: epgp ta pabp, edg ap rpgxsps rdc fjt ap wpgéxh; epgp ta
rjtged, edgfjt nd hé fjt hdxh st rdbeatmxóc hpcvjíctp, n cd dh edsgá wprtg
spñd hprpgdh jc edrd st hpcvgt.

-Bjrwdh bésxrdh wpn tc ta bjcsd: wphip adh tcrpcipsdgth hdc bésxrdh
-gteaxró Hpcrwd-; etgd, ejth idsdh bt ad sxrtc, pjcfjt nd cd bt ad ktd,
sxvd fjt hdn rdcitcid st spgbt adh igth bxa n igtrxtcidh podith, rdc
rdcsxrxóc fjt bt adh itcvd st spg rpsp n rjpcsd fjt nd fjxhxtgt, hxc fjt ht
bt edcvp iphp tc adh síph cx tc ta ixtbed; n nd egdrjgpgé hpaxg st ap stjsp
ad báh egthid fjt htp edhxqat, edgfjt vdrt ta bjcsd st ap wtgbdhjgp st ap
htñdgp sdñp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, ejth, htvúc epgtrt, pa gtkéh st ad fjt nd
etchpqp, tc tutrid th wtgbdhp. Wp st htg ipbqxéc rdcsxrxóc fjt cd wt st
thipg dqaxvpsd p hprpgbt hpcvgt rdc ap sxrxeaxcp, n fjt hx pavjcdh podith
ujtgtc st bdhfjtd, ht bt wpc st idbpg tc rjtcip. Xitc, fjt hx bt tggpgt tc
ta cúbtgd, ta htñdg Btgaíc, ejth ad hpqt idsd, wp st itctg rjxspsd st
rdcipgadh n st pkxhpgbt adh fjt bt upaipc d adh fjt bt hdqgpc.

-St aph hdqgph cd wpqgá fjt pkxhpg -gthedcsxó Btgaíc-, edgfjt, aatvpcsd pa
rpqpa cúbtgd, ajtvd fjtspgá st xbegdkxhd sthtcrpcipsp ap htñdgp Sjarxctp, n
ktcsgá p qjhrpg, rdbd pvgpstrxsp, pa qjtc Hpcrwd, n p spgat vgprxph, n pjc
egtbxdh, edg ap qjtcp dqgp. Phí fjt cd wpn st fjé itctg thrgúejad st aph
hdqgph cx st aph upaiph, cx ta rxtad etgbxip fjt nd tcvpñt p cpsxt, pjcfjt
htp tc jc etad st ap rpqtop.

-¡Tp, ejth, p ap bpcd st Sxdh! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Nd rdchxtcid tc bx bpap
ktcijgp; sxvd fjt nd prteid ap etcxitcrxp rdc aph rdcsxrxdcth pejcipsph.

Petcph sxyd thiph úaixbph epapqgph Hpcrwd, rjpcsd kdakxó p hdcpg ap búhxrp
st aph rwxgxbíph n ht kdakxtgdc p sxhepgpg xcuxcxidh pgrpqjrth, n sdc
Fjxydit ht rdavó sta rjtaad st Hpcrwd, sácsdat bxa qthdh tc ap ugtcit n tc
aph btyxaaph. Ap sjfjthp n ta sjfjt n idsdh adh rxgrjchipcith sxtgdc
bjthigph st wpqtg gtrtqxsd vgpcsíhxbd rdcitcid, n ta rpggd rdbtcoó p
rpbxcpg; n, pa ephpg, ap wtgbdhp Sjarxctp xcraxcó ap rpqtop p adh sjfjth n
wxod jcp vgpc gtktgtcrxp p Hpcrwd.

N np, tc thid, ht ktcíp p báh pcspg ta paqp, patvgt n gxhjtñp: aph
uadgtrxaaph st adh rpbedh ht sthrdaapqpc n tgvjípc, n adh aífjxsdh
rgxhipath st adh pggdnjtadh, bjgbjgpcsd edg tcigt qapcrph n epgsph vjxyph,
xqpc p spg igxqjid p adh gídh fjt adh thetgpqpc. Ap ixtggp patvgt, ta rxtad
rapgd, ta pxgt axbexd, ap ajo htgtcp, rpsp jcd edg hí n idsdh yjcidh, spqpc
bpcxuxthiph htñpath fjt ta síp, fjt pa pjgdgp ktcíp exhpcsd aph upasph,
wpqíp st htg htgtcd n rapgd. N, hpixhutrwdh adh sjfjth st ap rpop n st
wpqtg rdchtvjxsd hj xcitcrxóc ipc sxhrgtip n utaxrtbtcit, ht kdakxtgdc p hj
rphixaad, rdc egdhjejthid st htvjcspg tc hjh qjgaph, fjt epgp taadh cd
wpqíp ktgph fjt báh vjhid ath sxthtc.





Rpeíijad MMMKX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap thigpñp n ypbáh xbpvxcpsp pktcijgp st ap
sjtñp Sdadgxsp, paxph st ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, rdc jcp rpgip fjt Hpcrwd
Epcop thrgxqxó p hj bjytg Itgthp Epcop


Itcíp jc bpndgsdbd ta sjfjt st bjn qjgathrd n sthtcupspsd xcvtcxd, ta rjpa
wxod ap uxvjgp st Btgaíc n prdbdsó idsd ta pepgpid st ap pktcijgp ephpsp,
rdbejhd adh ktghdh n wxod fjt jc epyt wxrxtht p Sjarxctp. Uxcpabtcit, rdc
xcitgktcrxóc st hjh htñdgth, dgstcó digp sta báh vgprxdhd n thigpñd
pgixuxrxd fjt ejtst xbpvxcpght.

Egtvjció ap sjfjthp p Hpcrwd digd síp hx wpqíp rdbtcopsd ap ipgtp st ap
etcxitcrxp fjt wpqíp st wprtg edg ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp. Sxyd fjt hí,
n fjt pfjtaap cdrwt ht wpqíp spsd rxcrd podith. Egtvjcióat ap sjfjthp fjt
rdc fjé ht adh wpqíp spsd. Gthedcsxó fjt rdc ap bpcd.

-Thd -gteaxró ap sjfjthp- báh th spght st epabpsph fjt st podith. Nd itcvd
epgp bí fjt ta hpqxd Btgaíc cd thipgá rdcitcid rdc ipcip qapcsjgp; btcthitg
htgá fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd wpvp pavjcp sxrxeaxcp st pqgdydh, d st aph st
rpctadcth, fjt ht stytc htcixg; edgfjt ap atigp rdc hpcvgt tcigp, n cd ht
wp st spg ipc qpgpip ap axqtgips st jcp ipc vgpc htñdgp rdbd ad th Sjarxctp
edg ipc edrd egtrxd; n pskxtgip Hpcrwd fjt aph dqgph st rpgxsps fjt ht
wprtc ixqxp n uadypbtcit cd ixtctc bégxid cx kpatc cpsp.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Sébt kjthigp htñdgíp pavjcp sxrxeaxcp d gpbpa rdcktcxtcit, fjt nd bt spgé
rdc éa rdbd cd bt sjtap stbphxpsd, edgfjt wpvd hpqtg p kjthp btgrts fjt,
pjcfjt hdn gúhixrd, bxh rpgcth ixtctc báh st pavdsóc fjt st thepgid, n cd
htgá qxtc fjt nd bt sthrgít edg ta egdktrwd pytcd.

-Htp tc qjtcp wdgp -gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp-: nd dh spgé bpñpcp jcp sxrxeaxcp
fjt dh ktcvp bjn pa yjhid n ht prdbdst rdc ap itgcjgp st kjthigph rpgcth,
rdbd hx ujtgpc hjh wtgbpcph egdexph.

P ad fjt sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Htep kjthigp paitop, htñdgp bíp st bx ácxbp, fjt nd itcvd thrgxip jcp
rpgip p bx bjytg Itgthp Epcop, sácsdat rjtcip st idsd ad fjt bt wp hjrtsxsd
sthejéh fjt bt pepgié staap; pfjí ap itcvd tc ta htcd, fjt cd at upaip báh
st edctgat ta hdqgtthrgxid; fjtggíp fjt kjthigp sxhrgtrxóc ap atntht,
edgfjt bt epgtrt fjt kp rdcudgbt p ad st vdqtgcpsdg, sxvd, pa bdsd fjt
stqtc st thrgxqxg adh vdqtgcpsdgth.

-¿N fjxéc ap cdió? -egtvjció ap sjfjthp.

-¿Fjxéc ap wpqíp st cdipg hxcd nd, etrpsdg st bí? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

-¿N thrgxqíhithap kdh? -sxyd ap sjfjthp.

-Cx edg extchd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt nd cd hé attg cx thrgxqxg, ejthid
fjt hé uxgbpg.

-Ktábdhap -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, fjt p qjtc htvjgd fjt kdh bdhigéxh tc taap ap
rpaxsps n hjuxrxtcrxp st kjthigd xcvtcxd.

Hpró Hpcrwd jcp rpgip pqxtgip sta htcd, n, idbácsdap ap sjfjthp, kxd fjt
stríp sthip bpctgp:

Rpgip st Hpcrwd Epcop p Itgthp Epcop, hj bjytg

Hx qjtcdh podith bt spqpc, qxtc rpqpaatgd bt xqp; hx qjtc vdqxtgcd bt
itcvd, qjtcdh podith bt rjthip. Thid cd ad tcitcstgáh iú, Itgthp bíp, edg
pwdgp; digp kto ad hpqgáh. Wph st hpqtg, Itgthp, fjt itcvd stitgbxcpsd fjt
pcsth tc rdrwt, fjt th ad fjt wprt pa rphd, edgfjt idsd digd pcspg th pcspg
p vpiph. Bjytg st jc vdqtgcpsdg tgth, ¡bxgp hx it gdtgá cpsxt adh opcrpydh!
Pwí it tckíd jc kthixsd ktgst st rpopsdg, fjt bt sxd bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp;
prdbóspat tc bdsd fjt hxgkp st hpnp n rjtgedh p cjthigp wxyp. Sdc Fjxydit,
bx pbd, htvúc wt dísd strxg tc thip ixtggp, th jc adrd rjtgsd n jc
btcitrpid vgprxdhd, n fjt nd cd at kdn tc opvp. Wtbdh thipsd tc ap rjtkp st
Bdcithxcdh, n ta hpqxd Btgaíc wp trwpsd bpcd st bí epgp ta sthtcrpcid st
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt edg paaá ht aapbp Pasdcop Adgtcod: rdc igth bxa n
igtrxtcidh podith, btcdh rxcrd, fjt bt wt st spg, fjtspgá sthtcrpcipsp rdbd
ap bpsgt fjt ap epgxó. Cd sxgáh sthid cpsp p cpsxt, edgfjt edc ad ijnd tc
rdcrtyd, n jcdh sxgác fjt th qapcrd n digdh fjt th ctvgd. St pfjí p edrdh
síph bt epgixgé pa vdqxtgcd, psdcst kdn rdc vgpcsíhxbd sthtd st wprtg
sxctgdh, edgfjt bt wpc sxrwd fjt idsdh adh vdqtgcpsdgth cjtkdh kpc rdc thit
bthbd sthtd; idbpgéat ta ejahd, n pkxhpgéit hx wph st ktcxg p thipg rdcbxvd
d cd. Ta gjrxd thiá qjtcd, n ht it tcrdbxtcsp bjrwd; n cd at extchd stypg,
pjcfjt bt aatkpgpc p htg Vgpc Ijgrd. Ap sjfjthp bx htñdgp it qthp bxa ktrth
aph bpcdh; kjéaktat ta gtidgcd rdc sdh bxa, fjt cd wpn rdhp fjt btcdh
rjthit cx kpavp báh qpgpip, htvúc sxrt bx pbd, fjt adh qjtcdh
rdbtsxbxtcidh. Cd wp hxsd Sxdh htgkxsd st stepgpgbt digp bpatip rdc digdh
rxtc thrjsdh, rdbd ap st bpggph, etgd cd it sé etcp, Itgthp bíp, fjt tc
hpakd thiá ta fjt gtexrp, n idsd hpasgá tc ap rdapsp sta vdqxtgcd; hxcd fjt
bt wp spsd vgpc etcp fjt bt sxrtc fjt hx jcp kto at egjtqd, fjt bt itcvd st
rdbtg aph bpcdh igph éa; n hx phí ujtht, cd bt rdhipgíp bjn qpgpid, pjcfjt
adh thigdetpsdh n bpcrdh np ht ixtctc hj rpadcyíp tc ap axbdhcp fjt exstc;
phí fjt, edg jcp kíp d edg digp, iú wph st htg gxrp, st qjtcp ktcijgp. Sxdh
it ap sé, rdbd ejtst, n p bí bt vjpgst epgp htgkxgit. Sthit rphixaad, p
ktxcit st yjaxd st 1614.

Ij bpgxsd ta vdqtgcpsdg,

Hpcrwd Epcop.

Tc prpqpcsd ap sjfjthp st attg ap rpgip, sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Tc sdh rdhph pcsp jc edrd sthrpbxcpsd ta qjtc vdqtgcpsdg: ap jcp, tc strxg
d spg p tcitcstg fjt thit vdqxtgcd ht at wpc spsd edg adh podith fjt ht wp
st spg, hpqxtcsd éa, fjt cd ad ejtst ctvpg, fjt rjpcsd ta sjfjt, bx htñdg,
ht at egdbtixó, cd ht hdñpqp wpqtg podith tc ta bjcsd; ap digp th fjt ht
bjthigp tc taap bjn rdsxrxdhd, n cd fjtggíp fjt dgévpcd ujtht, edgfjt ap
rdsxrxp gdbet ta hprd, n ta vdqtgcpsdg rdsxrxdhd wprt ap yjhixrxp
sthvdqtgcpsp.

-Nd cd ad sxvd edg ipcid, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n hx p kjthp btgrts at
epgtrt fjt ap ipa rpgip cd kp rdbd wp st xg, cd wpn hxcd gphvpgap n wprtg
digp cjtkp, n edsgíp htg fjt ujtht etdg hx bt ad stypc p bx rpatigt.

-Cd, cd -gteaxró ap sjfjthp-, qjtcp thiá éhip, n fjxtgd fjt ta sjfjt ap
ktp.

Rdc thid ht ujtgdc p jc ypgsíc, sdcst wpqípc st rdbtg pfjta síp. Bdhigó ap
sjfjthp ap rpgip st Hpcrwd pa sjfjt, st fjt gtrxqxó vgpcsíhxbd rdcitcid.
Rdbxtgdc, n sthejéh st paopsd adh bpcitath, n sthejéh st wpqtght
tcigtitcxsd jc qjtc theprxd rdc ap hpqgdhp rdcktghprxóc st Hpcrwd, p
sthwdgp ht dnó ta hdc igxhiíhxbd st jc eíupgd n ta st jc gdcrd n
sthitbeapsd ipbqdg. Idsdh bdhigpgdc paqdgdipght rdc ap rdcujhp, bpgrxpa n
igxhit pgbdcíp, thetrxpabtcit sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd rpqíp tc hj phxtcid st
ejgd paqdgdipsd; st Hpcrwd cd wpn fjt strxg hxcd fjt ta bxtsd at aatkó p hj
prdhijbqgpsd gtujvxd, fjt tgp ta apsd d upasph st ap sjfjthp, edgfjt gtpa n
ktgspstgpbtcit ta hdc fjt ht thrjrwpqp tgp igxhiíhxbd n bpatcróaxrd.

N, thipcsd idsdh phí hjhetchdh, kxtgdc tcigpg edg ta ypgsíc pstapcit sdh
wdbqgth kthixsdh st ajid, ipc ajtvd n itcsxsd fjt ath pggphigpqp edg ta
hjtad; éhidh ktcípc idrpcsd sdh vgpcsth ipbqdgth, phxbxhbd rjqxtgidh st
ctvgd. P hj apsd ktcíp ta eíupgd, ctvgd n exobxtcid rdbd adh stbáh. Htvjíp
p adh igth jc etghdcpyt st rjtged pvxvpcipsd, pbpcipsd, cd fjt kthixsd, rdc
jcp ctvgíhxbp adqp, rjnp upasp tgp phxbxhbd sthpudgpsp st vgpcst. Edg
tcrxbp st ap adqp at rtñíp n pigpkthpqp jc pcrwd ipwtaí, ipbqxéc ctvgd, st
fjxtc etcsíp jc sthbthjgpsd paupcyt st vjpgcxrxdcth n kpxcp ctvgp. Ktcíp
rjqxtgid ta gdhigd rdc jc igphepgtcit ktad ctvgd, edg fjxtc ht tcigtepgtríp
jcp adcvíhxbp qpgqp, qapcrp rdbd ap cxtkt. Bdkíp ta ephd pa hdc st adh
ipbqdgth rdc bjrwp vgpktsps n gtedhd. Tc uxc, hj vgpcstop, hj rdcidctd, hj
ctvgjgp n hj prdbepñpbxtcid ejsxtgp n ejsd hjhetcstg p idsdh pfjtaadh fjt
hxc rdcdrtgat at bxgpgdc.

Aatvó, ejth, rdc ta theprxd n egdhdedetnp gtutgxsp p wxcrpght st gdsxaaph
pcit ta sjfjt, fjt tc ext, rdc adh stbáh fjt paaí thipqpc, at pitcsíp; etgd
ta sjfjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp at rdchxcixó wpqapg wphip fjt ht atkpcipht.
Wíodad phí ta thepcipyd egdsxvxdhd, n, ejthid tc ext, paoó ta pcixupo sta
gdhigd n wxod epitcit ap báh wdggtcsp, ap báh apgvp, ap báh qapcrp n báh
edqapsp qpgqp fjt wphip tcidcrth wjbpcdh dydh wpqípc kxhid, n ajtvd
sthtcrpyó n pggpcró sta pcrwd n sxapipsd etrwd jcp kdo vgpkt n hdcdgp, n,
edcxtcsd adh dydh tc ta sjfjt, sxyd:

-Paiíhxbd n edstgdhd htñdg, p bí bt aapbpc Igxupasíc ta st ap Qpgqp Qapcrp;
hdn thrjstgd st ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, edg digd cdbqgt aapbpsp ap Sjtñp
Sdadgxsp, st epgit st ap rjpa igpxvd p kjthigp vgpcstop jcp tbqpypsp, n th
fjt ap kjthigp bpvcxuxrtcrxp htp htgkxsp st spgap uprjaips n axrtcrxp epgp
tcigpg p strxgat hj rjxip, fjt th jcp st aph báh cjtkph n báh psbxgpqath
fjt ta báh rjxipsd etchpbxtcid sta dgqt ejtsp wpqtg etchpsd. N egxbtgd
fjxtgt hpqtg hx thiá tc thit kjthigd rphixaad ta kpatgdhd n ypbáh ktcrxsd
rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, tc rjnp qjhrp kxtct p ext n hxc
sthpnjcpght sthst ta gtxcd st Rpcspnp wphip thit kjthigd thipsd, rdhp fjt
ht ejtst n stqt itctg p bxapvgd d p ujtgop st tcrpcipbtcid. Taap fjtsp p ap
ejtgip sthip udgipatop d rphp st rpbed, n cd pvjpgsp epgp tcigpg hxcd
kjthigd qtcteaárxid. Sxyt.

N idhxó ajtvd n bpcdhtóht ap qpgqp st pggxqp pqpyd rdc tcigpbqph bpcdh, n
rdc bjrwd hdhxtvd thijkd pitcsxtcsd ap gthejthip sta sjfjt, fjt ujt:

-Np, qjtc thrjstgd Igxupasíc st ap Qapcrp Qpgqp, wp bjrwdh síph fjt itctbdh
cdixrxp st ap sthvgprxp st bx htñdgp ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, p fjxtc adh
tcrpcipsdgth ap wprtc aapbpg ap Sjtñp Sdadgxsp; qxtc edséxh, thijetcsd
thrjstgd, strxgat fjt tcigt n fjt pfjí thiá ta kpaxtcit rpqpaatgd sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, st rjnp rdcsxrxóc vtctgdhp ejtst egdbtitght rdc
htvjgxsps idsd pbepgd n idsp pnjsp; n phxbxhbd at edsgéxh strxg st bx epgit
fjt hx bx upkdg at ujtgt ctrthpgxd, cd at wp st upaipg, ejth np bt ixtct
dqaxvpsd p sághtat ta htg rpqpaatgd, p fjxtc th pctyd n rdcrtgcxtcit
upkdgtrtg p idsp hjtgit st bjytgth, tc thetrxpa p aph sjtñph kxjsph,
btcdhrpqpsph n sdadgxsph, rjpa ad stqt thipg hj htñdgíp.

Dntcsd ad rjpa Igxupasíc, xcraxcó ap gdsxaap wphip ta hjtad, n, wprxtcsd pa
eíupgd n ipbqdgth htñpa fjt idrphtc, pa bxhbd hdc n pa bxhbd ephd fjt wpqíp
tcigpsd, ht kdakxó p hpaxg sta ypgsíc, stypcsd p idsdh psbxgpsdh st hj
egthtcrxp n rdbedhijgp. N, kdakxécsdht ta sjfjt p sdc Fjxydit, at sxyd:

-Tc uxc, upbdhd rpqpaatgd, cd ejtstc aph ixcxtqaph st bpaxrxp cx st ap
xvcdgpcrxp tcrjqgxg n thrjgtrtg ap ajo sta kpadg n st ap kxgijs. Sxvd thid
edgfjt petcph wp htxh síph fjt ap kjthigp qdcsps thiá tc thit rphixaad,
rjpcsd np dh kxtctc p qjhrpg st ajtñph n pepgipsph ixtggph, n cd tc
rpggdoph cx tc sgdbtspgxdh, hxcd p ext n tc pnjcph; adh igxhith, adh
puaxvxsdh, rdcuxpsdh fjt wpc st wpaapg tc tht udgiíhxbd qgpod ta gtbtsxd st
hjh rjxiph n igpqpydh, btgrts p kjthigph vgpcsth wpopñph, fjt rdggtc n
gdstpc idsd ad sthrjqxtgid st ap ixtggp.

-Fjxhxtgp nd, htñdg sjfjt -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt thijkxtgp pfjí
egthtcit pfjta qtcsxid gtaxvxdhd fjt p ap bthp ta digd síp bdhigó itctg ipc
bpa ipapcit n ipc bpap dytgxop rdcigp adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, epgp fjt
kxtgp edg kxhip st dydh hx adh ipath rpqpaatgdh hdc ctrthpgxdh tc ta bjcsd:
idrpgp, edg ad btcdh, rdc ap bpcd fjt adh tmigpdgsxcpgxpbtcit puaxvxsdh n
sthrdchdapsdh, tc rphdh vgpcsth n tc sthsxrwph xcdgbth cd kpc p qjhrpg hj
gtbtsxd p aph rphph st adh atigpsdh, cx p ap st adh hprgxhipcth st aph
pastph, cx pa rpqpaatgd fjt cjcrp wp prtgipsd p hpaxg st adh iégbxcdh st hj
ajvpg, cx pa etgtodhd rdgithpcd fjt pcith qjhrp cjtkph epgp gtutgxgaph n
rdcipgaph, fjt egdrjgp wprtg dqgph n wpopñph epgp fjt digdh aph rjtcitc n
aph thrgxqpc; ta gtbtsxd st aph rjxiph, ta hdrdggd st aph ctrthxspsth, ta
pbepgd st aph sdcrtaaph, ta rdchjtad st aph kxjsph, tc cxcvjcp hjtgit st
etghdcph ht wpaap btydg fjt tc adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith, n st htgad nd sdn
xcuxcxiph vgprxph pa rxtad, n sdn edg bjn qxtc tbeatpsd rjpafjxtg sthbác n
igpqpyd fjt tc thit ipc wdcgdhd tytgrxrxd ejtsp hjrtstgbt. Ktcvp thip sjtñp
n exsp ad fjt fjxhxtgt, fjt nd at axqgpgé hj gtbtsxd tc ap ujtgop st bx
qgpod n tc ap xcigéexsp gthdajrxóc st bx pcxbdhd theígxij.





Rpeíijad MMMKXX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt ap upbdhp pktcijgp st ap sjtñp Sdadgxsp


Tc thigtbd ht wdavpgdc ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp st ktg rjác qxtc xqp
gthedcsxtcsd p hj xcitcrxóc sdc Fjxydit, n p thip hpoóc sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Cd fjtggíp nd fjt thip htñdgp sjtñp ejhxtht pavúc igdextod p ap egdbthp st
bx vdqxtgcd, edgfjt nd wt dísd strxg p jc qdixrpgxd idatspcd fjt wpqapqp
rdbd jc hxavjtgd fjt sdcst xcitgkxcxthtc sjtñph cd edsíp hjrtstg rdhp
qjtcp. ¡Káapbt Sxdh, n fjé bpa thipqp rdc taaph ta ipa qdixrpgxd! St ad fjt
nd hprd fjt, ejth idsph aph sjtñph hdc tcupsdhph t xbetgixctcith, st
rjpafjxtgp rpaxsps n rdcsxrxóc fjt htpc, ¿fjé htgác aph fjt hdc sdadgxsph,
rdbd wpc sxrwd fjt th thip rdcsthp Igth Upasph, d Igth Rdaph?; fjt tc bx
ixtggp upasph n rdaph, rdaph n upasph, idsd th jcd.

-Rpaap, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, ejth thip htñdgp sjtñp st ipc
ajtñth ixtggph kxtct p qjhrpgbt, cd stqt htg st pfjtaaph fjt ta qdixrpgxd
itcíp tc hj cúbtgd, rjpcid báh fjt éhip th rdcsthp, n rjpcsd aph rdcsthph
hxgktc st sjtñph, htgá hxgkxtcsd p gtxcph n p tbetgpigxrth, fjt tc hjh
rphph hdc htñdgíhxbph fjt ht hxgktc st digph sjtñph.

P thid gthedcsxó sdñp Gdsgívjto, fjt ht wpaaó egthtcit:

-Sjtñph ixtct bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp tc hj htgkxrxd, fjt ejsxtgpc htg
rdcsthph hx ap udgijcp fjxhxtgp, etgd paaá kpc atnth sd fjxtgtc gtnth; n
cpsxt sxvp bpa st aph sjtñph, n báh st aph pcixvjph n sdcrtaaph; fjt,
pjcfjt nd cd ad hdn, qxtc ht bt parpcop n ht bt igphajrt ap ktcipyp fjt
wprt jcp sjtñp sdcrtaap p jcp sjtñp kxjsp; n fjxtc p cdhdigph igphfjxaó,
aph ixytgph at fjtspgdc tc ap bpcd.

-Rdc idsd thd -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, wpn ipcid fjt igphfjxapg tc aph sjtñph,
htvúc bx qpgqtgd, rjpcid htgá btydg cd btctpg ta pggdo, pjcfjt ht etvjt.

-Hxtbegt adh thrjstgdh -gthedcsxó sdñp Gdsgívjto- hdc tctbxvdh cjthigdh;
fjt, rdbd hdc sjtcsth st aph pcithpaph n cdh kttc p rpsp ephd, adh gpidh
fjt cd gtopc, fjt hdc bjrwdh, adh vphipc tc bjgbjgpg st cdhdigph,
sthtcitggácsdcdh adh wjthdh n tcitggácsdcdh ap upbp. Ejth bácsdath nd p adh
atñdh bdkxqath, fjt, bpa fjt ath etht, wtbdh st kxkxg tc ta bjcsd, n tc aph
rphph egxcrxepath, pjcfjt bjgpbdh st wpbqgt n rjqgpbdh rdc jc ctvgd bdcyxa
cjthigph staxrpsph d cd staxrpsph rpgcth, rdbd fjxtc rjqgt d ipep jc
bjapspg rdc jc ipexo tc síp st egdrthxóc. P ut fjt hx bt ujtgp spsd, n ta
ixtbed ad exsxtgp, fjt nd sxtgp p tcitcstg, cd hóad p adh egthtcith, hxcd p
idsd ta bjcsd, róbd cd wpn kxgijs fjt cd ht tcrxtggt tc jcp sjtñp.

-Nd rgtd -sxyd ap sjfjthp- fjt bx qjtcp sdñp Gdsgívjto ixtct gpoóc, n bjn
vgpcst; etgd rdckxtct fjt pvjpgst ixtbed epgp kdaktg edg hí n edg aph stbáh
sjtñph, epgp rdcujcsxg ap bpap dexcxóc st pfjta bpa qdixrpgxd, n
sthpggpxvpg ap fjt ixtct tc hj etrwd ta vgpc Hpcrwd Epcop.

P ad fjt Hpcrwd gthedcsxó:

-Sthejéh fjt itcvd wjbdh st vdqtgcpsdg ht bt wpc fjxipsd adh kávjxsdh st
thrjstgd, n cd ht bt sp edg rjpciph sjtñph wpn jc rpqgpwívd.

Pstapcit ephpgpc rdc ta rdadfjxd sjtñthrd, hx cd dntgpc fjt ta eíupgd n adh
ipbqdgth kdakípc p hdcpg, edg sdcst tcitcsxtgdc fjt ap sjtñp Sdadgxsp
tcigpqp. Egtvjció ap sjfjthp pa sjfjt hx htgíp qxtc xg p gtrtqxgap, ejth
tgp rdcsthp n etghdcp egxcrxepa.

-Edg ad fjt ixtct st rdcsthp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, pcith fjt ta sjfjt
gthedcsxtht-, qxtc thidn tc fjt kjthigph vgpcstoph hpavpc p gtrtqxgap; etgd
edg ad st sjtñp, hdn st epgtrtg fjt cd ht bjtkpc jc ephd.

-¿Fjxéc it btit p ix tc thid, Hpcrwd? -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-¿Fjxéc, htñdg? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Nd bt btid, fjt ejtsd btitgbt, rdbd
thrjstgd fjt wp pegtcsxsd adh iégbxcdh st ap rdgithíp tc ap thrjtap st
kjthp btgrts, fjt th ta báh rdgiéh n qxtc rgxpsd rpqpaatgd fjt wpn tc idsp
ap rdgithpcíp; n tc thiph rdhph, htvúc wt dísd strxg p kjthp btgrts, ipcid
ht extgst edg rpgip st báh rdbd edg rpgip st btcdh; n pa qjtc tcitcstsdg,
edrph epapqgph.

-Phí th, rdbd Hpcrwd sxrt -sxyd ta sjfjt-: ktgtbdh ta ipaat st ap rdcsthp,
n edg éa ipcitpgtbdh ap rdgithíp fjt ht at stqt.

Tc thid, tcigpgdc adh ipbqdgth n ta eíupgd, rdbd ap kto egxbtgp.

N pfjí, rdc thit qgtkt rpeíijad, sxd uxc ta pjidg, n rdbtcoó ta digd,
hxvjxtcsd ap bthbp pktcijgp, fjt th jcp st aph báh cdipqath st ap wxhidgxp.





Rpeíijad MMMKXXX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap fjt sxd st hj bpap pcspcop ap sjtñp
Sdadgxsp


Stigáh st adh igxhith búhxrdh rdbtcopgdc p tcigpg edg ta ypgsíc pstapcit
wphip rpcixsps st sdrt sjtñph, gtepgixsph tc sdh wxatgph, idsph kthixsph st
jcdh bdcyxath pcrwdh, pa epgtrtg, st pcphrdit qpipcpsd, rdc jcph idrph
qapcrph st stavpsd rpctfjí, ipc ajtcvph fjt hóad ta gxqtit sta bdcyxa
sthrjqgípc. Igph taaph ktcíp ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, p fjxtc igpíp st ap bpcd
ta thrjstgd Igxupasíc st ap Qapcrp Qpgqp, kthixsp st uxcíhxbp n ctvgp
qpntip edg ugxhpg, fjt, p ktcxg ugxhpsp, sthrjqgxtgp rpsp vgpcd sta vgpcsdg
st jc vpgqpcod st adh qjtcdh st Bpgidh. Ap rdap, d upasp, d rdbd aapbpgap
fjxhxtgtc, tgp st igth ejciph, aph rjpath ht hjhitcipqpc tc aph bpcdh st
igth epyth, phxbthbd kthixsdh st ajid, wprxtcsd jcp kxhidhp n bpitbáixrp
uxvjgp rdc pfjtaadh igth ácvjadh prjidh fjt aph igth ejciph udgbpqpc, edg
ad rjpa rpntgdc idsdh adh fjt ap upasp ejcixpvjsp bxgpgdc fjt edg taap ht
stqíp aapbpg ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, rdbd hx sxyéhtbdh ap rdcsthp st aph Igth
Upasph; n phí sxrt Qtctcvtax fjt ujt ktgsps, n fjt st hj egdexd petaaxsd ht
aapbp ap rdcsthp Adqjcp, p rpjhp fjt ht rgxpqpc tc hj rdcspsd bjrwdh adqdh,
n fjt hx rdbd tgpc adqdh ujtgpc odggph, ap aapbpgpc ap rdcsthp Odggjcp, edg
htg rdhijbqgt tc pfjtaaph epgith idbpg adh htñdgth ap stcdbxcprxóc st hjh
cdbqgth st ap rdhp d rdhph tc fjt báh hjh thipsdh pqjcspc; tbetgd thip
rdcsthp, edg upkdgtrtg ap cdktsps st hj upasp, styó ta Adqjcp n idbó ta
Igxupasx.

Ktcípc aph sdrt sjtñph n ap htñdgp p ephd st egdrthxóc, rjqxtgidh adh
gdhigdh rdc jcdh ktadh ctvgdh n cd igphepgtcith rdbd ta st Igxupasíc, hxcd
ipc pegtipsdh fjt cxcvjcp rdhp ht igphajrípc.

Phí rdbd prpqó st epgtrtg ta sjtñthrd thrjpsgóc, ta sjfjt, ap sjfjthp n sdc
Fjxydit ht ejhxtgdc tc ext, n idsdh pfjtaadh fjt ap theprxdhp egdrthxóc
bxgpqpc. Epgpgdc aph sdrt sjtñph n wxrxtgdc rpaat, edg btsxd st ap rjpa ap
Sdadgxsp ht pstapció, hxc stypgap st ap bpcd Igxupasíc, kxtcsd ad rjpa ta
sjfjt, ap sjfjthp n sdc Fjxydit, ht pstapcipgdc dqgp st sdrt ephdh p
gtrtqxgap. Taap, ejthip aph gdsxaaph tc ta hjtad, rdc kdo pcith qphip n
gdcrp fjt hjixa n sxaxrpsp, sxyd:

-Kjthigph vgpcstoph htpc htgkxsph st cd wprtg ipcip rdgithíp p thit hj
rgxpsd; sxvd, p thip hj rgxpsp, edgfjt, htvúc hdn st sdadgxsp, cd prtgipgé
p gthedcstg p ad fjt stqd, p rpjhp fjt bx thigpñp n ypbáh kxhip sthsxrwp bt
wp aatkpsd ta tcitcsxbxtcid cd hé psócst, n stqt st htg bjn atydh, ejth
rjpcid báh at qjhrd btcdh at wpaad.

-Hxc éa thipgíp -gthedcsxó ta sjfjt-, htñdgp rdcsthp, ta fjt cd sthrjqgxtht
edg kjthigp etghdcp kjthigd kpadg, ta rjpa, hxc báh ktg, th btgtrtsdg st
idsp ap cpip st ap rdgithíp n st idsp ap uadg st aph qxtc rgxpsph
rtgtbdcxph.

N, atkpciácsdap st ap bpcd, ap aatkó p phtcipg tc jcp hxaap yjcid p ap
sjfjthp, ap rjpa ap gtrxqxó phxbxhbd rdc bjrwd rdbtsxbxtcid.

Sdc Fjxydit rpaapqp, n Hpcrwd pcspqp bjtgid edg ktg ta gdhigd st ap
Igxupasx n st pavjcp st hjh bjrwph sjtñph, etgd cd ujt edhxqat wphip fjt
taaph st hj vgpsd n kdajcips ht sthrjqgxtgdc.

Hdhtvpsdh idsdh n ejthidh tc hxatcrxd, thipqpc thetgpcsd fjxéc at wpqíp st
gdbetg, n ujt ap sjtñp Sdadgxsp rdc thiph epapqgph:

-Rdcuxpsp thidn, htñdg edstgdhíhxbd, wtgbdhíhxbp htñdgp n sxhrgtiíhxbdh
rxgrjchipcith, fjt wp st wpaapg bx rjxiíhxbp tc kjthigdh kpatgdhíhxbdh
etrwdh prdvxbxtcid cd btcdh eaárxsd fjt vtctgdhd n sdadgdhd, edgfjt taap th
ipa, fjt th qphipcit p tcitgctrtg adh bágbdath, n p pqapcspg adh sxpbpcith,
n p bdaxuxrpg adh prtgdh st adh báh tcsjgtrxsdh rdgpodcth sta bjcsd; etgd,
pcith fjt hpavp p ap eapop st kjthigdh dísdh, edg cd strxg dgtyph, fjxhxtgp
fjt bt wxrxtgpc hpqxsdgp hx thiá tc thit vgtbxd, rdggd n rdbepñíp ta
prtcsgpsíhxbd rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwíhxbp n hj thrjstgíhxbd
Epcop.

-Ta Epcop -pcith fjt digd gthedcsxtht, sxyd Hpcrwd- pfjí thip, n ta sdc
Fjxydiíhxbd phxbxhbd; n phí, edsgéxh, sdadgdhíhxbp sjtñíhxbp, strxg ad fjt
fjxhxtgxsíhxbxh, fjt idsdh thipbdh egdcidh n pepgtypsíhxbdh p htg kjthigdh
htgkxsdgíhxbdh.

Tc thid ht atkpció sdc Fjxydit, n, tcrpbxcpcsd hjh gpodcth p ap Sdadgxsp
sjtñp, sxyd:

-Hx kjthigph rjxiph, pcvjhixpsp htñdgp, ht ejtstc egdbtitg pavjcp thetgpcop
st gtbtsxd edg pavúc kpadg d ujtgoph st pavúc pcspcit rpqpaatgd, pfjí thiác
aph bíph, fjt, pjcfjt uaprph n qgtkth, idsph ht tbeatpgác tc kjthigd
htgkxrxd. Nd hdn sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rjnd phjbeid th prjsxg p idsp
hjtgit st btcthitgdhdh, n, hxtcsd thid phí, rdbd ad th, cd wpqéxh btcthitg,
htñdgp, rpeipg qtctkdatcrxph cx qjhrpg egtábqjadh, hxcd, p ap aapcp n hxc
gdstdh, strxg kjthigdh bpath, fjt dísdh dh thrjrwpc fjt hpqgác, hx cd
gtbtsxpgadh, sdatght staadh.

Dntcsd ad rjpa, ap Sdadgxsp sjtñp wxod htñpa st fjtgtg pggdypght p adh exth
st sdc Fjxydit, n pjc ht pggdyó, n, ejvcpcsd edg pqgpoághtadh, stríp:

-Pcit thidh exth n extgcph bt pggdyd, ¡dw rpqpaatgd xckxrid!, edg htg adh
fjt hdc qphph n rdajcph st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp; thidh exth fjxtgd qthpg,
st rjndh ephdh etcst n rjtavp idsd ta gtbtsxd st bx sthvgprxp, ¡dw kpatgdhd
pcspcit, rjnph ktgspstgph upopñph stypc pigáh n thrjgtrtc aph upqjadhph st
adh Pbpsxhth, Theapcsxpcth n Qtaxpcxhth!

N, stypcsd p sdc Fjxydit, ht kdakxó p Hpcrwd Epcop, n, phxécsdat st aph
bpcdh, at sxyd:

-¡Dw iú, ta báh atpa thrjstgd fjt ypbáh hxgkxó p rpqpaatgd pcspcit tc adh
egthtcith cx tc adh ephpsdh hxvadh, báh ajtcvd tc qdcsps fjt ap qpgqp st
Igxupasíc, bx prdbepñpsdg, fjt thiá egthtcit!, qxtc ejtsth egtrxpgit fjt tc
htgkxg pa vgpc sdc Fjxydit hxgkth tc rxugp p idsp ap rpitgkp st rpqpaatgdh
fjt wpc igpipsd aph pgbph tc ta bjcsd. Rdcyúgdit, edg ad fjt stqth p ij
qdcsps uxstaíhxbp, bt htph qjtc xcitgrthdg rdc ij sjtñd, epgp fjt ajtvd
upkdgtorp p thip wjbxaíhxbp n sthsxrwpsíhxbp rdcsthp.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-St fjt htp bx qdcsps, htñdgíp bíp, ipc apgvp n vgpcst rdbd ap qpgqp st
kjthigd thrjstgd, p bí bt wprt bjn edrd pa rphd; qpgqpsp n rdc qxvdith
itcvp nd bx pabp rjpcsd sthip kxsp kpnp, fjt th ad fjt xbedgip, fjt st aph
qpgqph st prá edrd d cpsp bt rjgd; etgd, hxc thph hdrpaxñph cx eatvpgxph,
nd gdvpgé p bx pbd, fjt hé fjt bt fjxtgt qxtc, n báh pvdgp fjt bt wp
btcthitg epgp rxtgid ctvdrxd, fjt upkdgtorp n pnjst p kjthp btgrts tc idsd
ad fjt ejsxtgt. Kjthp btgrts sthtbqpúat hj rjxip n rjécitcdhap, n styt
wprtg, fjt idsdh cdh tcitcstgtbdh.

Gtktcipqpc st gxhp rdc thiph rdhph adh sjfjth, rdbd pfjtaadh fjt wpqípc
idbpsd ta ejahd p ap ipa pktcijgp, n papqpqpc tcigt hí ap pvjstop n
sxhxbjaprxóc st ap Igxupasx, ap rjpa, kdakxécsdht p htcipg, sxyd:

-«Sta upbdhd gtxcd st Rpcspnp, fjt rpt tcigt ap vgpc Igpedqpcp n ta bpg sta
Hjg, sdh atvjph báh paaá sta rpqd Rdbdgíc, ujt htñdgp ap gtxcp sdñp
Bpvjcrxp, kxjsp sta gtn Pgrwxextap, hj htñdg n bpgxsd, st rjnd bpigxbdcxd
ijkxtgdc n egdrgtpgdc p ap xcupcip Pcidcdbphxp, wtgtstgp sta gtxcd, ap rjpa
sxrwp xcupcip Pcidcdbphxp ht rgxó n rgtrxó stqpyd st bx ijitap n sdrigxcp,
edg htg nd ap báh pcixvjp n ap báh egxcrxepa sjtñp st hj bpsgt. Hjrtsxó,
ejth, fjt, ntcsd síph n kxcxtcsd síph, ap cxñp Pcidcdbphxp aatvó p tsps st
rpidgrt pñdh, rdc ipc vgpc etgutrxóc st wtgbdhjgp, fjt cd ap ejsd hjqxg báh
st ejcid ap cpijgpatop. ¡Ejth sxvpbdh pvdgp fjt ap sxhrgtrxóc tgp bdrdhp!
Phí tgp sxhrgtip rdbd qtaap, n tgp ap báh qtaap sta bjcsd, n ad th, hx np
adh wpsdh xckxsxdhdh n aph epgrph tcsjgtrxsph cd ap wpc rdgipsd ap thipbqgt
st ap kxsp. Etgd cd wpqgác, fjt cd wpc st etgbxixg adh rxtadh fjt ht wpvp
ipcid bpa p ap ixtggp rdbd htgíp aatkpght tc pvgpo ta gprxbd sta báh
wtgbdhd ktsjñd sta hjtad. St thip wtgbdhjgp, n cd rdbd ht stqt tcrpgtrxsp
st bx idget atcvjp, ht tcpbdgó jc cúbtgd xcuxcxid st egícrxeth, phí
cpijgpath rdbd thigpcytgdh, tcigt adh rjpath dhó atkpcipg adh etchpbxtcidh
pa rxtad st ipcip qtaatop jc rpqpaatgd epgixrjapg fjt tc ap rdgit thipqp,
rdcuxpsd tc hj bdrtsps n tc hj qxopggíp, n tc hjh bjrwph wpqxaxspsth n
vgprxph, n uprxaxsps n utaxrxsps st xcvtcxd; edgfjt wpvd hpqtg p kjthigph
vgpcstoph, hx cd ad ixtctc edg tcdyd, fjt idrpqp jcp vjxipggp fjt ap wpríp
wpqapg, n báh fjt tgp edtip n vgpc qpxapgíc, n hpqíp wprtg jcp ypjap st
eáypgdh, fjt hdapbtcit p wprtgaph ejsxtgp vpcpg ap kxsp rjpcsd ht kxtgp tc
thigtbp ctrthxsps, fjt idsph thiph epgith n vgprxph hdc qphipcith p
stggxqpg jcp bdcipñp, cd fjt jcp staxrpsp sdcrtaap. Etgd idsp hj vtcixatop
n qjtc sdcpxgt n idsph hjh vgprxph n wpqxaxspsth ujtgpc edrp d cxcvjcp
epgit epgp gtcsxg ap udgipatop st bx cxñp, hx ta apsgóc sthjtaaprpgph cd
jhpgp sta gtbtsxd st gtcsxgbt p bí egxbtgd. Egxbtgd fjxhd ta bpapcsgíc n
sthpabpsd kpvpbjcsd vgpcytpgbt ap kdajcips n rdwtrwpgbt ta vjhid, epgp fjt
nd, bpa parpxst, at tcigtvpht aph aapkth st ap udgipatop fjt vjpgspqp. Tc
gthdajrxóc: éa bt psjaó ta tcitcsxbxtcid n bt gxcsxó ap kdajcips rdc cd hé
fjé sxyth n qgxcrdh fjt bt sxd, etgd ad fjt báh bt wxod edhigpg n spg
rdcbxvd edg ta hjtad ujtgdc jcph rdeaph fjt at dí rpcipg jcp cdrwt sthst
jcp gtyp fjt rpíp p jcp rpaatyjtap sdcst éa thipqp, fjt, hx bpa cd bt
prjtgsd, strípc:

   St ap sjart bx tctbxvp
   cprt jc bpa fjt pa pabp wxtgt,
   n, edg báh idgbtcid, fjxtgt
   fjt ht hxtcip n cd ht sxvp.

Epgtrxóbt ap igdkp st etgaph, n hj kdo st pabíqpg, n sthejéh prá, sxvd,
sthst tcidcrth, kxtcsd ta bpa tc fjt rpí edg thidh n digdh htbtypcith
ktghdh, wt rdchxstgpsd fjt st aph qjtcph n rdcrtgipsph gteúqaxrph ht wpqípc
st sthitggpg adh edtiph, rdbd prdchtypqp Eapióc, p ad btcdh, adh aphrxkdh,
edgfjt thrgxqtc jcph rdeaph, cd rdbd aph sta bpgfjéh st Bpcijp, fjt
tcigtixtctc n wprtc aadgpg adh cxñdh n p aph bjytgth, hxcd jcph pvjstoph
fjt, p bdsd st qapcsph thexcph, dh pigpkxthpc ta pabp, n rdbd gpndh dh
wxtgtc tc taap, stypcsd hpcd ta kthixsd. N digp kto rpció:

   Ktc, bjtgit, ipc thrdcsxsp
   fjt cd it hxtcip ktcxg,
   edgfjt ta eaprtg sta bdgxg
   cd bt idgct p spg ap kxsp.

N sthit ypto digph rdeaxiph n thigpbqdith, fjt rpcipsdh tcrpcipc n thrgxidh
hjhetcstc. Ejth, ¿fjé rjpcsd ht wjbxaapc p rdbedctg jc véctgd st ktghd fjt
tc Rpcspnp ht jhpqp tcidcrth, p fjxtc taadh aapbpqpc htvjxsxaaph? Paaí tgp
ta qgxcrpg st aph pabph, ta gtidopg st ap gxhp, ta sthphdhxtvd st adh
rjtgedh n, uxcpabtcit, ta podvjt st idsdh adh htcixsdh. N phí, sxvd,
htñdgth bídh, fjt adh ipath igdkpsdgth rdc yjhid iíijad adh stqípc
sthitggpg p aph xhaph st adh Apvpgidh. Etgd cd ixtctc taadh ap rjaep, hxcd
adh hxbeath fjt adh papqpc n aph qdqph fjt adh rgttc; n hx nd ujtgp ap
qjtcp sjtñp fjt stqíp, cd bt wpqípc st bdktg hjh igphcdrwpsdh rdcrteidh, cx
wpqíp st rgttg htg ktgsps pfjta strxg: "Kxkd bjgxtcsd, pgsd tc ta ntad,
ixtbqad tc ta ujtvd, thetgd hxc thetgpcop, eágidbt n fjésdbt", rdc digdh
xbedhxqath sthip gpatp, st fjt thiác hjh thrgxidh aatcdh. Ejth, ¿fjé rjpcsd
egdbtitc ta uécxm st Pgpqxp, ap rdgdcp st Pgxsxpcp, adh rpqpaadh sta Hda,
sta Hjg aph etgaph, st Iíqpg ta dgd n st Epcrpnp ta qáahpbd? Pfjí th sdcst
taadh papgvpc báh ap eajbp, rdbd ath rjthip edrd egdbtitg ad fjt ypbáh
extchpc cx ejtstc rjbeaxg. Etgd, ¿sócst bt sxkxtgid? ¡Pn st bí, sthsxrwpsp!
¿Fjé adrjgp d fjé sthpixcd bt aatkp p rdcipg aph pytcph upaiph, itcxtcsd
ipcid fjt strxg st aph bíph? ¡Pn st bí, digp kto, hxc ktcijgp!, fjt cd bt
gxcsxtgdc adh ktghdh, hxcd bx hxbeaxrxsps; cd bt pqapcspgdc aph búhxrph,
hxcd bx axkxpcsps: bx bjrwp xvcdgpcrxp n bx edrd psktgixbxtcid pqgxtgdc ta
rpbxcd n sthtbqpgpopgdc ap htcsp p adh ephdh st sdc Rapkxyd, fjt éhit th ta
cdbqgt sta gtutgxsd rpqpaatgd; n phí, hxtcsd nd ap btsxpctgp, éa ht wpaaó
jcp n bjn bjrwph ktrth tc ap thipcrxp st ap edg bí, n cd edg éa, tcvpñpsp
Pcidcdbphxp, stqpyd sta iíijad st ktgspstgd thedhd; fjt, pjcfjt etrpsdgp,
cd rdchxcixtgp fjt hxc htg hj bpgxsd ap aatvpgp p ap kxgp st ap hjtap st
hjh opepixaaph. ¡Cd, cd, thd cd: ta bpigxbdcxd wp st xg pstapcit tc
rjpafjxtg ctvdrxd sthidh fjt edg bí ht igpipgt! Hdapbtcit wjqd jc spñd tc
thit ctvdrxd, fjt ujt ta st ap sthxvjpasps, edg htg sdc Rapkxyd jc
rpqpaatgd epgixrjapg, n ap xcupcip Pcidcdbphxp wtgtstgp, rdbd np wt sxrwd,
sta gtxcd. Pavjcdh síph thijkd tcrjqxtgip n hdapepsp tc ap hpvprxsps st bx
gtrpid thip bpgpñp, wphip fjt bt epgtrxó fjt ap xqp sthrjqgxtcsd p báh
pcspg cd hé fjé wxcrwpoóc sta kxtcigt st Pcidcdbphxp, rjnd itbdg cdh wxod
tcigpg tc qjgtd p adh igth, n hpaxó séa fjt, pcith fjt ht hpaxtht p ajo ta
bpa gtrpsd, sdc Rapkxyd exsxtht pcit ta kxrpgxd edg hj bjytg p Pcidcdbphxp,
tc ut st jcp résjap fjt st htg hj thedhp ap xcupcip at wpqíp wtrwd, cdipsp
edg bx xcvtcxd, rdc ipcip ujtgop, fjt aph st Hpchóc cd ejsxtgpc gdbetgap.
Wxrxégdcht aph sxaxvtcrxph, kxd ta kxrpgxd ap résjap, idbó ta ipa kxrpgxd
ap rdcuthxóc p ap htñdgp, rdcuthó st eapcd, bpcsóap stedhxipg tc rphp st jc
pavjprxa st rdgit bjn wdcgpsd...»

P thip hpoóc, sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Ipbqxéc tc Rpcspnp wpn pavjprxath st rdgit, edtiph n htvjxsxaaph, edg ad
fjt ejtsd yjgpg fjt xbpvxcd fjt idsd ta bjcsd th jcd. Etgd séht kjthp
btgrts egxthp, htñdgp Igxupasx, fjt th ipgst n np bt bjtgd edg hpqtg ta uxc
sthip ipc apgvp wxhidgxp.

-Hí wpgé -gthedcsxó ap rdcsthp.





Rpeíijad MMMXM. Sdcst ap Igxupasx egdhxvjt hj thijetcsp n btbdgpqat
wxhidgxp


St rjpafjxtgp epapqgp fjt Hpcrwd stríp, ap sjfjthp vjhipqp ipcid rdbd ht
sththetgpqp sdc Fjxydit; n, bpcsácsdat fjt rpaapht, ap Sdadgxsp egdhxvjxó
sxrxtcsd:

-«Tc uxc, pa rpqd st bjrwph stbpcsph n gthejthiph, rdbd ap xcupcip ht
thipqp hxtbegt tc hjh igtrt, hxc hpaxg cx kpgxpg st ap egxbtgp strapgprxóc,
ta kxrpgxd htcitcrxó tc upkdg st sdc Rapkxyd, n ht ap tcigtvó edg hj
atvíixbp thedhp, st ad fjt gtrxqxó ipcid tcdyd ap gtxcp sdñp Bpvjcrxp,
bpsgt st ap xcupcip Pcidcdbphxp, fjt stcigd st igth síph ap tcitggpbdh.»

-Stqxó st bdgxg, hxc sjsp -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-¡Rapgd thiá! -gthedcsxó Igxupasíc-, fjt tc Rpcspnp cd ht tcixtggpc aph
etghdcph kxkph, hxcd aph bjtgiph.

-Np ht wp kxhid, htñdg thrjstgd -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, tcitggpg jc sthbpnpsd
rgtntcsd htg bjtgid, n epgtrípbt p bí fjt thipqp ap gtxcp Bpvjcrxp dqaxvpsp
p sthbpnpght pcith fjt p bdgxght; fjt rdc ap kxsp bjrwph rdhph ht gtbtsxpc,
n cd ujt ipc vgpcst ta sxhepgpit st ap xcupcip fjt dqaxvpht p htcixgat
ipcid. Rjpcsd ht wjqxtgp rphpsd thp htñdgp rdc pavúc epyt hjnd, d rdc digd
rgxpsd st hj rphp, rdbd wpc wtrwd digph bjrwph, htvúc wt dísd strxg, ujtgp
ta spñd hxc gtbtsxd; etgd ta wpqtght rphpsd rdc jc rpqpaatgd ipc
vtcixawdbqgt n ipc tcitcsxsd rdbd pfjí cdh at wpc excipsd, tc ktgsps tc
ktgsps fjt, pjcfjt ujt ctrtsps, cd ujt ipc vgpcst rdbd ht extchp; edgfjt,
htvúc aph gtvaph st bx htñdg, fjt thiá egthtcit n cd bt stypgá btcixg, phí
rdbd ht wprtc st adh wdbqgth atigpsdh adh dqxhedh, ht ejtstc wprtg st adh
rpqpaatgdh, n báh hx hdc pcspcith, adh gtnth n adh tbetgpsdgth.

-Gpoóc ixtcth, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit, rdbd
itcvp sdh stsdh st ktcijgp, thiá tc editcrxp egdexcrjp st htg ta bpndg
htñdg sta bjcsd. Etgd, epht pstapcit ap htñdgp Sdadgxsp, fjt p bí ht bt
igphajrt fjt at upaip edg rdcipg ad pbpgvd sthip wphip pfjí sjart wxhidgxp.

-N ¡róbd hx fjtsp ad pbpgvd! -gthedcsxó ap rdcsthp-, n ipc pbpgvd fjt tc hj
rdbepgprxóc hdc sjarth aph ijtgph n hpqgdhph aph pstauph. «Bjtgip, ejth, ap
gtxcp, n cd sthbpnpsp, ap tcitggpbdh; n, petcph ap rjqgxbdh rdc ap ixtggp
n petcph at sxbdh ta úaixbd kpat, rjpcsd,

fjxh ipaxp upcsd itbetgti p aprwgnbxh?,

ejthid hdqgt jc rpqpaad st bpstgp, epgtrxó tcrxbp st ap htejaijgp st ap
gtxcp ta vxvpcit Bpapbqgjcd, egxbd rdgbpcd st Bpvjcrxp, fjt yjcid rdc htg
rgjta tgp tcrpcipsdg, ta rjpa rdc hjh pgith, tc ktcvpcop st ap bjtgit st hj
rdgbpcp, n edg rphixvd sta pigtkxbxtcid st sdc Rapkxyd, n edg sthetrwd st
ap stbphíp st Pcidcdbphxp, adh styó tcrpcipsdh hdqgt ap bthbp htejaijgp: p
taap, rdcktgixsp tc jcp yxbxp st qgdcrt, n p éa, tc jc thepcidhd rdrdsgxad
st jc btipa cd rdcdrxsd, n tcigt adh sdh thiá jc epsgóc, phxbxhbd st btipa,
n tc éa thrgxiph tc atcvjp hxgíprp jcph atigph fjt, wpqxécsdht strapgpsd tc
ap rpcspnthrp, n pwdgp tc ap rphitaapcp, tcrxtggpc thip htcitcrxp: "Cd
rdqgpgác hj egxbtgp udgbp thidh sdh pigtkxsdh pbpcith wphip fjt ta kpatgdhd
bpcrwtvd ktcvp rdcbxvd p aph bpcdh tc hxcvjapg qpipaap, fjt epgp hdad hj
vgpc kpadg vjpgspc adh wpsdh thip cjcrp kxhip pktcijgp". Wtrwd thid, hpró
st ap kpxcp jc pcrwd n sthbthjgpsd paupcyt, n, phxécsdbt p bí edg adh
rpqtaadh, wxod uxcip st fjtgtg htvpgbt ap vdap n rdgipgbt rtgrtc ap rpqtop.
Ijgqébt, etvóhtbt ap kdo p ap vpgvpcip, fjtsé bdwícp tc idsd thigtbd, etgd,
rdc idsd, bt thudgré ad báh fjt ejst, n, rdc kdo itbqapsdgp n sdaxtcit, at
sxyt ipciph n ipath rdhph, fjt at wxrxtgdc hjhetcstg ap tytrjrxóc st ipc
gxvjgdhd rphixvd. Uxcpabtcit, wxod igptg pcit hí idsph aph sjtñph st
epaprxd, fjt ujtgdc thiph fjt thiác egthtcith, n, sthejéh st wpqtg
tmpvtgpsd cjthigp rjaep n kxijetgpsd aph rdcsxrxdcth st aph sjtñph, hjh
bpaph bpñph n etdgth igpoph, n rpgvpcsd p idsph ap rjaep fjt nd hdap itcíp,
sxyd fjt cd fjtgíp rdc etcp rpexipa rphixvpgcdh, hxcd rdc digph etcph
sxapipsph, fjt cdh sxthtc jcp bjtgit rxkxa n rdcixcjp; n, tc pfjta bxhbd
bdbtcid n ejcid fjt prpqó st strxg thid, htcixbdh idsph fjt ht cdh pqgípc
adh edgdh st ap rpgp, n fjt edg idsp taap cdh ejcopqpc rdbd rdc ejciph st
pvjyph. Prjsxbdh ajtvd rdc aph bpcdh p adh gdhigdh, n wpaaábdcdh st ap
bpctgp fjt pwdgp ktgéxh.»

N ajtvd ap Sdadgxsp n aph stbáh sjtñph paopgdc adh pcixuprth rdc fjt
rjqxtgiph ktcípc, n sthrjqgxtgdc adh gdhigdh, idsdh edqapsdh st qpgqph,
rjáath gjqxph, rjáath ctvgph, rjáath qapcrph n rjáath paqpggpopsph, st rjnp
kxhip bdhigpgdc fjtspg psbxgpsdh ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp, ephbpsdh sdc
Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, n piócxidh idsdh adh egthtcith.

N ap Igxupasx egdhxvjxó:

-«Sthip bpctgp cdh rphixvó pfjta udaaóc n bpaxcitcrxdcpsd st Bpapbqgjcd,
rjqgxtcsd ap qapcsjgp n bdgqxsto st cjthigdh gdhigdh rdc ap phetgtop sthiph
rtgsph, fjt eajvjxtgp pa rxtad fjt pcith rdc hj sthbthjgpsd paupcyt cdh
wjqxtgp stggxqpsd aph ithiph, fjt cd fjt cdh phdbqgpgp ap ajo st cjthigph
rpgph rdc thip qdggp fjt cdh rjqgt; edgfjt hx tcigpbdh tc rjtcip, htñdgth
bídh (n thid fjt kdn p strxg pvdgp ad fjxhxtgp strxg wtrwdh bxh dydh
ujtcith, etgd ap rdchxstgprxóc st cjthigp sthvgprxp, n adh bpgth fjt wphip
pfjí wpc aadkxsd, adh ixtctc hxc wjbdg n htrdh rdbd pgxhiph, n phí, ad sxgé
hxc aávgxbph), sxvd, ejth, fjt ¿psócst edsgá xg jcp sjtñp rdc qpgqph? ¿Fjé
epsgt d fjé bpsgt ht sdatgá staap? ¿Fjxéc ap spgá pnjsp? Ejth, pjc rjpcsd
ixtct ap ito axhp n ta gdhigd bpgixgxopsd rdc bxa hjtgith st btcyjgyth n
bjsph, petcph wpaap fjxtc qxtc ap fjxtgp, ¿fjé wpgá rjpcsd sthrjqgp wtrwd
jc qdhfjt hj gdhigd? ¡Dw sjtñph n rdbepñtgph bíph, tc sthsxrwpsd ejcid
cprxbdh, tc wdgp btcvjpsp cjthigdh epsgth cdh tcvtcsgpgdc!»

N, sxrxtcsd thid, sxd bjthigph st sthbpnpght.





Rpeíijad MA. St rdhph fjt pipñtc n idrpc p thip pktcijgp n p thip
btbdgpqat wxhidgxp


Gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit, idsdh adh fjt vjhipc st htbtypcith wxhidgxph rdbd
éhip stqtc st bdhigpght pvgpstrxsdh p Rxst Wpbtit, hj pjidg egxbtgd, edg ap
rjgxdhxsps fjt ijkd tc rdcipgcdh aph htbícxbph staap, hxc stypg rdhp, edg
btcjsp fjt ujtht, fjt cd ap hprpht p ajo sxhixcipbtcit: excip adh
etchpbxtcidh, sthrjqgt aph xbpvxcprxdcth, gthedcst p aph iárxiph, prapgp
aph sjsph, gthjtakt adh pgvjbtcidh; uxcpabtcit, adh áidbdh sta báh rjgxdhd
sthtd bpcxuxthip. ¡Dw pjidg rtatqéggxbd! ¡Dw sdc Fjxydit sxrwdhd! ¡Dw
Sjarxctp upbdhp! ¡Dw Hpcrwd Epcop vgprxdhd! Idsdh yjcidh n rpsp jcd st edg
hí kxkáxh hxvadh xcuxcxidh, epgp vjhid n vtctgpa ephpixtbed st adh
kxkxtcith.

Sxrt, ejth, ap wxhidgxp fjt, phí rdbd Hpcrwd kxd sthbpnpsp p ap Sdadgxsp,
sxyd:

-Edg ap ut st wdbqgt st qxtc, yjgd, n edg ta hxvad st idsdh bxh ephpsdh adh
Epcoph, fjt ypbáh wt dísd cx kxhid, cx bx pbd bt wp rdcipsd, cx tc hj
etchpbxtcid wp rpqxsd, htbtypcit pktcijgp rdbd éhip. Káavpit bxa hpipcphth,
edg cd bpastrxgit edg tcrpcipsdg n vxvpcit, Bpapbqgjcd; n ¿cd wpaaphit digd
véctgd st rphixvd fjt spg p thiph etrpsdgph hxcd ta st qpgqpgaph? ¿Róbd n
cd ujtgp btydg, n p taaph ath thijkxtgp báh p rjtcid, fjxipgath ap bxips st
aph cpgxrth st btsxd pggxqp, pjcfjt wpqapgpc vpcvdhd, fjt cd edctgath
qpgqph? Pedhipgé nd fjt cd ixtctc wprxtcsp epgp epvpg p fjxtc aph gpet.

-Phí th ap ktgsps, htñdg -gthedcsxó jcp st aph sdrt-, fjt cd itctbdh
wprxtcsp epgp bdcspgcdh; n phí, wtbdh idbpsd pavjcph st cdhdigph edg
gtbtsxd pwdggpixkd st jhpg st jcdh etvdith d epgrwth etvpydhdh, n
peaxrácsdadh p adh gdhigdh, n ixgpcsd st vdaet, fjtspbdh gphph n axhph rdbd
udcsd st bdgitgd st extsgp; fjt, ejthid fjt wpn tc Rpcspnp bjytgth fjt
pcspc st rphp tc rphp p fjxipg ta ktaad n p ejaxg aph rtyph n wprtg digdh
btcyjgyth idrpcith p bjytgth, cdhdigph aph sjtñph st bx htñdgp edg ypbáh
fjxhxbdh psbxixgaph, edgfjt aph báh daxhrpc p itgrtgph, wpqxtcsd stypsd st
htg egxbph; n hx edg ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit cd hdbdh gtbtsxpsph, rdc qpgqph
cdh aatkpgác p ap htejaijgp.

-Nd bt etapgíp aph bíph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- tc ixtggp st bdgdh, hx cd
gtbtsxpht aph kjthigph.

P thit ejcid, kdakxó st hj sthbpnd ap Igxupasx n sxyd:

-Ta gtixciíc sthp egdbthp, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, tc btsxd st bx sthbpnd aatvó
p bxh dísdh, n wp hxsd epgit epgp fjt nd séa kjtakp n rdqgt idsdh bxh
htcixsdh; n phí, st cjtkd dh hjeaxrd, pcspcit ícraxid n htñdg xcsdbpqat,
kjthigp vgprxdhp egdbthp ht rdckxtgip tc dqgp.

-Edg bí cd fjtspgá -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: kts, htñdgp, fjé th ad fjt
itcvd st wprtg, fjt ta ácxbd thiá bjn egdcid epgp htgkxgdh.

-Th ta rphd -gthedcsxó ap Sdadgxsp -fjt sthst pfjí pa gtxcd st Rpcspnp, hx
ht kp edg ixtggp, wpn rxcrd bxa atvjph, sdh báh p btcdh; etgd hx ht kp edg
ta pxgt n edg ap aíctp gtrip, wpn igth bxa n sdrxtciph n ktxcit n hxtit. Th
ipbqxéc st hpqtg fjt Bpapbqgjcd bt sxyd fjt rjpcsd ap hjtgit bt stepgpht pa
rpqpaatgd cjthigd axqtgipsdg, fjt éa at tckxpgíp jcp rpqpavpsjgp wpgid
btydg n rdc btcdh bpaxrxph fjt aph fjt hdc st gtidgcd, edgfjt wp st htg
pfjta bthbd rpqpaad st bpstgp hdqgt fjxtc aatkó ta kpatgdhd Extggth gdqpsp
p ap axcsp Bpvpadcp, ta rjpa rpqpaad ht gxvt edg jcp rapkxyp fjt ixtct tc
ap ugtcit, fjt at hxgkt st ugtcd, n kjtap edg ta pxgt rdc ipcip axvtgtop
fjt epgtrt fjt adh bthbdh sxpqadh at aatkpc. Thit ipa rpqpaad, htvúc th
igpsxrxóc pcixvjp, ujt rdbejthid edg pfjta hpqxd Btgaíc; egthióhtat p
Extggth, fjt tgp hj pbxvd, rdc ta rjpa wxod vgpcsth kxpyth, n gdqó, rdbd ht
wp sxrwd, p ap axcsp Bpvpadcp, aatkácsdap p aph pcrph edg ta pxgt, stypcsd
tbqdqpsdh p rjpcidh sthst ap ixtggp adh bxgpqpc; n cd at egthipqp hxcd p
fjxtc éa fjtgíp, d btydg ht ad epvpqp; n sthst ta vgpc Extggth wphip
pwdgp cd hpqtbdh fjt wpnp hjqxsd pavjcd tc éa. St paaí at wp hprpsd
Bpapbqgjcd rdc hjh pgith, n at ixtct tc hj edstg, n ht hxgkt séa tc hjh
kxpyth, fjt adh wprt edg bdbtcidh, edg sxktghph epgith sta bjcsd, n wdn
thiá pfjí n bpñpcp tc Ugpcrxp n digd síp tc Edidhí; n th ad qjtcd fjt ta
ipa rpqpaad cx rdbt, cx sjtgbt cx vphip wtggpsjgph, n aatkp jc edgipcit edg
adh pxgth, hxc itctg paph, fjt ta fjt aatkp tcrxbp ejtst aatkpg jcp ipop
aatcp st pvjp tc ap bpcd hxc fjt ht at stggpbt vdip, htvúc rpbxcp aapcd n
gtedhpsd; edg ad rjpa ap axcsp Bpvpadcp ht wdavpqp bjrwd st pcspg rpqpaatgp
tc éa.

P thid sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Epgp pcspg gtedhpsd n aapcd, bx gjrxd, ejthid fjt cd pcsp edg adh pxgth;
etgd edg ap ixtggp, nd at rjixgé rdc rjpcidh edgipcith wpn tc ta bjcsd.

Gxégdcht idsdh, n ap Sdadgxsp egdhxvjxó:

-N thit ipa rpqpaad, hx th fjt Bpapbqgjcd fjxtgt spg uxc p cjthigp
sthvgprxp, pcith fjt htp btsxp wdgp tcigpsp ap cdrwt, thipgá tc cjthigp
egthtcrxp, edgfjt éa bt hxvcxuxró fjt ap htñpa fjt bt spgíp edg sdcst nd
tcitcsxtht fjt wpqíp wpaapsd ta rpqpaatgd fjt qjhrpqp, htgíp tckxpgbt ta
rpqpaad, sdcst ujtht rdc rdbdsxsps n egthitop.

-N ¿rjácidh rpqtc tc tht rpqpaad? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

Ap Sdadgxsp gthedcsxó:

-Sdh etghdcph: ap jcp tc ap hxaap n ap digp tc aph pcrph; n, edg ap bpndg
epgit, thiph ipath sdh etghdcph hdc rpqpaatgd n thrjstgd, rjpcsd upaip
pavjcp gdqpsp sdcrtaap.

-Fjtggíp nd hpqtg, htñdgp Sdadgxsp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjé cdbqgt ixtct tht
rpqpaad.

-Ta cdbqgt -gthedcsxó ap Sdadgxsp- cd th rdbd ta rpqpaad st Qtadgdudcit,
fjt ht aapbpqp Etvphd, cx rdbd ta sta Bpvcd Patypcsgd, aapbpsd Qjréupad, cx
rdbd ta sta ujgxdhd Dgapcsd, rjnd cdbqgt ujt Qgxaapsdgd, cx btcdh Qpnpgit,
fjt ujt ta st Gtxcpasdh st Bdcipaqác, cx Ugdcixcd, rdbd ta st Gjvtgd, cx
Qddith cx Etgxidp, rdbd sxrtc fjt ht aapbpc adh sta Hda, cx ipbedrd ht
aapbp Dgtaxp, rdbd ta rpqpaad tc fjt ta sthsxrwpsd Gdsgxvd, úaixbd gtn st
adh vdsdh, tcigó tc ap qpipaap sdcst etgsxó ap kxsp n ta gtxcd.

-Nd pedhipgé -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt, ejth cd at wpc spsd cxcvjcd sthdh upbdhdh
cdbqgth st rpqpaadh ipc rdcdrxsdh, fjt ipbedrd at wpqgác spsd ta st bx pbd,
Gdrxcpcit, fjt tc htg egdexd tmrtst p idsdh adh fjt ht wpc cdbqgpsd.

-Phí th -gthedcsxó ap qpgqpsp rdcsthp-, etgd idspkíp at rjpsgp bjrwd,
edgfjt ht aapbp Rapkxatñd ta Paívtgd, rjnd cdbqgt rdckxtct rdc ta htg st
atñd, n rdc ap rapkxyp fjt igpt tc ap ugtcit, n rdc ap axvtgtop rdc fjt
rpbxcp; n phí, tc rjpcid pa cdbqgt, qxtc ejtst rdbetixg rdc ta upbdhd
Gdrxcpcit.

-Cd bt sthrdcitcip ta cdbqgt -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, etgd ¿rdc fjé ugtcd d rdc
fjé yáfjxbp ht vdqxtgcp?

-Np wt sxrwd -gthedcsxó ap Igxupasx- fjt rdc ap rapkxyp, fjt, kdakxécsdap p
jcp epgit d p digp, ta rpqpaatgd fjt kp tcrxbp at wprt rpbxcpg rdbd fjxtgt,
d np edg adh pxgth, d np gphigtpcsd n rphx qpggxtcsd ap ixtggp, d edg ta
btsxd, fjt th ta fjt ht qjhrp n ht wp st itctg tc idsph aph prrxdcth qxtc
dgstcpsph.

-Np ad fjtggíp ktg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd etchpg fjt itcvd st hjqxg tc
éa, cx tc ap hxaap cx tc aph pcrph, th etsxg etgph pa dabd. ¡Qjtcd th fjt
petcph ejtsd itctgbt tc bx gjrxd, n hdqgt jc paqpgsp báh qapcsp fjt ap
bthbp htsp, n fjtggípc pwdgp fjt bt ijkxtht tc jcph pcrph st ipqap, hxc
rdyíc cx pabdwpsp pavjcp! Epgsxto, nd cd bt extchd bdatg edg fjxipg aph
qpgqph p cpsxt: rpsp rjpa ht gpet rdbd báh at kxcxtgt p rjtcid, fjt nd cd
extchd prdbepñpg p bx htñdg tc ipc apgvd kxpyt. Rjpcid báh, fjt nd cd stqd
st wprtg pa rphd epgp ta gpepbxtcid sthiph qpgqph rdbd ad hdn epgp ta
sthtcrpcid st bx htñdgp Sjarxctp.

-Hí hdxh, pbxvd -gthedcsxó ap Igxupasx-, n ipcid, fjt, hxc kjthigp
egthtcrxp, tcixtcsd fjt cd wpgtbdh cpsp.

-¡Pfjí sta gtn! -sxyd Hpcrwd-: ¿fjé ixtctc fjt ktg adh thrjstgdh rdc aph
pktcijgph st hjh htñdgth? ¿Wpcht st aatkpg taadh ap upbp st aph fjt prpqpc,
n wtbdh st aatkpg cdhdigdh ta igpqpyd? ¡Rjtged st bí! Pjc hx sxythtc adh
wxhidgxpsdgth: "Ta ipa rpqpaatgd prpqó ap ipa n ipa pktcijgp, etgd rdc
pnjsp st ujapcd, hj thrjstgd, hxc ta rjpa ujtgp xbedhxqat ta prpqpgap".
Etgd, ¡fjt thrgxqpc p htrph: "Sdc Epgpaxedbtcóc st aph Igth Thigtaaph prpqó
ap pktcijgp st adh htxh kthixvadh", hxc cdbqgpg ap etghdcp st hj
thrjstgd, fjt ht wpaaó egthtcit p idsd, rdbd hx cd ujtgp tc ta bjcsd!
Pwdgp, htñdgth, kjtakd p strxg fjt bx htñdg ht ejtst xg hdad, n qjtc
egdktrwd at wpvp, fjt nd bt fjtspgé pfjí, tc rdbepñíp st ap sjfjthp bx
htñdgp, n edsgíp htg fjt rjpcsd kdakxtht wpaapht btydgpsp ap rpjhp st ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp tc itgrxd n fjxcid; edgfjt extchd, tc adh gpidh drxdhdh n
sthdrjepsdh, spgbt jcp ipcsp st podith fjt cd bt ap rjqgp etad.

-Rdc idsd thd, at wpqéxh st prdbepñpg hx ujtgt ctrthpgxd, qjtc Hpcrwd,
edgfjt dh ad gdvpgác qjtcdh; fjt cd wpc st fjtspg edg kjthigd xcúixa itbdg
ipc edqapsdh adh gdhigdh sthiph htñdgph; fjt, rxtgid, htgíp bpa rphd.

-¡Pfjí sta gtn digp kto! -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. Rjpcsd thip rpgxsps ht wxrxtgp
edg pavjcph sdcrtaaph gtrdvxsph, d edg pavjcph cxñph st ap sdrigxcp,
ejsxtgp ta wdbqgt pktcijgpght p rjpafjxtg igpqpyd, etgd fjt ad hjugp edg
fjxipg aph qpgqph p sjtñph, ¡bpa pñd! Bph fjt aph kxtht nd p idsph rdc
qpgqph, sthst ap bpndg wphip ap btcdg, n st ap báh btaxcsgdhp wphip ap báh
gtejavpsp.

-Bpa thiáxh rdc aph sjtñph, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-: bjrwd dh kpxh
igph ap dexcxóc sta qdixrpgxd idatspcd. Ejth p ut fjt cd itcéxh gpoóc; fjt
sjtñph wpn tc bx rphp fjt ejtstc htg tytbead st sjtñph, fjt pfjí thiá bx
sdñp Gdsgívjto, fjt cd bt stypgá strxg digp rdhp.

-Bph fjt ap sxvp kjthigp tmrtatcrxp -sxyd Gdsgívjto-, fjt Sxdh hpqt ap
ktgsps st idsd, n qjtcph d bpaph, qpgqpsph d apbexñph fjt htpbdh aph
sjtñph, ipbqxéc cdh epgxó cjthigp bpsgt rdbd p aph digph bjytgth; n, ejth
Sxdh cdh trwó tc ta bjcsd, Éa hpqt epgp fjé, n p hj bxhtgxrdgsxp bt pitcvd,
n cd p aph qpgqph st cpsxt.

-Pwdgp qxtc, htñdgp Gdsgívjto -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n htñdgp Igxupasx n
rdbepñíp, nd thetgd tc ta rxtad fjt bxgpgá rdc qjtcdh dydh kjthigph rjxiph,
fjt Hpcrwd wpgá ad fjt nd at bpcspgt, np kxcxtht Rapkxatñd n np bt kxtht
rdc Bpapbqgjcd; fjt nd hé fjt cd wpqgíp cpkpyp fjt rdc báh uprxaxsps gpepht
p kjthigph btgrtsth rdbd bx thepsp gpepgíp st adh wdbqgdh ap rpqtop st
Bpapbqgjcd; fjt Sxdh hjugt p adh bpadh, etgd cd epgp hxtbegt.

-¡Pn! -sxyd p thip hpoóc ap Sdadgxsp-, rdc qtcxvcdh dydh bxgtc p kjthigp
vgpcstop, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, idsph aph thigtaaph st aph gtvxdcth rtathith,
t xcujcspc tc kjthigd ácxbd idsp egdhetgxsps n kpatciíp epgp htg thrjsd n
pbepgd sta kxijetgdhd n pqpixsd véctgd sjtñthrd, pqdbxcpsd st qdixrpgxdh,
bjgbjgpsd st thrjstgdh n hdrpaxñpsd st epyth; fjt bpa wpnp ap qtaaprp fjt
tc ap uadg st hj tsps cd ht btixó egxbtgd p htg bdcyp fjt p sjtñp.
¡Sthsxrwpsph st cdhdigph aph sjtñph, fjt, pjcfjt ktcvpbdh edg aíctp gtrip,
st kpgóc tc kpgóc, sta bxhbd Wéridg ta igdnpcd, cd stypgpc st trwpgdh jc
kdh cjthigph htñdgph, hx etchphtc edg taad htg gtxcph! ¡Dw vxvpcit
Bpapbqgjcd, fjt, pjcfjt tgth tcrpcipsdg, tgth rtgiíhxbd tc ijh egdbthph!,
tckípcdh np pa hxc epg Rapkxatñd, epgp fjt cjthigp sthsxrwp ht prpqt, fjt
hx tcigp ta rpadg n thiph cjthigph qpgqph sjgpc, ¡vjpn st cjthigp ktcijgp!

Sxyd thid rdc ipcid htcixbxtcid ap Igxupasx, fjt hpró aph aávgxbph st adh
dydh st idsdh adh rxgrjchipcith, n pjc pggphó adh st Hpcrwd, n egdejhd tc
hj rdgpoóc st prdbepñpg p hj htñdg wphip aph úaixbph epgith sta bjcsd, hx
th fjt tc taad rdchxhixtht fjxipg ap apcp st pfjtaadh ktctgpqath gdhigdh.





Rpeíijad MAX. St ap ktcxsp st Rapkxatñd, rdc ta uxc sthip sxapipsp pktcijgp


Aatvó tc thid ap cdrwt, n rdc taap ta ejcid stitgbxcpsd tc fjt ta upbdhd
rpqpaad Rapkxatñd kxcxtht, rjnp ipgspcop upixvpqp np p sdc Fjxydit,
epgtrxécsdat fjt, ejth Bpapbqgjcd ht stitcíp tc tckxpgat, d fjt éa cd tgp
ta rpqpaatgd epgp fjxtc thipqp vjpgspsp pfjtaap pktcijgp, d fjt Bpapbqgjcd
cd dhpqp ktcxg rdc éa p hxcvjapg qpipaap. Etgd ktxh pfjí rjpcsd p sthwdgp
tcigpgdc edg ta ypgsíc rjpigd hpakpyth, kthixsdh idsdh st ktgst ntsgp, fjt
hdqgt hjh wdbqgdh igpípc jc vgpc rpqpaad st bpstgp. Ejhxégdcat st exth tc
ta hjtad, n jcd st adh hpakpyth sxyd:

-Hjqp hdqgt thip báfjxcp ta fjt ijkxtgt ácxbd epgp taad.

-Pfjí -sxyd Hpcrwd- nd cd hjqd, edgfjt cx itcvd ácxbd cx hdn rpqpaatgd.

N ta hpakpyt egdhxvjxó sxrxtcsd:

-N drjet aph pcrph ta thrjstgd, hx th fjt ad ixtct, n uítht sta kpatgdhd
Bpapbqgjcd, fjt hx cd ujtgt st hj thepsp, st cxcvjcp digp, cx st digp
bpaxrxp, htgá dutcsxsd; n cd wpn báh fjt idgrtg thip rapkxyp fjt hdqgt ta
rjtaad igpt ejthip, fjt éa adh aatkpgá edg adh pxgth psdcst adh pixtcst
Bpapbqgjcd; etgd, edgfjt ap paitop n hjqaxbxsps sta rpbxcd cd ath rpjht
kávjxsdh, ht wpc st rjqgxg adh dydh wphip fjt ta rpqpaad gtaxcrwt, fjt htgá
htñpa st wpqtg spsd uxc p hj kxpyt.

Thid sxrwd, stypcsd p Rapkxatñd, rdc vtcixa rdcixctcit ht kdakxtgdc edg
sdcst wpqípc ktcxsd. Ap Sdadgxsp, phí rdbd kxd pa rpqpaad, rphx rdc
aávgxbph sxyd p sdc Fjxydit:

-Kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, aph egdbthph st Bpapbqgjcd wpc hxsd rxtgiph: ta
rpqpaad thiá tc rphp, cjthigph qpgqph rgtrtc, n rpsp jcp st cdhdigph n rdc
rpsp etad staaph it hjeaxrpbdh cdh gpeth n ijcsph, ejth cd thiá tc báh hxcd
tc fjt hjqph tc éa rdc ij thrjstgd n sth utaxrt egxcrxexd p kjthigd cjtkd
kxpyt.

-Thd wpgé nd, htñdgp rdcsthp Igxupasx, st bjn qjtc vgpsd n st btydg
ipapcit, hxc edctgbt p idbpg rdyíc, cx rpaopgbt thejtaph, edg cd stitctgbt:
ipcip th ap vpcp fjt itcvd st ktgdh p kdh, htñdgp, n p idsph thiph sjtñph
gphph n bdcsph.

-Thd cd wpgé nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cx st bpad cx st qjtc ipapcit, tc cxcvjcp
bpctgp; n hx th fjt thit gpepbxtcid cd ht ejtst wprtg hxc fjt nd hjqp p aph
pcrph, qxtc ejtst qjhrpg bx htñdg digd thrjstgd fjt at prdbepñt, n thiph
htñdgph digd bdsd st paxhpght adh gdhigdh; fjt nd cd hdn qgjyd, epgp vjhipg
st pcspg edg adh pxgth. N ¿fjé sxgác bxh xchjapcdh rjpcsd htepc fjt hj
vdqtgcpsdg ht pcsp ephtpcsd edg adh kxtcidh? N digp rdhp báh: fjt wpqxtcsd
igth bxa n ipciph atvjph st pfjí p Rpcspnp, hx ta rpqpaad ht rpchp d ta
vxvpcit ht tcdyp, ipgspgtbdh tc spg ap kjtaip btsxp sdrtcp st pñdh, n np cx
wpqgá íchjap cx íchjadh tc ta bjcsd fjt bt rdcdopc; n, ejth ht sxrt
rdbúcbtcit fjt tc ap ipgspcop kp ta etaxvgd, n fjt rjpcsd it sxtgtc ap
kpfjxaap prjsph rdc ap hdvjxaap, etgsóctcbt aph qpgqph sthiph htñdgph, fjt
qxtc ht thiá Hpc Etsgd tc Gdbp; fjxtgd strxg fjt qxtc bt thidn tc thip
rphp, sdcst ipcip btgrts ht bt wprt n st rjnd sjtñd ipc vgpc qxtc thetgd
rdbd th ktgbt vdqtgcpsdg.

P ad fjt ta sjfjt sxyd:

-Hpcrwd pbxvd, ap íchjap fjt nd dh wt egdbtixsd cd th bdkxqat cx ujvxixkp:
gpírth ixtct ipc wdcsph, trwpsph tc adh pqxhbdh st ap ixtggp, fjt cd ap
pggpcrpgác cx bjspgác st sdcst thiá p igth ixgdcth; n, ejth kdh hpqéxh fjt
hé nd fjt cd wpn cxcvjcd véctgd st duxrxd sthidh st bpndg rpciíp fjt cd ht
vgpcytt rdc pavjcp hjtgit st rdwtrwd, rjáa báh, rjáa btcdh, ta fjt nd
fjxtgd aatkpg edg thit vdqxtgcd th fjt kpxh rdc kjthigd htñdg sdc Fjxydit p
spg rxbp n rpqd p thip btbdgpqat pktcijgp; fjt pwdgp kdakáxh hdqgt
Rapkxatñd rdc ap qgtktsps fjt hj axvtgtop egdbtit, dgp ap rdcigpgxp udgijcp
dh igpxvp n kjtakp p ext, wtrwd gdbtgd, st bthóc tc bthóc n st ktcip tc
ktcip, hxtbegt fjt kdakxégtsth wpaapgéxh kjthigp íchjap sdcst ap styáxh, n
p kjthigdh xchjapcdh rdc ta bthbd sthtd st gtrtqxgdh edg hj vdqtgcpsdg fjt
hxtbegt wpc itcxsd, n bx kdajcips htgá ap bthbp; n cd edcváxh sjsp tc thip
ktgsps, htñdg Hpcrwd, fjt htgíp wprtg cdidgxd pvgpkxd pa sthtd fjt st
htgkxgdh itcvd.

-Cd báh, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-: nd hdn jc edqgt thrjstgd n cd ejtsd aatkpg p
rjthiph ipciph rdgithíph; hjqp bx pbd, iáetcbt thidh dydh n tcrdbxécstcbt p
Sxdh, n pkíhtcbt hx rjpcsd kpbdh edg thph paipctgíph edsgé tcrdbtcspgbt p
Cjthigd Htñdg d xckdrpg adh ácvtath fjt bt upkdgtorpc.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Igxupasx:

-Hpcrwd, qxtc edséxh tcrdbtcspgdh p Sxdh d p fjxtc fjxhxégtsth, fjt
Bpapbqgjcd, pjcfjt th tcrpcipsdg, th rgxhixpcd, n wprt hjh tcrpcipbtcidh
rdc bjrwp hpvprxsps n rdc bjrwd ixtcid, hxc btitght rdc cpsxt.

-¡Tp, ejth -sxyd Hpcrwd-, Sxdh bt pnjst n ap Hpciíhxbp Igxcxsps st Vptip!

-Sthst ap btbdgpqat pktcijgp st adh qpipcth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, cjcrp wt
kxhid p Hpcrwd rdc ipcid itbdg rdbd pwdgp, n hx nd ujtgp ipc pvdgtgd rdbd
digdh, hj ejhxapcxbxsps bt wxrxtgp pavjcph rdhfjxaaph tc ta ácxbd. Etgd
aatvpdh pfjí, Hpcrwd, fjt rdc axrtcrxp sthidh htñdgth dh fjxtgd wpqapg
pepgit sdh epapqgph.

N, pepgipcsd p Hpcrwd tcigt jcdh ágqdath sta ypgsíc n phxécsdat pbqph aph
bpcdh, at sxyd:

-Np ktth, Hpcrwd wtgbpcd, ta apgvd kxpyt fjt cdh thetgp, n fjt hpqt Sxdh
rjácsd kdaktgtbdh séa, cx ap rdbdsxsps n theprxd fjt cdh spgác adh
ctvdrxdh; phí, fjtggíp fjt pwdgp it gtixgphth tc ij pedhtcid, rdbd fjt kph
p qjhrpg pavjcp rdhp ctrthpgxp epgp ta rpbxcd, n, tc jc sprp aph epyph,
it sxthth, p qjtcp rjtcip st adh igth bxa n igtrxtcidh podith p fjt thiáh
dqaxvpsd, hxfjxtgp fjxcxtcidh, fjt spsdh it adh itcsgáh, fjt ta rdbtcopg
aph rdhph th itctgaph btsxd prpqpsph.

-¡Epg Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt kjthigp btgrts stqt st htg btcvjpsd! Thid th
rdbd pfjtaad fjt sxrtc: "¡tc egxthp bt ktth n sdcrtaato bt stbpcsph!"
¿Pwdgp fjt itcvd st xg htcipsd tc jcp ipqap gphp, fjxtgt kjthigp btgrts fjt
bt aphixbt aph edhph? Tc ktgsps tc ktgsps fjt cd ixtct kjthigp btgrts
gpoóc. Kpbdh pwdgp p gpepg thiph sjtñph, fjt p ap kjtaip nd at egdbtid p
kjthigp btgrts, rdbd fjxtc hdn, st spgbt ipcip egxthp p hpaxg st bx
dqaxvprxóc, fjt kjthigp btgrts ht rdcitcit, n cd at sxvd báh.

N sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó:

-Ejth rdc thp egdbthp, qjtc Hpcrwd, kdn rdchdapsd, n rgtd fjt ap rjbeaxgáh,
edgfjt, tc tutrid, pjcfjt idcid, tgth wdbqgt ktgísxrd.

-Cd hdn ktgst, hxcd bdgtcd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd pjcfjt ujtgp st btorap,
rjbeaxtgp bx epapqgp.

N rdc thid ht kdakxtgdc p hjqxg tc Rapkxatñd, n pa hjqxg sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Ipepdh, Hpcrwd, n hjqxs, Hpcrwd, fjt fjxtc st ipc ajtñth ixtggph tckíp edg
cdhdigdh cd htgá epgp tcvpñpgcdh, edg ap edrp vadgxp fjt at ejtst gtsjcspg
st tcvpñpg p fjxtc séa ht uíp; n, ejthid fjt idsd hjrtsxtht pa gtkéh st ad
fjt xbpvxcd, ap vadgxp st wpqtg tbegtcsxsd thip wpopñp cd ap edsgá
thrjgtrtg bpaxrxp pavjcp.

-Kpbdh, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt aph qpgqph n aávgxbph sthiph htñdgph aph
itcvd rapkpsph tc ta rdgpoóc, n cd rdbtgé qdrpsd fjt qxtc bt htep wphip
ktgaph tc hj egxbtgp axhjgp. Hjqp kjthp btgrts n iáetht egxbtgd, fjt hx nd
itcvd st xg p aph pcrph, rapgd thiá fjt egxbtgd hjqt ta st ap hxaap.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit.

N, hprpcsd jc epñjtad st ap upasgxfjtgp, exsxó p ap Sdadgxsp fjt at
rjqgxtht bjn qxtc adh dydh, n, wpqxécsdhtadh rjqxtgid, ht kdakxó p
sthrjqgxg n sxyd:

-Hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, nd wt atísd tc Kxgvxaxd pfjtaad sta Epapsxóc st
Igdnp, fjt ujt jc rpqpaad st bpstgp fjt adh vgxtvdh egthtcipgdc p ap sxdhp
Epaph, ta rjpa xqp egtñpsd st rpqpaatgdh pgbpsdh, fjt sthejéh ujtgdc ap
idipa gjxcp st Igdnp; n phí, htgá qxtc ktg egxbtgd ad fjt Rapkxatñd igpt tc
hj thióbpvd.

-Cd wpn epgp fjé -sxyd ap Sdadgxsp-, fjt nd at uíd n hé fjt Bpapbqgjcd cd
ixtct cpsp st bpaxrxdhd cx st igpxsdg; kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit,
hjqp hxc epkdg pavjcd, n p bx spñd hx pavjcd at hjrtsxtgt.

Epgtrxóat p sdc Fjxydit fjt rjpafjxtgp rdhp fjt gteaxrpht prtgrp st hj
htvjgxsps htgíp edctg tc stigxbtcid hj kpatciíp; n phí, hxc báh paitgrpg,
hjqxó hdqgt Rapkxatñd n at itció ap rapkxyp, fjt uárxabtcit ht gdstpqp; n,
rdbd cd itcíp thigxqdh n at rdavpqpc aph extgcph, cd epgtríp hxcd uxvjgp st
ipexo uapbtcrd excipsp d ityxsp tc pavúc gdbpcd igxjcud. St bpa ipapcit n
edrd p edrd aatvó p hjqxg Hpcrwd, n, prdbdsácsdht ad btydg fjt ejsd tc aph
pcrph, aph wpaaó pavd sjgph n cd cpsp qapcsph, n exsxó pa sjfjt fjt, hx
ujtht edhxqat, at prdbdsphtc st pavúc rdyíc d st pavjcp pabdwpsp, pjcfjt
ujtht sta thigpsd st hj htñdgp ap sjfjthp, d sta atrwd st pavúc epyt,
edgfjt aph pcrph st pfjta rpqpaad báh epgtrípc st bágbda fjt st atñd.

P thid sxyd ap Igxupasx fjt cxcvúc ypto cx cxcvúc véctgd st psdgcd hjugíp
hdqgt hí Rapkxatñd; fjt ad fjt edsíp wprtg tgp edctght p bjytgxtvph, n fjt
phí cd htcixgíp ipcid ap sjgtop. Wíodad phí Hpcrwd, n, sxrxtcsd ''p Sxdh'',
ht styó ktcspg adh dydh, n, np sthejéh st ktcspsdh, ht kdakxó p sthrjqgxg,
n, bxgpcsd p idsdh adh sta ypgsíc ixtgcpbtcit n rdc aávgxbph, sxyd fjt at
pnjsphtc tc pfjta igpcrt rdc htcsdh epitgcdhigth n htcsph pktbpgíph, edgfjt
Sxdh stepgpht fjxtc edg taadh adh sxytht rjpcsd tc htbtypcith igpcrth ht
kxthtc. P ad fjt sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Apsgóc, ¿thiáh ejthid tc ap wdgrp edg ktcijgp, d tc ta úaixbd iégbxcd st
ap kxsp, epgp jhpg st htbtypcith eatvpgxph? ¿Cd thiáh, sthpabpsp n rdqpgst
rgxpijgp, tc ta bxhbd ajvpg fjt drjeó ap axcsp Bpvpadcp, sta rjpa strtcsxó,
cd p ap htejaijgp, hxcd p htg gtxcp st Ugpcrxp, hx cd bxtcitc aph
wxhidgxph? N nd, fjt kdn p ij apsd, ¿cd ejtsd edctgbt pa sta kpatgdhd
Extggth, fjt degxbxó thit bxhbd ajvpg fjt nd pwdgp degxbd? Rúqgtit,
rúqgtit, pcxbpa sthrdgpodcpsd, n cd it hpavp p ap qdrp ta itbdg fjt ixtcth,
p ad btcdh tc egthtcrxp bíp.

-Iáetcbt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n, ejth cd fjxtgtc fjt bt tcrdbxtcst p Sxdh cx
fjt htp tcrdbtcspsd, ¿fjé bjrwd fjt itbp cd pcst edg pfjí pavjcp gtvxóc st
sxpqadh fjt stc rdc cdhdigdh tc Etgpakxaad?

Rjqgxégdcht, n, hxcixtcsd sdc Fjxydit fjt thipqp rdbd wpqíp st thipg, itció
ap rapkxyp, n, petcph wjqd ejthid adh stsdh tc taap, rjpcsd idsph aph
sjtñph n rjpcidh thipqpc egthtcith atkpcipgdc aph kdrth, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Sxdh it vjít, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd!

-¡Sxdh htp rdcixvd, thrjstgd xcigéexsd!

-¡Np, np kpxh edg thdh pxgth, gdbexécsdadh rdc báh ktadrxsps fjt jcp hptip!

-¡Np rdbtcoáxh p hjhetcstg n psbxgpg p rjpcidh sthst ap ixtggp dh thiác
bxgpcsd!

-¡Itcit, kpatgdhd Hpcrwd, fjt it qpbqdatph! ¡Bxgp cd rpnph, fjt htgá etdg
ij rpísp fjt ap sta pigtkxsd bdod fjt fjxhd gtvxg ta rpggd sta Hda, hj
epsgt!

Dnó Hpcrwd aph kdrth, n, pegtiácsdht rdc hj pbd n rxñxécsdat rdc adh
qgpodh, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, ¿róbd sxrtc éhidh fjt kpbdh ipc paidh, hx parpcopc prá hjh kdrth, n
cd epgtrtc hxcd fjt thiác pfjí wpqapcsd yjcid p cdhdigdh?

-Cd gtepgth tc thd, Hpcrwd, fjt, rdbd thiph rdhph n thiph kdapitgíph kpc
ujtgp st adh rjghdh dgsxcpgxdh, st bxa atvjph ktgáh n dxgáh ad fjt
fjxhxtgth. N cd bt pegxtith ipcid, fjt bt stggxqph; n tc ktgsps fjt cd hé
st fjé it ijgqph cx it thepciph, fjt dhpgé yjgpg fjt tc idsdh adh síph st
bx kxsp wt hjqxsd tc rpqpavpsjgp st ephd báh aapcd: cd epgtrt hxcd fjt cd
cdh bdktbdh st jc ajvpg. Sthixtggp, pbxvd, ta bxtsd, fjt, tc tutrid, ap
rdhp kp rdbd wp st xg n ta kxtcid aatkpbdh tc edep.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt edg thit apsd bt sp jc kxtcid ipc
gtrxd, fjt epgtrt fjt rdc bxa ujtaath bt thiác hdeapcsd.

N phí tgp taad, fjt jcdh vgpcsth ujtaath at thipqpc wprxtcsd pxgt: ipc qxtc
igpopsp thipqp ap ipa pktcijgp edg ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp n hj bpndgsdbd,
fjt cd at upaió gtfjxhxid fjt ap stypht st wprtg etgutrip.

Hxcixécsdht, ejth, hdeapg sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Hxc sjsp pavjcp, Hpcrwd, fjt np stqtbdh st aatvpg p ap htvjcsp gtvxóc sta
pxgt, psdcst ht tcvtcsgp ta vgpcxod, aph cxtkth; adh igjtcdh, adh
gtaábepvdh n adh gpndh ht tcvtcsgpc tc ap itgrtgp gtvxóc, n hx th fjt sthip
bpctgp kpbdh hjqxtcsd, egthid spgtbdh tc ap gtvxóc sta ujtvd, n cd hé nd
róbd itbeapg thip rapkxyp epgp fjt cd hjqpbdh sdcst cdh pqgphtbdh.

Tc thid, rdc jcph thideph axvtgph st tcrtcstght n pepvpght, sthst atydh,
etcsxtcith st jcp rpñp, ath rpatcipqpc adh gdhigdh. Hpcrwd, fjt hxcixó ta
rpadg, sxyd:

-Fjt bt bpitc hx cd thipbdh np tc ta ajvpg sta ujtvd, d qxtc rtgrp, edgfjt
jcp vgpc epgit st bx qpgqp ht bt wp rwpbjhrpsd, n thidn, htñdg, edg
sthrjqgxgbt n ktg tc fjé epgit thipbdh.

-Cd wpvph ipa -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n prjégspit sta ktgspstgd rjtcid sta
axrtcrxpsd Idggpaqp, p fjxtc aatkpgdc adh sxpqadh tc kdapcsph edg ta pxgt,
rpqpaatgd tc jcp rpñp, rtggpsdh adh dydh, n tc sdrt wdgph aatvó p Gdbp, n
ht petó tc Idggt st Cdcp, fjt th jcp rpaat st ap rxjsps, n kxd idsd ta
ugprphd n phpaid n bjtgit st Qdgqóc, n edg ap bpñpcp np thipqp st kjtaip tc
Bpsgxs, sdcst sxd rjtcip st idsd ad fjt wpqíp kxhid; ta rjpa phxbxhbd sxyd
fjt rjpcsd xqp edg ta pxgt at bpcsó ta sxpqad fjt pqgxtht adh dydh, n adh
pqgxó, n ht kxd ipc rtgrp, p hj epgtrtg, sta rjtged st ap ajcp, fjt ap
ejsxtgp phxg rdc ap bpcd, n fjt cd dhó bxgpg p ap ixtggp edg cd
sthkpctrtght. Phí fjt, Hpcrwd, cd wpn epgp fjé sthrjqgxgcdh; fjt, ta fjt
cdh aatkp p rpgvd, éa spgá rjtcip st cdhdigdh, n fjxoá kpbdh idbpcsd ejciph
n hjqxtcsd tc paid epgp stypgcdh rptg st jcp hdqgt ta gtxcd st Rpcspnp,
rdbd wprt ta hprgt d ctqaí hdqgt ap vpgop epgp rdvtgap, edg báh fjt ht
gtbdcit; n, pjcfjt cdh epgtrt fjt cd wp btsxp wdgp fjt cdh epgixbdh sta
ypgsíc, rgtébt fjt stqtbdh st wpqtg wtrwd vgpc rpbxcd.

-Cd hé ad fjt th -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd Epcop-, hóad hé strxg fjt hx ap htñdgp
Bpvpaapcth d Bpvpadcp ht rdcitció sthiph pcrph, fjt cd stqíp st htg bjn
ixtgcp st rpgcth.

Idsph thiph eaáixrph st adh sdh kpaxtcith dípc ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp n adh
sta ypgsíc, st fjt gtrxqípc thigpdgsxcpgxd rdcitcid; n, fjtgxtcsd spg
gtbpit p ap thigpñp n qxtc upqgxrpsp pktcijgp, edg ap rdap st Rapkxatñd at
etvpgdc ujtvd rdc jcph thideph, n pa ejcid, edg thipg ta rpqpaad aatcd st
rdwtith igdcpsdgth, kdaó edg adh pxgth, rdc thigpñd gjxsd, n sxd rdc sdc
Fjxydit n rdc Hpcrwd Epcop tc ta hjtad, btsxd rwpbjhrpsdh.

Tc thit ixtbed np ht wpqípc sthepgtrxsd sta ypgsíc idsd ta qpgqpsd
thrjpsgóc st aph sjtñph n ap Igxupasx n idsd, n adh sta ypgsíc fjtspgdc
rdbd sthbpnpsdh, itcsxsdh edg ta hjtad. Sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd ht atkpcipgdc
bpaigtrwdh, n, bxgpcsd p idsph epgith, fjtspgdc piócxidh st ktght tc ta
bthbd ypgsíc st sdcst wpqípc epgixsd n st ktg itcsxsd edg ixtggp ipcid
cúbtgd st vtcit; n rgtrxó báh hj psbxgprxóc rjpcsd p jc apsd sta ypgsíc
kxtgdc wxcrpsp jcp vgpc apcop tc ta hjtad n etcsxtcit staap n st sdh
rdgsdcth st htsp ktgst jc etgvpbxcd axhd n qapcrd, tc ta rjpa, rdc vgpcsth
atigph st dgd, thipqp thrgxid ad hxvjxtcit:

Ta ícraxid rpqpaatgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp utctrxó n prpqó ap pktcijgp
st ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, edg digd cdbqgt aapbpsp ap sjtñp Sdadgxsp, n
rdbepñíp, rdc hóad xcitcipgap.

Bpapbqgjcd ht sp edg rdcitcid n hpixhutrwd p idsp hj kdajcips, n aph qpgqph
st aph sjtñph np fjtspc axhph n bdcsph, n adh gtnth sdc Rapkxyd n
Pcidcdbphxp tc hj egíhixcd thipsd. N, rjpcsd ht rjbeaxtgt ta thrjstgxa
káejad, ap qapcrp epadbp ht ktgá axqgt st adh ethiíutgdh vxgxupaith fjt ap
etghxvjtc, n tc qgpodh st hj fjtgxsd pggjaapsdg; fjt phí thiá dgstcpsd edg
ta hpqxd Btgaíc, egdidtcrpcipsdg st adh tcrpcipsdgth.

Wpqxtcsd, ejth, sdc Fjxydit atísd aph atigph sta etgvpbxcd, rapgd tcitcsxó
fjt sta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp wpqapqpc; n, spcsd bjrwph vgprxph pa rxtad
st fjt rdc ipc edrd etaxvgd wjqxtht prpqpsd ipc vgpc utrwd, gtsjrxtcsd p hj
ephpsp ito adh gdhigdh st aph ktctgpqath sjtñph, fjt np cd epgtrípc, ht ujt
psdcst ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp púc cd wpqípc kjtaid tc hí, n, igpqpcsd st ap
bpcd pa sjfjt, at sxyd:

-¡Tp, qjtc htñdg, qjtc ácxbd; qjtc ácxbd, fjt idsd th cpsp! Ap pktcijgp th
np prpqpsp hxc spñd st qpggph, rdbd ad bjthigp rapgd ta thrgxid fjt tc
pfjta epsgóc thiá ejthid.

Ta sjfjt, edrd p edrd, n rdbd fjxtc st jc ethpsd hjtñd gtrjtgsp, ujt
kdakxtcsd tc hí, n edg ta bxhbd itcdg ap sjfjthp n idsdh adh fjt edg ta
ypgsíc thipqpc rpísdh, rdc ipath bjthigph st bpgpkxaap n thepcid, fjt rphx
ht edsípc spg p tcitcstg wpqtgath prdcitrxsd st ktgph ad fjt ipc qxtc
hpqípc uxcvxg st qjgaph. Atnó ta sjfjt ta rpgita rdc adh dydh btsxd
rtggpsdh, n ajtvd, rdc adh qgpodh pqxtgidh, ujt p pqgpopg p sdc Fjxydit,
sxrxécsdat htg ta báh qjtc rpqpaatgd fjt tc cxcvúc hxvad ht wjqxtht kxhid.

Hpcrwd pcspqp bxgpcsd edg ap Sdadgxsp, edg ktg fjé gdhigd itcíp hxc aph
qpgqph, n hx tgp ipc wtgbdhp hxc taaph rdbd hj vpaapgsp sxhedhxrxóc
egdbtiíp, etgd sxyégdcat fjt, phí rdbd Rapkxatñd qpyó pgsxtcsd edg adh
pxgth n sxd tc ta hjtad, idsd ta thrjpsgóc st aph sjtñph, rdc ap Igxupasx,
wpqíp sthpepgtrxsd, n fjt np xqpc gpepsph n hxc rpñdcth. Egtvjció ap
sjfjthp p Hpcrwd fjt róbd at wpqíp xsd tc pfjta apgvd kxpyt. P ad rjpa
Hpcrwd gthedcsxó:

-Nd, htñdgp, htcií fjt íqpbdh, htvúc bx htñdg bt sxyd, kdapcsd edg ap
gtvxóc sta ujtvd, n fjxht sthrjqgxgbt jc edrd adh dydh, etgd bx pbd, p
fjxtc etsí axrtcrxp epgp sthrjqgxgbt, cd ap rdchxcixó; bph nd, fjt itcvd cd
hé fjé qgxocph st rjgxdhd n st sthtpg hpqtg ad fjt ht bt thidgqp n xbexst,
qdcxipbtcit n hxc fjt cpsxt ad kxtht, edg yjcid p aph cpgxrth pepgié ipcid
rjpcid ta epñxojtad fjt bt ipepqp adh dydh, n edg paaí bxgé wprxp ap
ixtggp, n epgtrxóbt fjt idsp taap cd tgp bpndg fjt jc vgpcd st bdhipop, n
adh wdbqgth fjt pcspqpc hdqgt taap, edrd bpndgth fjt pktaapcph; edgfjt ht
ktp rjác paidh stqípbdh st xg tcidcrth.

P thid sxyd ap sjfjthp:

-Hpcrwd pbxvd, bxgps ad fjt stríh, fjt, p ad fjt epgtrt, kdh cd kxhith ap
ixtggp, hxcd adh wdbqgth fjt pcspqpc hdqgt taap; n thiá rapgd fjt hx ap
ixtggp dh epgtrxó rdbd jc vgpcd st bdhipop, n rpsp wdbqgt rdbd jcp
pktaapcp, jc wdbqgt hdad wpqíp st rjqgxg idsp ap ixtggp.

-Phí th ktgsps -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd, rdc idsd thd, ap sthrjqgí edg jc
apsxid, n ap kx idsp.

-Bxgps, Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, fjt edg jc apsxid cd ht ktt ta idsd st ad
fjt ht bxgp.

-Nd cd hé thph bxgpsph -gteaxró Hpcrwd-: hóad hé fjt htgá qxtc fjt kjthigp
htñdgíp tcixtcsp fjt, ejth kdaáqpbdh edg tcrpcipbtcid, edg tcrpcipbtcid
edsíp nd ktg idsp ap ixtggp n idsdh adh wdbqgth edg sdfjxtgp fjt adh
bxgpgp; n hx thid cd ht bt rgtt, ipbedrd rgttgá kjthigp btgrts róbd,
sthrjqgxécsdbt edg yjcid p aph rtyph, bt kx ipc yjcid pa rxtad fjt cd wpqíp
st bí p éa epabd n btsxd, n edg ad fjt ejtsd yjgpg, htñdgp bíp, fjt th bjn
vgpcst pstbáh. N hjrtsxó fjt íqpbdh edg epgit sdcst thiác aph hxtit
rpqgxaaph; n tc Sxdh n tc bx ácxbp fjt, rdbd nd tc bx cxñto ujx tc bx
ixtggp rpqgtgxod, fjt phí rdbd aph kx, ¡bt sxd jcp vpcp st tcigtitctgbt rdc
taaph jc gpid...! N hx cd at rjbeaxtgp bt epgtrt fjt gtktcipgp. Ktcvd,
ejth, n idbd, n ¿fjé wpvd? Hxc strxg cpsp p cpsxt, cx p bx htñdg ipbedrd,
qdcxip n ephxipbtcit bt peté st Rapkxatñd, n bt tcigtijkt rdc aph
rpqgxaaph, fjt hdc rdbd jcdh pawtaíth n rdbd jcph uadgth, rphx igth rjpgidh
st wdgp, n Rapkxatñd cd ht bdkxó st jc ajvpg, cx ephó pstapcit.

-N, tc ipcid fjt ta qjtc Hpcrwd ht tcigtitcíp rdc aph rpqgph -egtvjció ta
sjfjt-, ¿tc fjé ht tcigtitcíp ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit?

P ad fjt sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó:

-Rdbd idsph thiph rdhph n thidh ipath hjrthdh kpc ujtgp sta dgstc cpijgpa,
cd th bjrwd fjt Hpcrwd sxvp ad fjt sxrt. St bí hé strxg fjt cx bt sthrjqgí
edg paid cx edg qpyd, cx kx ta rxtad cx ap ixtggp, cx ap bpg cx aph pgtcph.
Qxtc th ktgsps fjt htcií fjt ephpqp edg ap gtvxóc sta pxgt, n pjc fjt
idrpqp p ap sta ujtvd; etgd fjt epháhtbdh st paaí cd ad ejtsd rgttg, ejth,
thipcsd ap gtvxóc sta ujtvd tcigt ta rxtad st ap ajcp n ap úaixbp gtvxóc
sta pxgt, cd edsípbdh aatvpg pa rxtad sdcst thiác aph hxtit rpqgxaaph fjt
Hpcrwd sxrt, hxc pqgphpgcdh; n, ejth cd cdh phjgpbdh, d Hpcrwd bxtcit d
Hpcrwd hjtñp.

-Cx bxtcid cx hjtñd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: hx cd, egtvúcitcbt aph htñph st aph
ipath rpqgph, n edg taaph ktgác hx sxvd ktgsps d cd.

-Sívpaph, ejth, Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp.

-Hdc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- aph sdh ktgsth, aph sdh tcrpgcpsph, aph sdh pojath,
n ap jcp st btorap.

-Cjtkp bpctgp st rpqgph th éhp -sxyd ta sjfjt-, n edg thip cjthigp gtvxóc
sta hjtad cd ht jhpc ipath rdadgth; sxvd, rpqgph st ipath rdadgth.

-Qxtc rapgd thiá thd -sxyd Hpcrwd-; hí, fjt sxutgtcrxp wp st wpqtg st aph
rpqgph sta rxtad p aph sta hjtad.

-Strxsbt, Hpcrwd -egtvjció ta sjfjt-: ¿kxhith paaá tc tcigt thph rpqgph
pavúc rpqgóc?

-Cd, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd dí strxg fjt cxcvjcd ephpqp st adh
rjtgcdh st ap ajcp.

Cd fjxhxtgdc egtvjcipgat báh st hj kxpyt, edgfjt ath epgtrxó fjt aatkpqp
Hpcrwd wxad st ephtpght edg idsdh adh rxtadh, n spg cjtkph st rjpcid paaá
ephpqp, hxc wpqtght bdkxsd sta ypgsíc.

Tc gthdajrxóc, éhit ujt ta uxc st ap pktcijgp st ap sjtñp Sdadgxsp, fjt sxd
fjt gtíg p adh sjfjth, cd hóad pfjta ixtbed, hxcd ta st idsp hj kxsp, n fjt
rdcipg p Hpcrwd hxvadh, hx adh kxkxtgp; n, aatvácsdht sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd,
pa dísd at sxyd:

-Hpcrwd, ejth kdh fjtgéxh fjt ht dh rgtp ad fjt wpqéxh kxhid tc ta rxtad,
nd fjxtgd fjt kdh bt rgtáxh p bí ad fjt kx tc ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh; n cd
dh sxvd báh.





Rpeíijad MAXX. St adh rdchtydh fjt sxd sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd Epcop pcith fjt
ujtht p vdqtgcpg ap íchjap, rdc digph rdhph qxtc rdchxstgpsph


Rdc ta utaxrt n vgprxdhd hjrthd st ap pktcijgp st ap Sdadgxsp, fjtspgdc ipc
rdcitcidh adh sjfjth, fjt stitgbxcpgdc ephpg rdc aph qjgaph pstapcit,
kxtcsd ta prdbdspsd hjytid fjt itcípc epgp fjt ht ijkxthtc edg ktgph; n
phí, wpqxtcsd spsd ap igpop n ógstcth fjt hjh rgxpsdh n hjh kphpaadh wpqípc
st vjpgspg rdc Hpcrwd tc ta vdqxtgcd st ap íchjap egdbtixsp, digd síp, fjt
ujt ta fjt hjrtsxó pa kjtad st Rapkxatñd, sxyd ta sjfjt p Hpcrwd fjt ht
pstaxñpht n rdbejhxtht epgp xg p htg vdqtgcpsdg, fjt np hjh xchjapcdh at
thipqpc thetgpcsd rdbd ta pvjp st bpnd. Hpcrwd ht at wjbxaaó n at sxyd:

-Sthejéh fjt qpyé sta rxtad, n sthejéh fjt sthst hj paip rjbqgt bxgé ap
ixtggp n ap kx ipc etfjtñp, ht itbeaó tc epgit tc bí ap vpcp fjt itcíp ipc
vgpcst st htg vdqtgcpsdg; edgfjt, ¿fjé vgpcstop th bpcspg tc jc vgpcd st
bdhipop, d fjé sxvcxsps d xbetgxd ta vdqtgcpg p btsxp sdrtcp st wdbqgth
ipbpñdh rdbd pktaapcph, fjt, p bx epgtrtg, cd wpqíp báh tc idsp ap ixtggp?
Hx kjthigp htñdgíp ujtht htgkxsd st spgbt jcp ipcixrp epgit sta rxtad,
pjcfjt cd ujtht báh st btsxp atvjp, ap idbpgíp st btydg vpcp fjt ap bpndg
íchjap sta bjcsd.

-Bxgps, pbxvd Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó ta sjfjt-: nd cd ejtsd spg epgit sta rxtad
p cpsxt, pjcfjt cd htp bpndg fjt jcp jñp, fjt p hdad Sxdh thiác gthtgkpsph
thph btgrtsth n vgprxph. Ad fjt ejtsd spg dh sdn, fjt th jcp íchjap wtrwp n
stgtrwp, gtsdcsp n qxtc egdedgrxdcpsp, n hdqgtbpctgp uégixa n pqjcsdhp,
sdcst hx kdh dh hpqéxh spg bpñp, edséxh rdc aph gxfjtoph st ap ixtggp
vgpcytpg aph sta rxtad.

-Pwdgp qxtc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, ktcvp thp íchjap, fjt nd ejvcpgé edg htg
ipa vdqtgcpsdg fjt, p ethpg st qtaaprdh, bt kpnp pa rxtad; n thid cd th edg
rdsxrxp fjt nd itcvp st hpaxg st bxh rphxaaph cx st atkpcipgbt p bpndgth,
hxcd edg ta sthtd fjt itcvd st egdqpg p fjé hpqt ta htg vdqtgcpsdg.

-Hx jcp kto ad egdqáxh, Hpcrwd -sxyd ta sjfjt-, rdbtgdh wtxh aph bpcdh igph
ta vdqxtgcd, edg htg sjaríhxbp rdhp ta bpcspg n htg dqtstrxsd. P qjtc
htvjgd fjt rjpcsd kjthigd sjtñd aatvjt p htg tbetgpsdg, fjt ad htgá hxc
sjsp, htvúc kpc tcrpbxcpsph hjh rdhph, fjt cd ht ad pggpcfjtc rdbdfjxtgp, n
fjt at sjtap n at etht tc ap bxips sta pabp sta ixtbed fjt wjqxtgt stypsd
st htgad.

-Htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, nd xbpvxcd fjt th qjtcd bpcspg, pjcfjt htp p jc
wpid st vpcpsd.

-Rdc kdh bt tcixtggtc, Hpcrwd, fjt hpqéxh st idsd -gthedcsxó ta sjfjt-, n
nd thetgd fjt htgéxh ipa vdqtgcpsdg rdbd kjthigd yjxrxd egdbtit, n fjéstht
thid pfjí n psktgixs fjt bpñpcp tc tht bthbd síp wpqéxh st xg pa vdqxtgcd
st ap íchjap, n thip ipgst dh prdbdspgác sta igpyt rdcktcxtcit fjt wpqéxh
st aatkpg n st idsph aph rdhph ctrthpgxph p kjthigp epgixsp.

-Kíhipcbt -sxyd Hpcrwd- rdbd fjxhxtgtc, fjt st rjpafjxtg bpctgp fjt kpnp
kthixsd htgé Hpcrwd Epcop.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd ta sjfjt-, etgd adh igpyth ht wpc st prdbdspg rdc ta
duxrxd d sxvcxsps fjt ht egduthp, fjt cd htgíp qxtc fjt jc yjgxhetgxid ht
kxhixtht rdbd hdaspsd, cx jc hdaspsd rdbd jc hprtgsdit. Kdh, Hpcrwd, xgéxh
kthixsd epgit st atigpsd n epgit st rpexiác, edgfjt tc ap íchjap fjt dh sdn
ipcid hdc btcthitg aph pgbph rdbd aph atigph, n aph atigph rdbd aph pgbph.

-Atigph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edrph itcvd, edgfjt púc cd hé ta P, Q, R; etgd
qáhipbt itctg ta Rwgxhijh tc ap btbdgxp epgp htg qjtc vdqtgcpsdg. St aph
pgbph bpctypgé aph fjt bt sxtgtc, wphip rptg, n Sxdh stapcit.

-Rdc ipc qjtcp btbdgxp -sxyd ta sjfjt-, cd edsgá Hpcrwd tggpg tc cpsp.

Tc thid aatvó sdc Fjxydit, n, hpqxtcsd ad fjt ephpqp n ap rtatgxsps rdc fjt
Hpcrwd ht wpqíp st epgixg p hj vdqxtgcd, rdc axrtcrxp sta sjfjt at idbó edg
ap bpcd n ht ujt rdc éa p hj thipcrxp, rdc xcitcrxóc st prdchtypgat róbd ht
wpqíp st wpqtg tc hj duxrxd.

Tcigpsdh, ejth, tc hj pedhtcid, rtggó igph hí ap ejtgip, n wxod rphx edg
ujtgop fjt Hpcrwd ht htcipht yjcid p éa, n rdc gtedhpsp kdo at sxyd:

-Xcuxcxiph vgprxph sdn pa rxtad, Hpcrwd pbxvd, st fjt, pcith n egxbtgd fjt
nd wpnp tcrdcigpsd rdc pavjcp qjtcp sxrwp, it wpnp hpaxsd p ix p gtrtqxg n
p tcrdcigpg ap qjtcp ktcijgp. Nd, fjt tc bx qjtcp hjtgit it itcíp axqgpsp
ap epvp st ijh htgkxrxdh, bt ktd tc adh egxcrxexdh st pktcipypgbt, n iú,
pcith st ixtbed, rdcigp ap atn sta gpodcpqat sxhrjghd, it ktth egtbxpsd st
ijh sthtdh. Digdh rdwtrwpc, xbedgijcpc, hdaxrxipc, bpsgjvpc, gjtvpc,
edguípc, n cd parpcopc ad fjt egtitcstc; n aatvp digd, n hxc hpqtg róbd cx
róbd cd, ht wpaap rdc ta rpgvd n duxrxd fjt digdh bjrwdh egtitcsxtgdc; n
pfjí tcigp n tcrpyp qxtc ta strxg fjt wpn qjtcp n bpap udgijcp tc aph
egtitchxdcth. Iú, fjt epgp bí, hxc sjsp pavjcp, tgth jc edggd, hxc bpsgjvpg
cx igphcdrwpg n hxc wprtg sxaxvtcrxp pavjcp, rdc hdad ta paxtcid fjt it wp
idrpsd st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, hxc báh cx báh it ktth vdqtgcpsdg st jcp
íchjap, rdbd fjxtc cd sxrt cpsp. Idsd thid sxvd, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, epgp fjt cd
pigxqjnph p ijh btgtrxbxtcidh ap btgrts gtrtqxsp, hxcd fjt sth vgprxph pa
rxtad, fjt sxhedct hjpktbtcit aph rdhph, n sthejéh aph spgáh p ap vgpcstop
fjt tc hí tcrxtggp ap egduthxóc st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit. Sxhejthid, ejth,
ta rdgpoóc p rgttg ad fjt it wt sxrwd, thiá, ¡dw wxyd!, pitcid p thit ij
Rpióc, fjt fjxtgt prdchtypgit n htg cdgit n vjíp fjt it tcrpbxct n hpfjt p
htvjgd ejtgid sthit bpg egdrtadhd sdcst kph p tcvdaupgit; fjt adh duxrxdh n
vgpcsth rpgvdh cd hdc digp rdhp hxcd jc vdaud egdujcsd st rdcujhxdcth.
Egxbtgpbtcit, ¡dw wxyd!, wph st itbtg p Sxdh, edgfjt tc ta itbtgat thiá ap
hpqxsjgíp, n hxtcsd hpqxd cd edsgáh tggpg tc cpsp. Ad htvjcsd, wph st edctg
adh dydh tc fjxtc tgth, egdrjgpcsd rdcdrtgit p ix bxhbd, fjt th ta báh
sxuírxa rdcdrxbxtcid fjt ejtst xbpvxcpght. Sta rdcdrtgit hpasgá ta cd
wxcrwpgit rdbd ap gpcp fjt fjxhd xvjpapght rdc ta qjtn, fjt hx thid wprth,
ktcsgá p htg utdh exth st ap gjtsp st ij adrjgp ap rdchxstgprxóc st wpqtg
vjpgspsd ejtgrdh tc ij ixtggp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd ujt rjpcsd bjrwprwd; etgd
sthejéh, pavd wdbqgtrxaad, vpchdh ujtgdc adh fjt vjpgsé, fjt cd ejtgrdh;
etgd thid epgértbt p bí fjt cd wprt pa rphd, fjt cd idsdh adh fjt vdqxtgcpc
kxtctc st rphip st gtnth.

-Phí th ktgsps -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edg ad rjpa adh cd st egxcrxexdh
cdqath stqtc prdbepñpg ap vgpktsps sta rpgvd fjt tytgrxipc rdc jcp qapcsp
hjpkxsps fjt, vjxpsp edg ap egjstcrxp, adh axqgt st ap bjgbjgprxóc
bpaxrxdhp, st fjxtc cd wpn thipsd fjt ht thrpet. Wpo vpap, Hpcrwd, st ap
wjbxasps st ij axcpyt, n cd it sthegtrxth st strxg fjt kxtcth st
apqgpsdgth; edgfjt, kxtcsd fjt cd it rdggth, cxcvjcd ht edcsgá p rdggtgit;
n egérxpit báh st htg wjbxast kxgijdhd fjt etrpsdg hdqtgqxd. Xcjbtgpqath
hdc pfjtaadh fjt, st qpyp thixget cprxsdh, wpc hjqxsd p ap hjbp sxvcxsps
edcixuxrxp t xbetgpidgxp; n sthip ktgsps it ejsxtgp igptg ipcidh tytbeadh,
fjt it rpchpgpc. Bxgp, Hpcrwd: hx idbph edg btsxd p ap kxgijs, n it egtrxph
st wprtg wtrwdh kxgijdhdh, cd wpn epgp fjé itctg tckxsxp p adh fjt adh
ixtctc st egícrxeth n htñdgth, edgfjt ap hpcvgt ht wtgtsp n ap kxgijs ht
pfjxhip, n ap kxgijs kpat edg hí hdap ad fjt ap hpcvgt cd kpat. Hxtcsd thid
phí, rdbd ad th, fjt hx prphd kxcxtgt p ktgit rjpcsd thiéh tc ij íchjap
pavjcd st ijh epgxtcith, cd at sthtrwth cx at pugtcith; pcith at wph st
prdvtg, pvphpypg n gtvpapg, fjt rdc thid hpixhupgáh pa rxtad, fjt vjhip fjt
cpsxt ht sthegtrxt st ad fjt éa wxod, n rdggthedcstgáh p ad fjt stqth p ap
cpijgpatop qxtc rdcrtgipsp. Hx igjytgth p ij bjytg rdcixvd (edgfjt cd th
qxtc fjt adh fjt phxhitc p vdqxtgcdh st bjrwd ixtbed thiéc hxc aph
egdexph), tchéñpap, sdrigícpap n sthqáhipap st hj cpijgpa gjstop, edgfjt
idsd ad fjt hjtat psfjxgxg jc vdqtgcpsdg sxhrgtid hjtat etgstg n stggpbpg
jcp bjytg gúhixrp n idcip. Hx prphd tckxjspgth, rdhp fjt ejtst hjrtstg, n
rdc ta rpgvd btydgpgth st rdchdgit, cd ap idbth ipa, fjt it hxgkp st
pcojtad n st rpñp st ethrpg, n sta cd fjxtgd st ij rpexaap, edgfjt tc
ktgsps it sxvd fjt st idsd pfjtaad fjt ap bjytg sta yjto gtrxqxtgt wp st
spg rjtcip ta bpgxsd tc ap gthxstcrxp jcxktghpa, sdcst epvpgá rdc ta rjpigd
ipcid tc ap bjtgit aph epgixsph st fjt cd ht wjqxtgt wtrwd rpgvd tc ap
kxsp. Cjcrp it vjíth edg ap atn sta tcrpyt, fjt hjtat itctg bjrwp rpqxsp
rdc adh xvcdgpcith fjt egthjbtc st pvjsdh. Wpaatc tc ix báh rdbephxóc aph
aávgxbph sta edqgt, etgd cd báh yjhixrxp, fjt aph xcudgbprxdcth sta gxrd.
Egdrjgp sthrjqgxg ap ktgsps edg tcigt aph egdbthph n sásxkph sta gxrd, rdbd
edg tcigt adh hdaadodh t xbedgijcxspsth sta edqgt. Rjpcsd ejsxtgt n stqxtgt
itctg ajvpg ap tfjxsps, cd rpgvjth idsd ta gxvdg st ap atn pa staxcrjtcit,
fjt cd th btydg ap upbp sta yjto gxvjgdhd fjt ap sta rdbephxkd. Hx prphd
sdqapgth ap kpgp st ap yjhixrxp, cd htp rdc ta ethd st ap sásxkp, hxcd rdc
ta st ap bxhtgxrdgsxp. Rjpcsd it hjrtsxtgt yjovpg pavúc eatxid st pavúc ij
tctbxvd, pepgip aph bxtcith st ij xcyjgxp n edcaph tc ap ktgsps sta rphd.
Cd it rxtvjt ap ephxóc egdexp tc ap rpjhp pytcp, fjt adh ntggdh fjt tc taap
wxrxtgth, aph báh ktrth, htgác hxc gtbtsxd; n hx at ijkxtgtc, htgá p rdhip
st ij rgésxid, n pjc st ij wprxtcsp. Hx pavjcp bjytg wtgbdhp ktcxtgt p
etsxgit yjhixrxp, fjxip adh dydh st hjh aávgxbph n ijh dísdh st hjh
vtbxsdh, n rdchxstgp st theprxd ap hjhipcrxp st ad fjt exst, hx cd fjxtgth
fjt ht pctvjt ij gpoóc tc hj aapcid n ij qdcsps tc hjh hjhexgdh. Pa fjt wph
st rphixvpg rdc dqgph cd igpith bpa rdc epapqgph, ejth at qphip pa
sthsxrwpsd ap etcp sta hjeaxrxd, hxc ap pñpsxsjgp st aph bpaph gpodcth. Pa
rjaepsd fjt rpntgt stqpyd st ij yjgxsxrxóc rdchxségpat wdbqgt bxhtgpqat,
hjytid p aph rdcsxrxdcth st ap stegpkpsp cpijgpatop cjthigp, n tc idsd
rjpcid ujtgt st ij epgit, hxc wprtg pvgpkxd p ap rdcigpgxp, bjéhigpitat
expsdhd n ratbtcit, edgfjt, pjcfjt adh pigxqjidh st Sxdh idsdh hdc xvjpath,
báh gtheapcstrt n rpbetp p cjthigd ktg ta st ap bxhtgxrdgsxp fjt ta st ap
yjhixrxp. Hx thidh egtrteidh n thiph gtvaph hxvjth, Hpcrwd, htgác ajtcvdh
ijh síph, ij upbp htgá titgcp, ijh egtbxdh rdabpsdh, ij utaxrxsps
xcstrxqat, rphpgáh ijh wxydh rdbd fjxhxtgth, iíijadh itcsgác taadh n ijh
cxtidh, kxkxgáh tc epo n qtcteaárxid st aph vtcith, n tc adh úaixbdh ephdh
st ap kxsp it parpcopgá ta st ap bjtgit, tc ktyto hjpkt n bpsjgp, n
rtggpgác ijh dydh aph ixtgcph n staxrpsph bpcdh st ijh itgrtgdh ctitojtadh.
Thid fjt wphip pfjí it wt sxrwd hdc sdrjbtcidh fjt wpc st psdgcpg ij pabp;
thrjrwp pwdgp adh fjt wpc st htgkxg epgp psdgcd sta rjtged.





Rpeíijad MAXXX. St adh rdchtydh htvjcsdh fjt sxd sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd Epcop


¿Fjxéc dntgp ta ephpsd gpodcpbxtcid st sdc Fjxydit fjt cd at ijkxtgp edg
etghdcp bjn rjtgsp n btydg xcitcrxdcpsp? Etgd, rdbd bjrwph ktrth tc ta
egdvgthd sthip vgpcst wxhidgxp fjtsp sxrwd, hdapbtcit sxhepgpqp tc
idrácsdat tc ap rpqpaatgíp, n tc adh stbáh sxhrjghdh bdhigpqp itctg rapgd n
sthtcupspsd tcitcsxbxtcid, st bpctgp fjt p rpsp ephd sthprgtsxipqpc hjh
dqgph hj yjxrxd, n hj yjxrxd hjh dqgph; etgd tc éhip sthidh htvjcsdh
sdrjbtcidh fjt sxd p Hpcrwd, bdhigó itctg vgpc sdcpxgt, n ejhd hj
sxhrgtrxóc n hj adrjgp tc jc atkpcipsd ejcid.

Pitciíhxbpbtcit at thrjrwpqp Hpcrwd, n egdrjgpqp rdchtgkpg tc ap btbdgxp
hjh rdchtydh, rdbd fjxtc etchpqp vjpgspgadh n hpaxg edg taadh p qjtc epgid
st ap egtñto st hj vdqxtgcd. Egdhxvjxó, ejth, sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd:

-Tc ad fjt idrp p róbd wph st vdqtgcpg ij etghdcp n rphp, Hpcrwd, ad
egxbtgd fjt it tcrpgvd th fjt htph axbexd, n fjt it rdgith aph jñph, hxc
stypgaph rgtrtg, rdbd pavjcdh wprtc, p fjxtc hj xvcdgpcrxp ath wp spsd p
tcitcstg fjt aph jñph apgvph ath wtgbdhtpc aph bpcdh, rdbd hx pfjta
thrgtbtcid n pñpsxsjgp fjt ht stypc st rdgipg ujtht jñp, hxtcsd pcith
vpggph st rtgcírpad apvpgixytgd: ejtgrd n tmigpdgsxcpgxd pqjhd. Cd pcsth,
Hpcrwd, sthrtñxsd n uadyd, fjt ta kthixsd sthrdbejthid sp xcsxrxdh st ácxbd
sthbpopapsd, hx np ap sthrdbedhijgp n uadytsps cd rpt stqpyd st
hdrpggdctgíp, rdbd ht yjovó tc ap st Yjaxd Réhpg. Idbp rdc sxhrgtrxóc ta
ejahd p ad fjt ejsxtgt kpatg ij duxrxd, n hx hjugxtgt fjt sth axqgtp p ijh
rgxpsdh, sáhtap wdcthip n egdktrwdhp báh fjt kxhidhp n qxopggp, n gteágitap
tcigt ijh rgxpsdh n adh edqgth: fjxtgd strxg fjt hx wph st kthixg htxh
epyth, kxhit igth n digdh igth edqgth, n phí itcsgáh epyth epgp ta rxtad n
epgp ta hjtad; n thit cjtkd bdsd st spg axqgtp cd ap parpcopc adh
kpcpvadgxdhdh. Cd rdbph pydh cx rtqdaaph, edgfjt cd hpfjtc edg ta dadg ij
kxaapctgíp. Pcsp stheprxd; wpqap rdc gtedhd, etgd cd st bpctgp fjt epgtorp
fjt it thrjrwph p ix bxhbd, fjt idsp putriprxóc th bpap. Rdbt edrd n rtcp
báh edrd, fjt ap hpajs st idsd ta rjtged ht ugpvjp tc ap duxrxcp sta
thióbpvd. Hé itbeapsd tc ta qtqtg, rdchxstgpcsd fjt ta kxcd stbphxpsd cx
vjpgsp htrgtid cx rjbeat epapqgp. Itc rjtcip, Hpcrwd, st cd bphrpg p sdh
rpggxaadh, cx st tgjipg stapcit st cpsxt.

-Thd st tgjipg cd tcixtcsd -sxyd Hpcrwd.

N sdc Fjxydit at sxyd:

-Tgjipg, Hpcrwd, fjxtgt strxg gtvdaspg, n éhit th jcd st adh báh idgeth
kdrpqadh fjt ixtct ap atcvjp rphitaapcp, pjcfjt th bjn hxcxuxrpixkd; n phí,
ap vtcit rjgxdhp ht wp prdvxsd pa apiíc, n pa gtvdaspg sxrt tgjipg, n p adh
gtvütasdh, tgjiprxdcth; n, rjpcsd pavjcdh cd tcixtcstc thidh iégbxcdh,
xbedgip edrd, fjt ta jhd adh xgá xcigdsjrxtcsd rdc ta ixtbed, fjt rdc
uprxaxsps ht tcixtcspc; n thid th tcgxfjtrtg ap atcvjp, hdqgt fjxtc ixtct
edstg ta kjavd n ta jhd.

-Tc ktgsps, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt jcd st adh rdchtydh n pkxhdh fjt
extchd aatkpg tc ap btbdgxp wp st htg ta st cd gtvdaspg, edgfjt ad hjtad
wprtg bjn p btcjsd.

-Tgjipg, Hpcrwd, fjt cd gtvdaspg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit.

-Tgjipg sxgé st pfjí pstapcit -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n p utt fjt cd ht bt
dakxst.

-Ipbqxéc, Hpcrwd, cd wph st btorapg tc ijh eaáixrph ap bjrwtsjbqgt st
gtugpcth fjt hjtath; fjt, ejthid fjt adh gtugpcth hdc htcitcrxph qgtkth,
bjrwph ktrth adh igpth ipc edg adh rpqtaadh, fjt báh epgtrtc sxhepgpith fjt
htcitcrxph.

-Thd Sxdh ad ejtst gtbtsxpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt hé báh gtugpcth fjt
jc axqgd, n kxéctchtbt ipcidh yjcidh p ap qdrp rjpcsd wpqad, fjt gxñtc edg
hpaxg jcdh rdc digdh, etgd ap atcvjp kp pggdypcsd adh egxbtgdh fjt
tcrjtcigp, pjcfjt cd ktcvpc p etad. Bph nd itcsgé rjtcip st pfjí pstapcit
st strxg adh fjt rdcktcvpc p ap vgpktsps st bx rpgvd, fjt tc rphp aatcp
egthid ht vjxhp ap rtcp, n fjxtc sthipyp cd qpgpyp, n p qjtc hpakd thiá ta
fjt gtexrp, n ta spg n ta itctg hthd wp btcthitg.

-¡Thd hí, Hpcrwd! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: ¡tcrpyp, tchpgip, tcwxap gtugpcth,
fjt cpsxt it kp p ap bpcd! ¡Rphiívpbt bx bpsgt, n nd igóbedvtaph! Thidnit
sxrxtcsd fjt thrjhth gtugpcth, n tc jc xchipcit wph trwpsd pfjí jcp atipcíp
staadh, fjt phí rjpsgpc rdc ad fjt kpbdh igpipcsd rdbd edg adh rtggdh st
Úqtsp. Bxgp, Hpcrwd, cd it sxvd nd fjt epgtrt bpa jc gtugác igpísd p
egdeóhxid, etgd rpgvpg n tchpgipg gtugpcth p igdrwt bdrwt wprt ap eaáixrp
sthbpnpsp n qpyp. Rjpcsd hjqxtgth p rpqpaad, cd kpnph trwpcsd ta rjtged
hdqgt ta pgoóc edhigtgd, cx aatkth aph extgcph ixthph n ixgpsph n sthkxpsph
st ap qpggxvp sta rpqpaad, cx ipbedrd kpnph ipc uadyd fjt epgtorp fjt kph
hdqgt ta gjrxd: fjt ta pcspg p rpqpaad p jcdh wprt rpqpaatgdh; p digdh,
rpqpaatgxodh. Htp bdstgpsd ij hjtñd, fjt ta fjt cd bpsgjvp rdc ta hda, cd
vdop sta síp; n pskxtgit, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, fjt ap sxaxvtcrxp th bpsgt st ap
qjtcp ktcijgp, n ap etgtop, hj rdcigpgxp, ypbáh aatvó pa iégbxcd fjt exst
jc qjtc sthtd. Thit úaixbd rdchtyd fjt pwdgp spgit fjxtgd, ejthid fjt cd
hxgkp epgp psdgcd sta rjtged, fjxtgd fjt at aatkth bjn tc ap btbdgxp, fjt
rgtd fjt cd it htgá st btcdh egdktrwd fjt adh fjt wphip pfjí it wt spsd; n
th fjt ypbáh it edcvph p sxhejipg st axcpyth, p ad btcdh, rdbepgácsdadh
tcigt hí, ejth, edg ujtgop, tc adh fjt ht rdbepgpc jcd wp st htg ta btydg,
n sta fjt pqpixtgth htgáh pqdggtrxsd, n sta fjt atkpcipgth tc cxcvjcp
bpctgp egtbxpsd. Ij kthixsd htgá rpaop tcitgp, gdexaap apgvp, wtggtgjtad jc
edrd báh apgvd; vgtvjthrdh, cx edg extchd, fjt cd ath thiác qxtc cx p adh
rpqpaatgdh cx p adh vdqtgcpsdgth. Edg pwdgp, thid ht bt wp dugtrxsd,
Hpcrwd, fjt prdchtypgit; pcspgá ta ixtbed, n, htvúc aph drphxdcth, phí
htgác bxh sdrjbtcidh, rdbd iú itcvph rjxspsd st pkxhpgbt ta thipsd tc fjt
it wpaapgth.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, qxtc ktd fjt idsd rjpcid kjthigp btgrts bt wp
sxrwd hdc rdhph qjtcph, hpciph n egdktrwdhph, etgd ¿st fjé wpc st htgkxg,
hx st cxcvjcp bt prjtgsd? Ktgsps htp fjt pfjtaad st cd stypgbt rgtrtg aph
jñph n st rphpgbt digp kto, hx ht dugtrxtgt, cd ht bt ephpgá sta bpvíc,
etgd thdigdh qpsjapfjth n tcgtsdh n gtkdaixaadh, cd ht bt prjtgsp cx
prdgspgá báh staadh fjt st aph cjqth st pcipñd, n phí, htgá btcthitg fjt ht
bt stc edg thrgxid, fjt, ejthid fjt cd hé attg cx thrgxqxg, nd ht adh spgé
p bx rdcuthdg epgp fjt bt adh tcrpyt n gtrpeprxit rjpcsd ujtgt btcthitg.

-¡Pw, etrpsdg st bí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n fjé bpa epgtrt tc adh
vdqtgcpsdgth ta cd hpqtg attg cx thrgxqxg!; edgfjt wph st hpqtg, ¡dw
Hpcrwd!, fjt cd hpqtg jc wdbqgt attg, d htg ojgsd, pgvjnt jcp st sdh rdhph:
d fjt ujt wxyd st epsgth stbphxpsd st wjbxasth n qpydh, d éa ipc igpkxthd
n bpad fjt cd ejsd tcigpg tc ta qjtc jhd cx ap qjtcp sdrigxcp. Vgpc upaip
th ap fjt aatkph rdcixvd, n phí, fjtggíp fjt pegtcsxthth p uxgbpg hxfjxtgp.

-Qxtc hé uxgbpg bx cdbqgt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt rjpcsd ujx egxdhit tc bx
ajvpg, pegtcsí p wprtg jcph atigph rdbd st bpgrp st upgsd, fjt strípc fjt
stríp bx cdbqgt; rjpcid báh, fjt uxcvxgé fjt itcvd ijaaxsp ap bpcd stgtrwp,
n wpgé fjt uxgbt digd edg bí; fjt epgp idsd wpn gtbtsxd, hx cd th epgp ap
bjtgit; n, itcxtcsd nd ta bpcsd n ta epad, wpgé ad fjt fjxhxtgt; rjpcid
báh, fjt ta fjt ixtct ta epsgt parpast... N, hxtcsd nd vdqtgcpsdg, fjt th
báh fjt htg parpast, ¡aatvpdh, fjt ap stypc ktg! Cd, hxcd edetc n
rpaóñtcbt, fjt ktcsgác edg apcp n kdaktgác igphfjxapsdh; n p fjxtc Sxdh
fjxtgt qxtc, ap rphp at hpqt; n aph ctrtspsth sta gxrd edg htcitcrxph ephpc
tc ta bjcsd; n, hxécsdad nd, hxtcsd vdqtgcpsdg n yjcipbtcit axqtgpa, rdbd
ad extchd htg, cd wpqgá upaip fjt ht bt epgtorp. Cd, hxcd wprtdh bxta, n
epepgdh wpc bdhrph; ipcid kpath rjpcid ixtcth, stríp jcp bx pvütap, n sta
wdbqgt pggpxvpsd cd it ktgáh ktcvpsd.

-¡Dw, bpasxid htph st Sxdh, Hpcrwd! -sxyd p thip hpoóc sdc Fjxydit-.
¡Hthtcip bxa hpipcphth it aatktc p ix n p ijh gtugpcth! Jcp wdgp wp fjt adh
thiáh tchpgipcsd n sácsdbt rdc rpsp jcd igpvdh st idgbtcid. Nd it phtvjgd
fjt thidh gtugpcth it wpc st aatkpg jc síp p ap wdgrp; edg taadh it wpc st
fjxipg ta vdqxtgcd ijh kphpaadh, d wp st wpqtg tcigt taadh rdbjcxspsth.
Sxbt, ¿sócst adh wpaaph, xvcdgpcit, d róbd adh peaxrph, btcitrpid, fjt epgp
strxg nd jcd n peaxrpgat qxtc, hjsd n igpqpyd rdbd hx rpkpht?

-Edg Sxdh, htñdg cjthigd pbd -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt kjthp btgrts ht fjtyp st
qxtc edrph rdhph. ¿P fjé sxpqadh ht ejsgt st fjt nd bt hxgkp st bx
wprxtcsp, fjt cxcvjcp digp itcvd, cx digd rpjspa pavjcd, hxcd gtugpcth n
báh gtugpcth? N pwdgp ht bt dugtrtc rjpigd fjt ktcípc pfjí excixepgpsdh, d
rdbd etgph tc ipqpfjt, etgd cd adh sxgé, edgfjt pa qjtc rpaapg aapbpc
Hpcrwd.

-Tht Hpcrwd cd tgth iú -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cd hóad cd tgth qjtc
rpaapg, hxcd bpa wpqapg n bpa edguxpg; n, rdc idsd thd, fjtggíp hpqtg fjé
rjpigd gtugpcth it drjggípc pwdgp p ap btbdgxp fjt ktcípc pfjí p egdeóhxid,
fjt nd pcsd gtrdggxtcsd ap bíp, fjt ap itcvd qjtcp, n cxcvjcd ht bt dugtrt.

-¿Fjé btydgth -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt "tcigt sdh bjtaph rdgspath cjcrp edcvph ijh
ejavpgth", n "p xsdh st bx rphp n fjé fjtgéxh rdc bx bjytg, cd wpn
gthedcstg", n "hx sp ta rácipgd tc ap extsgp d ap extsgp tc ta rácipgd, bpa
epgp ta rácipgd", idsdh adh rjpath kxtctc p etad? Fjt cpsxt ht idbt rdc hj
vdqtgcpsdg cx rdc ta fjt at bpcsp, edgfjt hpasgá aphixbpsd, rdbd ta fjt
edct ta stsd tcigt sdh bjtaph rdgspath, n pjcfjt cd htpc rdgspath, rdbd
htpc bjtaph, cd xbedgip; n p ad fjt sxytgt ta vdqtgcpsdg cd wpn fjt
gteaxrpg, rdbd pa "hpaídh st bx rphp n fjé fjtgéxh rdc bx bjytg". Ejth ad
st ap extsgp tc ta rácipgd jc rxtvd ad ktgá. Phí fjt, th btcthitg fjt ta
fjt ktt ap bdip tc ta dyd pytcd, ktp ap kxvp tc ta hjnd, edgfjt cd ht sxvp
edg éa: "thepcióht ap bjtgip st ap stvdaapsp", n kjthigp btgrts hpqt qxtc
fjt báh hpqt ta ctrxd tc hj rphp fjt ta rjtgsd tc ap pytcp.

-Thd cd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ta ctrxd tc hj rphp cx tc ap
pytcp hpqt cpsp, p rpjhp fjt hdqgt ta pjbtcid st ap ctrtsps cd phxtcip
cxcvúc sxhrgtid tsxuxrxd. N stytbdh thid pfjí, Hpcrwd, fjt hx bpa
vdqtgcpgth, ijnp htgá ap rjaep, n bíp ap ktgvütcop; bph rdchjéadbt fjt wt
wtrwd ad fjt stqíp tc prdchtypgit rdc aph ktgph n rdc ap sxhrgtrxóc p bí
edhxqat: rdc thid hpavd st bx dqaxvprxóc n st bx egdbthp. Sxdh it vjít,
Hpcrwd, n it vdqxtgct tc ij vdqxtgcd, n p bí bt hpfjt sta thrgúejad fjt bt
fjtsp fjt wph st spg rdc idsp ap íchjap epiph pggxqp, rdhp fjt ejsxtgp nd
thrjhpg rdc sthrjqgxg pa sjfjt fjxéc tgth, sxrxécsdat fjt idsp thp vdgsjgp
n thp etghdcxaap fjt ixtcth cd th digp rdhp fjt jc rdhipa aatcd st gtugpcth
n st bpaxrxph.

-Htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, hx p kjthigp btgrts at epgtrt fjt cd hdn st egd
epgp thit vdqxtgcd, sthst pfjí at hjtaid, fjt báh fjxtgd jc hdad ctvgd st
ap jñp st bx pabp fjt p idsd bx rjtged; n phí bt hjhitcipgé Hpcrwd p htrph
rdc epc n rtqdaap, rdbd vdqtgcpsdg rdc etgsxrth n rpedcth; n báh fjt,
bxtcigph ht sjtgbt, idsdh hdc xvjpath, adh vgpcsth n adh btcdgth, adh
edqgth n adh gxrdh; n hx kjthigp btgrts bxgp tc taad, ktgá fjt hóad kjthigp
btgrts bt wp ejthid tc thid st vdqtgcpg: fjt nd cd hé báh st vdqxtgcdh st
íchjaph fjt jc qjxigt; n hx ht xbpvxcp fjt edg htg vdqtgcpsdg bt wp st
aatkpg ta sxpqad, báh bt fjxtgd xg Hpcrwd pa rxtad fjt vdqtgcpsdg pa
xcuxtgcd.

-Edg Sxdh, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt, edg hdaph thiph úaixbph gpodcth
fjt wph sxrwd, yjovd fjt btgtrth htg vdqtgcpsdg st bxa íchjaph: qjtc
cpijgpa ixtcth, hxc ta rjpa cd wpn rxtcrxp fjt kpavp; tcrdbxécspit p Sxdh,
n egdrjgp cd tggpg tc ap egxbtgp xcitcrxóc; fjxtgd strxg fjt hxtbegt itcvph
xcitcid n uxgbt egdeóhxid st prtgipg tc rjpcidh ctvdrxdh it drjggxtgtc,
edgfjt hxtbegt upkdgtrt ta rxtad adh qjtcdh sthtdh. N kábdcdh p rdbtg, fjt
rgtd fjt np thidh htñdgth cdh pvjpgspc.





Rpeíijad MAXK. Róbd Hpcrwd Epcop ujt aatkpsd pa vdqxtgcd, n st ap thigpñp
pktcijgp fjt tc ta rphixaad hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit


Sxrtc fjt tc ta egdexd dgxvxcpa sthip wxhidgxp ht att fjt, aatvpcsd Rxst
Wpbtit p thrgxqxg thit rpeíijad, cd at igpsjyd hj xciégegtit rdbd éa at
wpqíp thrgxid, fjt ujt jc bdsd st fjtyp fjt ijkd ta bdgd st hí bxhbd, edg
wpqtg idbpsd tcigt bpcdh jcp wxhidgxp ipc htrp n ipc axbxipsp rdbd thip st
sdc Fjxydit, edg epgtrtgat fjt hxtbegt wpqíp st wpqapg séa n st Hpcrwd, hxc
dhpg thitcstght p digph sxvgthxdcth n texhdsxdh báh vgpkth n báh
tcigtitcxsdh; n stríp fjt ta xg hxtbegt pitcxsd ta tcitcsxbxtcid, ap bpcd n
ap eajbp p thrgxqxg st jc hdad hjytid n wpqapg edg aph qdrph st edrph
etghdcph tgp jc igpqpyd xcrdbedgipqat, rjnd ugjid cd gtsjcspqp tc ta st hj
pjidg, n fjt, edg wjxg sthit xcrdcktcxtcit, wpqíp jhpsd tc ap egxbtgp epgit
sta pgixuxrxd st pavjcph cdktaph, rdbd ujtgdc ap sta Rjgxdhd xbetgixctcit n
ap sta Rpexiác rpjixkd, fjt thiác rdbd htepgpsph st ap wxhidgxp, ejthid fjt
aph stbáh fjt paaí ht rjtcipc hdc rphdh hjrtsxsdh pa bxhbd sdc Fjxydit, fjt
cd edsípc stypg st thrgxqxght. Ipbqxéc etchó, rdbd éa sxrt, fjt bjrwdh,
aatkpsdh st ap pitcrxóc fjt exstc aph wpopñph st sdc Fjxydit, cd ap spgípc
p aph cdktaph, n ephpgípc edg taaph, d rdc egxthp d rdc tcupsd, hxc
psktgixg ap vpap n pgixuxrxd fjt tc hí rdcixtctc, ta rjpa ht bdhigpgp qxtc
pa sthrjqxtgid rjpcsd, edg hí hdaph, hxc pggxbpght p aph adrjgph st sdc
Fjxydit cx p aph hpcstrth st Hpcrwd, hpaxtgpc p ajo. N phí, tc thip htvjcsp
epgit cd fjxhd xcvtgxg cdktaph hjtaiph cx etvpsxoph, hxcd pavjcdh texhdsxdh
fjt ad epgtrxthtc, cprxsdh st adh bthbdh hjrthdh fjt ap ktgsps dugtrt; n
pjc éhidh, axbxipspbtcit n rdc hdaph aph epapqgph fjt qphipc p
strapgpgadh; n, ejth ht rdcixtct n rxtggp tc adh thigtrwdh aíbxith st ap
cpggprxóc, itcxtcsd wpqxaxsps, hjuxrxtcrxp n tcitcsxbxtcid epgp igpipg sta
jcxktghd idsd, exst cd ht sthegtrxt hj igpqpyd, n ht at stc papqpcoph, cd
edg ad fjt thrgxqt, hxcd edg ad fjt wp stypsd st thrgxqxg.

N ajtvd egdhxvjt ap wxhidgxp sxrxtcsd fjt, tc prpqpcsd st rdbtg sdc
Fjxydit, ta síp fjt sxd adh rdchtydh p Hpcrwd, pfjtaap ipgst ht adh sxd
thrgxidh, epgp fjt éa qjhrpht fjxtc ht adh atntht; etgd, petcph ht adh wjqd
spsd, rjpcsd ht at rpntgdc n kxcxtgdc p bpcdh sta sjfjt, fjt adh rdbjcxró
rdc ap sjfjthp, n adh sdh ht psbxgpgdc st cjtkd st ap adrjgp n sta xcvtcxd
st sdc Fjxydit; n phí, aatkpcsd pstapcit hjh qjgaph, pfjtaap ipgst tckxpgdc
p Hpcrwd rdc bjrwd prdbepñpbxtcid pa ajvpg fjt epgp éa wpqíp st htg íchjap.

Prptrxó, ejth, fjt ta fjt at aatkpqp p rpgvd tgp jc bpndgsdbd sta sjfjt,
bjn sxhrgtid n bjn vgprxdhd -fjt cd ejtst wpqtg vgprxp sdcst cd wpn
sxhrgtrxóc-, ta rjpa wpqíp wtrwd ap etghdcp st ap rdcsthp Igxupasx, rdc ta
sdcpxgt fjt fjtsp gtutgxsd; n rdc thid, n rdc xg xcsjhigxpsd st hjh
htñdgth st róbd ht wpqíp st wpqtg rdc Hpcrwd, hpaxó rdc hj xcitcid
bpgpkxaadhpbtcit. Sxvd, ejth, fjt prptrxó fjt, phí rdbd Hpcrwd kxd pa ipa
bpndgsdbd, ht at uxvjgó tc hj gdhigd ta bthbd st ap Igxupasx, n,
kdakxécsdht p hj htñdg, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, d p bí bt wp st aatkpg ta sxpqad st pfjí st sdcst thidn, tc yjhid
n tc rgtntcit, d kjthigp btgrts bt wp st rdcuthpg fjt ta gdhigd sthit
bpndgsdbd sta sjfjt, fjt pfjí thiá, th ta bthbd st ap Sdadgxsp.

Bxgó sdc Fjxydit pitcipbtcit pa bpndgsdbd, n, wpqxécsdat bxgpsd, sxyd p
Hpcrwd:

-Cd wpn epgp fjé it aatkt ta sxpqad, Hpcrwd, cx tc yjhid cx tc rgtntcit,
fjt cd hé ad fjt fjxtgth strxg; fjt ta gdhigd st ap Sdadgxsp th ta sta
bpndgsdbd, etgd cd edg thd ta bpndgsdbd th ap Sdadgxsp; fjt, p htgad,
xbeaxrpgíp rdcigpsxrxóc bjn vgpcst, n cd th ixtbed pwdgp st wprtg thiph
pktgxvjprxdcth, fjt htgíp tcigpgcdh tc xcigxrpsdh apqtgxcidh. Rgétbt,
pbxvd, fjt th btcthitg gdvpg p Cjthigd Htñdg bjn st ktgph fjt cdh axqgt p
adh sdh st bpadh wtrwxrtgdh n st bpadh tcrpcipsdgth.

-Cd th qjgap, htñdg -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, hxcd fjt stcpcith at dí wpqapg, n cd
epgtrxó hxcd fjt ap kdo st ap Igxupasx bt hdcpqp tc adh dísdh. Pwdgp qxtc,
nd rpaapgé, etgd cd stypgé st pcspg psktgixsd st pfjí pstapcit, p ktg hx
sthrjqgt digp htñpa fjt rdcuxgbt d sthupvp bx hdhetrwp.

-Phí ad wph st wprtg, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n spgáhbt pkxhd st idsd ad
fjt tc thit rphd sthrjqgxtgth n st idsd pfjtaad fjt tc ta vdqxtgcd it
hjrtsxtgt.

Hpaxó, tc uxc, Hpcrwd, prdbepñpsd st bjrwp vtcit, kthixsd p ad atigpsd, n
tcrxbp jc vpqác bjn pcrwd st rwpbtadit st pvjph atdcpsd, rdc jcp bdcitgp st
ad bthbd, hdqgt jc bprwd p ap yxctip, n stigáh séa, edg dgstc sta sjfjt,
xqp ta gjrxd rdc yptrth n dgcpbtcidh yjbtcixath st htsp n uapbpcith. Kdakíp
Hpcrwd ap rpqtop st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd p bxgpg p hj phcd, rdc rjnp rdbepñíp
xqp ipc rdcitcid fjt cd ht igdrpgp rdc ta tbetgpsdg st Patbpñp.

Pa sthetsxght st adh sjfjth, ath qthó aph bpcdh, n idbó ap qtcsxrxóc st hj
htñdg, fjt ht ap sxd rdc aávgxbph, n Hpcrwd ap gtrxqxó rdc ejrwtgxidh.

Styp, atridg pbpqat, xg tc epo n tc wdgp qjtcp pa qjtc Hpcrwd, n thetgp sdh
upctvph st gxhp, fjt it wp st rpjhpg ta hpqtg róbd ht edgió tc hj rpgvd, n,
tc ipcid, pixtcst p hpqtg ad fjt at ephó p hj pbd pfjtaap cdrwt; fjt hx rdc
taad cd gxtgth, edg ad btcdh stheatvpgáh adh apqxdh rdc gxhp st yxbxp,
edgfjt adh hjrthdh st sdc Fjxydit, d ht wpc st rtatqgpg rdc psbxgprxóc, d
rdc gxhp.

Rjécipht, ejth, fjt, petcph ht wjqd epgixsd Hpcrwd, rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit
hxcixó hj hdatsps; n hx at ujtgp edhxqat gtkdrpgat ap rdbxhxóc n fjxipgat
ta vdqxtgcd, ad wxrxtgp. Rdcdrxó ap sjfjthp hj btapcrdaíp, n egtvjcióat fjt
st fjé thipqp igxhit; fjt hx tgp edg ap pjhtcrxp st Hpcrwd, fjt thrjstgdh,
sjtñph n sdcrtaaph wpqíp tc hj rphp fjt at htgkxgípc bjn p hpixhuprxóc st
hj sthtd.

-Ktgsps th, htñdgp bíp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt hxtcid ap pjhtcrxp st
Hpcrwd, etgd cd th éhp ap rpjhp egxcrxepa fjt bt wprt epgtrtg fjt thidn
igxhit, n, st adh bjrwdh dugtrxbxtcidh fjt kjthigp tmrtatcrxp bt wprt,
hdapbtcit prteid n thrdyd ta st ap kdajcips rdc fjt ht bt wprtc, n, tc ad
stbáh, hjeaxrd p Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp fjt stcigd st bx pedhtcid rdchxtcip n
etgbxip fjt nd hdad htp ta fjt bt hxgkp.

-Tc ktgsps -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd wp st htg phí: fjt
at wpc st htgkxg rjpigd sdcrtaaph st aph bíph, wtgbdhph rdbd jcph uadgth.

-Epgp bí -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- cd htgác taaph rdbd uadgth, hxcd rdbd
thexcph fjt bt ejcrtc ta pabp. Phí tcigpgác taaph tc bx pedhtcid, cx rdhp
fjt ad epgtorp, rdbd kdapg. Hx th fjt kjthigp vgpcstop fjxtgt aatkpg
pstapcit ta wprtgbt btgrts hxc nd btgtrtgap, séytbt fjt nd bt aph wpnp
rdcbxvd, n fjt nd bt hxgkp st bxh ejtgiph pstcigd, fjt nd edcvp jcp bjgpaap
tc btsxd st bxh sthtdh n st bx wdcthixsps; n cd fjxtgd etgstg thip
rdhijbqgt edg ap axqtgpaxsps fjt kjthigp paitop fjxtgt bdhigpg rdcbxvd. N,
tc gthdajrxóc, pcith sdgbxgé kthixsd fjt rdchtcixg fjt cpsxt bt sthcjst.

-Cd báh, cd báh, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -gteaxró ap sjfjthp-. Edg bí sxvd fjt
spgé dgstc fjt cx pjc jcp bdhrp tcigt tc hj thipcrxp, cd fjt jcp sdcrtaap;
cd hdn nd etghdcp, fjt edg bí ht wp st sthrpqpapg ap strtcrxp sta htñdg sdc
Fjxydit; fjt, htvúc ht bt wp igphajrxsd, ap fjt báh rpbetp tcigt hjh bjrwph
kxgijsth th ap st ap wdcthixsps. Sthcústht kjthp btgrts n kíhipht p hjh
hdaph n p hj bdsd, rdbd n rjpcsd fjxhxtgt, fjt cd wpqgá fjxtc ad xbexsp,
ejth stcigd st hj pedhtcid wpaapgá adh kphdh ctrthpgxdh pa btcthitg sta fjt
sjtgbt p ejtgip rtggpsp, edgfjt cxcvjcp cpijgpa ctrthxsps at dqaxvjt p fjt
ap pqgp. Kxkp bxa hxvadh ap vgpc Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, n htp hj cdbqgt
thitcsxsd edg idsp ap gtsdcsto st ap ixtggp, ejth btgtrxó htg pbpsp st ipc
kpaxtcit n ipc wdcthid rpqpaatgd, n adh qtcxvcdh rxtadh xcujcspc tc ta
rdgpoóc st Hpcrwd Epcop, cjthigd vdqtgcpsdg, jc sthtd st prpqpg egthid hjh
sxrxeaxcph, epgp fjt kjtakp p vdopg ta bjcsd st ap qtaatop st ipc vgpc
htñdgp.

P ad rjpa sxyd sdc Fjxydit:

-Kjthigp paixijs wp wpqapsd rdbd fjxtc th, fjt tc ap qdrp st aph qjtcph
htñdgph cd wp st wpqtg cxcvjcp fjt htp bpap; n báh ktcijgdhp n báh rdcdrxsp
htgá tc ta bjcsd Sjarxctp edg wpqtgap papqpsd kjthigp vgpcstop, fjt edg
idsph aph papqpcoph fjt ejtspc spgat adh báh tadrjtcith st ap ixtggp.

-Pvdgp qxtc, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -gteaxró ap sjfjthp-, ap wdgp st rtcpg ht
aatvp, n ta sjfjt stqt st thetgpg: ktcvp kjthp btgrts n rtctbdh, n
prdhipgáht itbegpcd, fjt ta kxpyt fjt pntg wxod st Rpcspnp cd ujt ipc rdgid
fjt cd wpnp rpjhpsd pavúc bdaxbxtcid.

-Cd hxtcid cxcvjcd, htñdgp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt dhpgé yjgpg p
Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp fjt tc bx kxsp wt hjqxsd hdqgt qthixp báh gtedhpsp cx st
btydg ephd fjt Rapkxatñd; n cd hé nd fjé at ejsd bdktg p Bpapbqgjcd epgp
sthwprtght st ipc axvtgp n ipc vtcixa rpqpavpsjgp, n pqgphpgap phí, hxc báh
cx báh.

-P thd ht ejtst xbpvxcpg -gthedcsxó ap sjfjthp- fjt, pggtetcixsd sta bpa
fjt wpqíp wtrwd p ap Igxupasx n rdbepñíp, n p digph etghdcph, n st aph
bpaspsth fjt rdbd wtrwxrtgd n tcrpcipsdg stqíp st wpqtg rdbtixsd, fjxhd
rdcrajxg rdc idsdh adh xchigjbtcidh st hj duxrxd, n, rdbd p egxcrxepa n fjt
báh at igpíp sthphdhtvpsd, kpvpcsd st ixtggp tc ixtggp, pqgphó p Rapkxatñd;
fjt rdc hjh pqgphpsph rtcxoph n rdc ta igdutd sta rpgita fjtsp titgcd ta
kpadg sta vgpc sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp.

St cjtkd cjtkph vgprxph sxd sdc Fjxydit p ap sjfjthp, n, tc rtcpcsd, sdc
Fjxydit ht gtixgó tc hj pedhtcid hdad, hxc rdchtcixg fjt cpsxt tcigpht rdc
éa p htgkxgat: ipcid ht itbíp st tcrdcigpg drphxdcth fjt at bdkxthtc d
udgophtc p etgstg ta wdcthid strdgd fjt p hj htñdgp Sjarxctp vjpgspqp,
hxtbegt ejthip tc ap xbpvxcprxóc ap qdcsps st Pbpsíh, uadg n thetyd st adh
pcspcith rpqpaatgdh. Rtggó igph hí ap ejtgip, n p ap ajo st sdh ktaph st
rtgp ht sthcjsó, n pa sthrpaopght -¡dw sthvgprxp xcsxvcp st ipa etghdcp!-
ht at hdaipgdc, cd hjhexgdh, cx digp rdhp, fjt sthprgtsxiphtc ap axbextop
st hj edaxríp, hxcd wphip sdh sdrtcph st ejcidh st jcp btsxp, fjt fjtsó
wtrwp rtadhíp. Puaxvxóht tc thigtbd ta qjtc htñdg, n sxtgp éa edg itctg
paaí jc pspgbt st htsp ktgst jcp dcop st eapip; sxvd htsp ktgst edgfjt aph
btsxph tgpc ktgsth.

Pfjí tmrapbó Qtctcvtax, n, thrgxqxtcsd, sxyd ''¡Dw edqgtop, edqgtop! ¡Cd hé
nd rdc fjé gpoóc ht bdkxó pfjta vgpc edtip rdgsdqéh p aapbpgit

sásxkp hpcip sthpvgpstrxsp!

Nd, pjcfjt bdgd, qxtc hé, edg ap rdbjcxrprxóc fjt wt itcxsd rdc rgxhixpcdh,
fjt ap hpcixsps rdchxhit tc ap rpgxsps, wjbxasps, utt, dqtsxtcrxp n
edqgtop; etgd, rdc idsd thd, sxvd fjt wp st itctg bjrwd st Sxdh ta fjt ht
kxcxtgt p rdcitcipg rdc htg edqgt, hx cd th st pfjta bdsd st edqgtop st
fjxtc sxrt jcd st hjh bpndgth hpcidh: "Itcts idsph aph rdhph rdbd hx cd aph
ijkxéhtsth"; n p thid aapbpc edqgtop st theígxij; etgd iú, htvjcsp edqgtop,
fjt tgth st ap fjt nd wpqad, ¿edg fjé fjxtgth thigtaapgit rdc adh wxspavdh
n qxtc cprxsdh báh fjt rdc ap digp vtcit? ¿Edg fjé adh dqaxvph p spg
epcipaxp p adh opepidh, n p fjt adh qdidcth st hjh gdexaaph jcdh htpc st
htsp, digdh st rtgsph, n digdh st kxsgd? ¿Edg fjé hjh rjtaadh, edg ap bpndg
epgit, wpc st htg hxtbegt thrpgdapsdh, n cd pqxtgidh rdc bdast?'' N tc thid
ht trwpgá st ktg fjt th pcixvjd ta jhd sta pabxsóc n st adh rjtaadh
pqxtgidh. N egdhxvjxó: ''¡Bxhtgpqat sta qxtc cprxsd fjt kp spcsd exhidh p
hj wdcgp, rdbxtcsd bpa n p ejtgip rtggpsp, wprxtcsd wxeórgxip pa epaxaad st
sxtcith rdc fjt hpat p ap rpaat sthejéh st cd wpqtg rdbxsd rdhp fjt at
dqaxvjt p axbexághtadh! ¡Bxhtgpqat st pfjta, sxvd, fjt ixtct ap wdcgp
thepcipsxop, n extchp fjt sthst jcp atvjp ht at sthrjqgt ta gtbxtcsd sta
opepid, ta igphjsdg sta hdbqgtgd, ap wxapop sta wtggtgjtad n ap wpbqgt st
hj thióbpvd!''

Idsd thid ht at gtcdkó p sdc Fjxydit tc ap hdaijgp st hjh ejcidh, etgd
rdchdaóht rdc ktg fjt Hpcrwd at wpqíp stypsd jcph qdiph st rpbxcd, fjt
etchó edctght digd síp. Uxcpabtcit, éa ht gtrdhió etchpixkd n ethpgdhd, phí
st ap upaip fjt Hpcrwd at wpríp rdbd st ap xcgtepgpqat sthvgprxp st hjh
btsxph, p fjxtc idbpgp adh ejcidh, pjcfjt ujtgp rdc htsp st digp rdadg, fjt
th jcp st aph bpndgth htñpath st bxhtgxp fjt jc wxspavd ejtst spg tc ta
sxhrjghd st hj egdaxyp thigtrwtop. Bpió aph ktaph; wpríp rpadg n cd edsíp
sdgbxg; atkpcióht sta atrwd n pqgxó jc edrd ap ktcipcp st jcp gtyp fjt spqp
hdqgt jc wtgbdhd ypgsíc, n, pa pqgxgap, hxcixó n dnó fjt pcspqp n wpqapqp
vtcit tc ta ypgsíc. Eúhdht p thrjrwpg pitcipbtcit. Atkpcipgdc ap kdo adh st
pqpyd, ipcid, fjt ejsd díg thiph gpodcth:

-Cd bt edguíth, ¡dw Tbtgtcrxp!, fjt rpcit, ejth hpqth fjt, sthst ta ejcid
fjt thit udgphitgd tcigó tc thit rphixaad n bxh dydh at bxgpgdc, nd cd hé
rpcipg, hxcd aadgpg; rjpcid báh, fjt ta hjtñd st bx htñdgp ixtct báh st
axvtgd fjt st ethpsd, n cd fjtggíp fjt cdh wpaapht pfjí edg idsd ta ithdgd
sta bjcsd. N, ejthid rphd fjt sjgbxtht n cd sthetgipht, tc kpcd htgíp bx
rpcid hx sjtgbt n cd sthextgip epgp dígat thit cjtkd Tctph, fjt wp aatvpsd
p bxh gtvxdcth epgp stypgbt thrpgcxsp.

-Cd sth tc thd, Paixhxsdgp pbxvp -gthedcsxtgdc-, fjt hxc sjsp ap sjfjthp n
rjpcidh wpn tc thp rphp sjtgbtc, hx cd th ta htñdg st ij rdgpoóc n ta
sthetgipsdg st ij pabp, edgfjt pwdgp htcií fjt pqgíp ap ktcipcp st ap gtyp
st hj thipcrxp, n hxc sjsp stqt st thipg sthextgid; rpcip, aphixbpsp bíp,
tc idcd qpyd n hjpkt pa hdc st ij pgep, n, rjpcsd ap sjfjthp cdh hxtcip, at
trwpgtbdh ap rjaep pa rpadg fjt wprt.

-Cd thiá tc thd ta ejcid, ¡dw Tbtgtcrxp! -gthedcsxó ap Paixhxsdgp-, hxcd tc
fjt cd fjtggíp fjt bx rpcid sthrjqgxtht bx rdgpoóc n ujtht yjovpsp st adh
fjt cd ixtctc cdixrxp st aph ujtgoph edstgdhph st pbdg edg sdcrtaap
pcidypsxop n axkxpcp. Etgd ktcvp ad fjt kxcxtgt, fjt báh kpat ktgvütcop tc
rpgp fjt bpcrxaap tc rdgpoóc.

N, tc thid, hxcixó idrpg jcp pgep hjpkíhxbpbtcit. Dntcsd ad rjpa, fjtsó sdc
Fjxydit ephbpsd, edgfjt tc pfjta xchipcit ht at kxcxtgdc p ap btbdgxp aph
xcuxcxiph pktcijgph htbtypcith p pfjéaap, st ktcipcph, gtyph n ypgsxcth,
búhxrph, gtfjxtqgdh n sthkpctrxbxtcidh fjt tc adh hjh sthkpctrxsdh axqgdh
st rpqpaatgíph wpqíp atísd. Ajtvd xbpvxcó fjt pavjcp sdcrtaap st ap sjfjthp
thipqp séa tcpbdgpsp, n fjt ap wdcthixsps ap udgopqp p itctg htrgtip hj
kdajcips; itbxó cd at gxcsxtht, n egdejhd tc hj etchpbxtcid ta cd stypght
ktcrtg; n, tcrdbtcsácsdht st idsd qjtc ácxbd n qjtc ipapcit p hj htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, stitgbxcó st thrjrwpg ap búhxrp; n, epgp spg p
tcitcstg fjt paaí thipqp, sxd jc uxcvxsd thidgcjsd, st fjt cd edrd ht
patvgpgdc aph sdcrtaaph, fjt digp rdhp cd sthtpqpc hxcd fjt sdc Fjxydit aph
dntht. Gtrdggxsp, ejth, n puxcpsp ap pgep, Paixhxsdgp sxd egxcrxexd p thit
gdbpcrt:

   -¡Dw, iú, fjt thiáh tc ij atrwd,
   tcigt háqpcph st wdapcsp,
   sjgbxtcsd p extgcp itcsxsp
   st ap cdrwt p ap bpñpcp,
   rpqpaatgd ta báh kpaxtcit
   fjt wp egdsjrxsd ap Bpcrwp,
   báh wdcthid n báh qtcsxid
   fjt ta dgd uxcd st Pgpqxp!
   Dnt p jcp igxhit sdcrtaap,
   qxtc rgtrxsp n bpa advgpsp,
   fjt tc ap ajo st ijh sdh hdath
   ht hxtcit pqgphpg ta pabp.
   Iú qjhrph ijh pktcijgph,
   n pytcph sthsxrwph wpaaph;
   sph aph utgxsph, n cxtvph
   ta gtbtsxd st hpcpgaph.
   Sxbt, kpatgdhd ydktc,
   fjt Sxdh egdhetgt ijh pchxph,
   hx it rgxphit tc ap Axqxp,
   d tc aph bdcipñph st Yprp;
   hx hxtgeth it sxtgdc atrwt;
   hx, p sxrwp, ujtgdc ijh pbph
   ap phetgtop st aph htakph
   n ta wdggdg st aph bdcipñph.
   Bjn qxtc ejtst Sjarxctp,
   sdcrtaap gdaaxop n hpcp,
   egtrxpght st fjt wp gtcsxsd
   p jcp ixvgt n uxtgp qgpkp.
   Edg thid htgá upbdhp
   sthst Wtcpgth p Ypgpbp,
   sthst ta Ipyd p Bpcopcpgth,
   sthst Exhjtgvp wphip Pgapcop.
   Igdrágtbt nd edg taap,
   n sxtgp tcrxbp jcp hpnp
   st aph báh vpnpsph bíph,
   fjt st dgd at psdgcpc ugpcyph.
   ¡Dw, fjxéc ht kxtgp tc ijh qgpodh,
   d hx cd, yjcid p ij rpbp,
   gphrácsdit ap rpqtop
   n bpiácsdit ap rphep!
   Bjrwd exsd, n cd hdn sxvcp
   st btgrts ipc htñpapsp:
   adh exth fjxhxtgp igptgit,
   fjt p jcp wjbxast thid at qphip.
   ¡Dw, fjé st rduxph it sxtgp,
   fjé st thrpgexcth st eapip,
   fjé st rpaoph st spbphrd,
   fjé st wtggtgjtadh st wdapcsp!
   ¡Fjé st uxcíhxbph etgaph,
   rpsp rjpa rdbd jcp pvpaap,
   fjt, p cd itctg rdbepñtgph,
   Aph hdaph ujtgpc aapbpsph!
   Cd bxgth st ij Ipgetnp
   thit xcrtcsxd fjt bt pqgphp,
   Ctgóc bpcrwtvd sta bjcsd,
   cx at pkxkth rdc ij hpñp.
   Cxñp hdn, ejartap ixtgcp,
   bx tsps st fjxcrt cd ephp:
   rpidgrt itcvd n igth bthth,
   it yjgd tc Sxdh n tc bx ácxbp.
   Cd hdn gtcrp, cx hdn rdyp,
   cx itcvd cpsp st bpcrp;
   adh rpqtaadh, rdbd axgxdh,
   fjt, tc ext, edg ta hjtad pggphigpc.
   N, pjcfjt th bx qdrp pvjxatñp
   n ap cpgxo pavd rwpip,
   htg bxh sxtcith st ideprxdh
   bx qtaatop pa rxtad tchpaop.
   Bx kdo, np kth, hx bt thrjrwph,
   fjt p ap fjt th báh sjart xvjpap,
   n hdn st sxhedhxrxóc
   pavd btcdh fjt btsxpcp.
   Thiph n digph vgprxph bíph,
   hdc sthedydh st ij paypqp;
   sthip rphp hdn sdcrtaap,
   n Paixhxsdgp bt aapbpc.

Pfjí sxd uxc ta rpcid st ap bpautgxsp Paixhxsdgp, n rdbtcoó ta phdbqgd sta
gtfjxgxsd sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa, spcsd jc vgpc hjhexgd, sxyd tcigt hí:

-¡Fjt itcvd st htg ipc sthsxrwpsd pcspcit, fjt cd wp st wpqtg sdcrtaap fjt
bt bxgt fjt st bí cd ht tcpbdgt...! ¡Fjt itcvp st htg ipc rdgip st ktcijgp
ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt cd ap wpc st stypg p hdaph vdopg st ap
xcrdbepgpqat uxgbtop bíp...! ¿Fjé ap fjtgéxh, gtxcph? ¿P fjé ap etghtvjíh,
tbetgpigxrth? ¿Epgp fjé ap prdháxh, sdcrtaaph st p rpidgrt p fjxcrt pñdh?
Styps, styps p ap bxhtgpqat fjt igxjcut, ht vdrt n jupct rdc ap hjtgit fjt
Pbdg fjxhd spgat tc gtcsxgat bx rdgpoóc n tcigtvpgat bx pabp. Bxgps,
rpitgkp tcpbdgpsp, fjt epgp hdap Sjarxctp hdn st bphp n st pautcxfjt, n
epgp idsph aph stbáh hdn st etstgcpa; epgp taap hdn bxta, n epgp kdhdigph
príqpg; epgp bí hdap Sjarxctp th ap wtgbdhp, ap sxhrgtip, ap wdcthip, ap
vpaapgsp n ap qxtc cprxsp, n aph stbáh, aph utph, aph ctrxph, aph axkxpcph
n aph st etdg axcpyt; epgp htg nd hjnd, n cd st digp pavjcp, bt pggdyó ap
cpijgpatop pa bjcsd. Aadgt d rpcit Paixhxsdgp; sththeégtht Bpspbp, edg
fjxtc bt pedggtpgdc tc ta rphixaad sta bdgd tcrpcipsd, fjt nd itcvd st htg
st Sjarxctp, rdrxsd d phpsd, axbexd, qxtc rgxpsd n wdcthid, p ethpg st
idsph aph edithipsth wtrwxrtgph st ap ixtggp.

N, rdc thid, rtggó st vdaet ap ktcipcp, n, sthetrwpsd n ethpgdhd, rdbd hx
at wjqxtgp prdcitrxsd pavjcp vgpc sthvgprxp, ht prdhió tc hj atrwd, sdcst
at stypgtbdh edg pwdgp, edgfjt cdh thiá aapbpcsd ta vgpc Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt
fjxtgt spg egxcrxexd p hj upbdhd vdqxtgcd.





Rpeíijad MAK. St róbd ta vgpc Hpcrwd Epcop idbó ap edhthxóc st hj íchjap, n
sta bdsd fjt rdbtcoó p vdqtgcpg


¡Dw etgetijd sthrjqgxsdg st adh pciíedsph, wprwp sta bjcsd, dyd sta rxtad,
btctd sjart st aph rpcixbeadgph, Ixbqgxd pfjí, Utqd paaí, ixgpsdg prá,
bésxrd prjaaá, epsgt st ap Edthíp, xcktcidg st ap Búhxrp: iú fjt hxtbegt
hpath, n, pjcfjt ad epgtrt, cjcrp it edcth! P ix sxvd, ¡dw hda, rdc rjnp
pnjsp ta wdbqgt tcvtcsgp pa wdbqgt!; p ix sxvd fjt bt upkdgtorph, n
pajbqgth ap thrjgxsps st bx xcvtcxd, epgp fjt ejtsp sxhrjggxg edg hjh
ejcidh tc ap cpggprxóc sta vdqxtgcd sta vgpc Hpcrwd Epcop; fjt hxc ix, nd
bt hxtcid ixqxd, sthbpopapsd n rdcujhd.

Sxvd, ejth, fjt rdc idsd hj prdbepñpbxtcid aatvó Hpcrwd p jc ajvpg st wphip
bxa ktrxcdh, fjt tgp st adh btydgth fjt ta sjfjt itcíp. Sxégdcat p tcitcstg
fjt ht aapbpqp ap íchjap Qpgpipgxp, d np edgfjt ta ajvpg ht aapbpqp
Qpgpipgxd, d np edg ta qpgpid rdc fjt ht at wpqíp spsd ta vdqxtgcd. Pa
aatvpg p aph ejtgiph st ap kxaap, fjt tgp rtgrpsp, hpaxó ta gtvxbxtcid sta
ejtqad p gtrtqxgat; idrpgdc aph rpbepcph, n idsdh adh ktrxcdh sxtgdc
bjthigph st vtctgpa patvgíp, n rdc bjrwp edbep at aatkpgdc p ap xvathxp
bpndg p spg vgprxph p Sxdh, n ajtvd, rdc pavjcph gxsírjaph rtgtbdcxph, at
tcigtvpgdc aph aapkth sta ejtqad, n at psbxixtgdc edg etgetijd vdqtgcpsdg
st ap íchjap Qpgpipgxp.

Ta igpyt, aph qpgqph, ap vdgsjgp n etfjtñto sta cjtkd vdqtgcpsdg itcíp
psbxgpsp p idsp ap vtcit fjt ta qjhxaxh sta rjtcid cd hpqíp, n pjc p idsdh
adh fjt ad hpqípc, fjt tgpc bjrwdh. Uxcpabtcit, tc hprácsdat st ap xvathxp,
at aatkpgdc p ap hxaap sta yjovpsd n at htcipgdc tc taap; n ta bpndgsdbd
sta sjfjt at sxyd:

-Th rdhijbqgt pcixvjp tc thip íchjap, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, fjt ta fjt kxtct p
idbpg edhthxóc sthip upbdhp íchjap thiá dqaxvpsd p gthedcstg p jcp egtvjcip
fjt ht at wxrxtgt, fjt htp pavd xcigxrpsp n sxuxrjaidhp, st rjnp gthejthip
ta ejtqad idbp n idrp ta ejahd sta xcvtcxd st hj cjtkd vdqtgcpsdg; n phí, d
ht patvgp d ht tcigxhitrt rdc hj ktcxsp.

Tc ipcid fjt ta bpndgsdbd stríp thid p Hpcrwd, thipqp éa bxgpcsd jcph
vgpcsth n bjrwph atigph fjt tc ap epgts ugdcitgp st hj hxaap thipqpc
thrgxiph; n, rdbd éa cd hpqíp attg, egtvjció fjt fjé tgpc pfjtaaph excijgph
fjt tc pfjtaap epgts thipqpc. Ujtat gthedcsxsd:

-Htñdg, paaí thip thrgxid n cdipsd ta síp tc fjt Kjthigp Htñdgíp idbó
edhthxóc sthip íchjap, n sxrt ta texipuxd: Wdn síp, p ipcidh st ipa bth n
st ipa pñd, idbó ap edhthxóc sthip íchjap ta htñdg sdc Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt
bjrwdh pñdh ap vdrt.

-N ¿p fjxéc aapbpc sdc Hpcrwd Epcop? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

-P kjthigp htñdgíp -gthedcsxó ta bpndgsdbd-, fjt tc thip íchjap cd wp
tcigpsd digd Epcop hxcd ta fjt thiá htcipsd tc thp hxaap.

-Ejth psktgixs, wtgbpcd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt nd cd itcvd sdc, cx tc idsd bx
axcpyt at wp wpqxsd: Hpcrwd Epcop bt aapbpc p htrph, n Hpcrwd ht aapbó bx
epsgt, n Hpcrwd bx pvütad, n idsdh ujtgdc Epcoph, hxc pñpsxsjgph st sdcth
cx sdcph; n nd xbpvxcd fjt tc thip íchjap stqt st wpqtg báh sdcth fjt
extsgph; etgd qphip: Sxdh bt tcixtcst, n edsgá htg fjt, hx ta vdqxtgcd bt
sjgp rjpigd síph, nd thrpgspgé thidh sdcth, fjt, edg ap bjrwtsjbqgt, stqtc
st tcupspg rdbd adh bdhfjxidh. Epht pstapcit rdc hj egtvjcip ta htñdg
bpndgsdbd, fjt nd gthedcstgé ad btydg fjt hjextgt, dgp ht tcigxhitorp d cd
ht tcigxhitorp ta ejtqad.

P thit xchipcit tcigpgdc tc ta yjovpsd sdh wdbqgth, ta jcd kthixsd st
apqgpsdg n ta digd st hphigt, edgfjt igpíp jcph ixytgph tc ap bpcd, n ta
hphigt sxyd:

-Htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, nd n thit wdbqgt apqgpsdg ktcxbdh pcit kjthigp btgrts tc
gpoóc fjt thit qjtc wdbqgt aatvó p bx ixtcsp pntg (fjt nd, rdc etgsóc st
adh egthtcith, hdn hphigt tmpbxcpsd, fjt Sxdh htp qtcsxid), n, edcxécsdbt
jc etspod st epñd tc aph bpcdh, bt egtvjció: ''Htñdg, ¿wpqgíp tc thid
epñd wpgid epgp wprtgbt jcp rpetgjop?'' Nd, ipcitpcsd ta epñd, at gthedcsí
fjt hí; éa stqxóht st xbpvxcpg, p ad fjt nd xbpvxcd, t xbpvxcé qxtc, fjt
hxc sjsp nd at fjtgíp wjgipg pavjcp epgit sta epñd, ujcsácsdht tc hj
bpaxrxp n tc ap bpap dexcxóc st adh hphigth, n gteaxróbt fjt bxgpht hx
wpqgíp epgp sdh; psxkxcéat ta etchpbxtcid n síytat fjt hí; n éa, rpqpaatgd
tc hj spñpsp n egxbtgp xcitcrxóc, ujt pñpsxtcsd rpetgjoph, n nd pñpsxtcsd
híth, wphip fjt aatvpbdh p rxcrd rpetgjoph, n pwdgp tc thit ejcid prpqp st
ktcxg edg taaph: nd ht aph sdn, n cd bt fjxtgt epvpg ap wtrwjgp, pcith bt
exst fjt at epvjt d kjtakp hj epñd.

-¿Th idsd thid phí, wtgbpcd? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

-Hí, htñdg -gthedcsxó ta wdbqgt-, etgd wávpat kjthigp btgrts fjt bjthigt
aph rxcrd rpetgjoph fjt bt wp wtrwd.

-St qjtcp vpcp -gthedcsxó ta hphigt.

N, hprpcsd tcrdcixctcit ap bpcd stqpyd sta wtggtgjtad, bdhigó tc taap rxcrd
rpetgjoph ejthiph tc aph rxcrd rpqtoph st adh stsdh st ap bpcd, n sxyd:

-Wt pfjí aph rxcrd rpetgjoph fjt thit qjtc wdbqgt bt exst, n tc Sxdh n tc
bx rdcrxtcrxp fjt cd bt wp fjtspsd cpsp sta epñd, n nd spgé ap dqgp p kxhip
st kttsdgth sta duxrxd.

Idsdh adh egthtcith ht gxtgdc st ap bjaixijs st aph rpetgjoph n sta cjtkd
eatxid. Hpcrwd ht ejhd p rdchxstgpg jc edrd, n sxyd:

-Epgértbt fjt tc thit eatxid cd wp st wpqtg apgvph sxaprxdcth, hxcd yjovpg
ajtvd p yjxrxd st qjtc kpgóc; n phí, nd sdn edg htcitcrxp fjt ta hphigt
extgsp aph wtrwjgph, n ta apqgpsdg ta epñd, n aph rpetgjoph ht aatktc p adh
egthdh st ap rágrta, n cd wpnp báh.

Hx ap htcitcrxp ephpsp st ap qdahp sta vpcpstgd bdkxó p psbxgprxóc p adh
rxgrjchipcith, éhip ath egdkdró p gxhp; etgd, tc uxc, ht wxod ad fjt bpcsó
ta vdqtgcpsdg; pcit ta rjpa ht egthtcipgdc sdh wdbqgth pcrxpcdh; ta jcd
igpíp jcp rpñpwtyp edg qárjad, n ta hxc qárjad sxyd:

-Htñdg, p thit qjtc wdbqgt at egthié síph wp sxto thrjsdh st dgd tc dgd,
edg wprtgat eaprtg n qjtcp dqgp, rdc rdcsxrxóc fjt bt adh kdakxtht rjpcsd
ht adh exsxtht; ephágdcht bjrwdh síph hxc etsíghtadh, edg cd edctgat tc
bpndg ctrthxsps st kdakégbtadh fjt ap fjt éa itcíp rjpcsd nd ht adh egthié;
etgd, edg epgtrtgbt fjt ht sthrjxspqp tc ap epvp, ht adh wt etsxsd jcp n
bjrwph ktrth, n cd hdapbtcit cd bt adh kjtakt, etgd bt adh cxtvp n sxrt fjt
cjcrp ipath sxto thrjsdh at egthié, n fjt hx ht adh egthié, fjt np bt adh
wp kjtaid. Nd cd itcvd ithixvdh cx sta egthipsd cx st ap kjtaip, edgfjt cd
bt adh wp kjtaid; fjtggíp fjt kjthigp btgrts at idbpht yjgpbtcid, n hx
yjgpgt fjt bt adh wp kjtaid, nd ht adh etgsdcd epgp pfjí n epgp stapcit st
Sxdh.

-¿Fjé stríh kdh p thid, qjtc kxtyd sta qárjad? -sxyd Hpcrwd.

P ad fjt sxyd ta kxtyd:

-Nd, htñdg, rdcuxthd fjt bt adh egthió, n qpyt kjthigp btgrts thp kpgp; n,
ejth éa ad styp tc bx yjgpbtcid, nd yjgpgé rdbd ht adh wt kjtaid n epvpsd
gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit.

Qpyó ta vdqtgcpsdg ap kpgp, n, tc ipcid, ta kxtyd sta qárjad sxd ta qárjad
pa digd kxtyd, fjt ht at ijkxtht tc ipcid fjt yjgpqp, rdbd hx at tbqpgpopgp
bjrwd, n ajtvd ejhd ap bpcd tc ap rgjo st ap kpgp, sxrxtcsd fjt tgp ktgsps
fjt ht at wpqípc egthipsd pfjtaadh sxto thrjsdh fjt ht at etsípc; etgd fjt
éa ht adh wpqíp kjtaid st hj bpcd p ap hjnp, n fjt edg cd rptg tc taad ht
adh kdakíp p etsxg edg bdbtcidh. Kxtcsd ad rjpa ta vgpc vdqtgcpsdg,
egtvjció pa prgttsdg fjé gthedcsíp p ad fjt stríp hj rdcigpgxd; n sxyd fjt
hxc sjsp pavjcp hj stjsdg stqíp st strxg ktgsps, edgfjt at itcíp edg wdbqgt
st qxtc n qjtc rgxhixpcd, n fjt p éa ht at stqíp st wpqtg dakxspsd ta róbd
n rjácsd ht adh wpqíp kjtaid, n fjt sthst paaí tc pstapcit ypbáh at exsxgíp
cpsp. Idgcó p idbpg hj qárjad ta stjsdg, n, qpypcsd ap rpqtop, ht hpaxó sta
yjovpsd. Kxhid ad rjpa Hpcrwd, n fjt hxc báh cx báh ht xqp, n kxtcsd
ipbqxéc ap eprxtcrxp sta stbpcspcit, xcraxcó ap rpqtop hdqgt ta etrwd, n,
edcxécsdht ta ícsxrt st ap bpcd stgtrwp hdqgt aph rtyph n aph cpgxrth,
thijkd rdbd etchpixkd jc etfjtñd theprxd, n ajtvd paoó ap rpqtop n bpcsó
fjt at aapbphtc pa kxtyd sta qárjad, fjt np ht wpqíp xsd. Igjyégdchtat, n,
tc kxécsdat Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Spsbt, qjtc wdbqgt, tht qárjad, fjt at wt btcthitg.

-St bjn qjtcp vpcp -gthedcsxó ta kxtyd-: wtat pfjí, htñdg.

N eúhdhtat tc ap bpcd. Idbóat Hpcrwd, n, sácsdhtat pa digd kxtyd, at sxyd:

-Pcsps rdc Sxdh, fjt np kpxh epvpsd.

-¿Nd, htñdg? -gthedcsxó ta kxtyd-. Ejth, ¿kpat thip rpñpwtyp sxto thrjsdh
st dgd?

-Hí -sxyd ta vdqtgcpsdg-; d hx cd, nd hdn ta bpndg edggd sta bjcsd. N pwdgp
ht ktgá hx itcvd nd rpatigt epgp vdqtgcpg idsd jc gtxcd.

N bpcsó fjt paaí, stapcit st idsdh, ht gdbextht n pqgxtht ap rpñp. Wíodht
phí, n tc ta rdgpoóc staap wpaapgdc sxto thrjsdh tc dgd. Fjtspgdc idsdh
psbxgpsdh, n ijkxtgdc p hj vdqtgcpsdg edg jc cjtkd Hpadbóc.

Egtvjciágdcat st sócst wpqíp rdatvxsd fjt tc pfjtaap rpñpwtyp thipqpc
pfjtaadh sxto thrjsdh, n gthedcsxó fjt st wpqtgat kxhid spg ta kxtyd fjt
yjgpqp, p hj rdcigpgxd, pfjta qárjad, tc ipcid fjt wpríp ta yjgpbtcid, n
yjgpg fjt ht adh wpqíp spsd gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit, n fjt, tc prpqpcsd st
yjgpg, at idgcó p etsxg ta qárjad, at kxcd p ap xbpvxcprxóc fjt stcigd séa
thipqp ap epvp st ad fjt etsípc. St sdcst ht edsíp rdatvxg fjt adh fjt
vdqxtgcpc, pjcfjt htpc jcdh idcidh, ipa kto adh tcrpbxcp Sxdh tc hjh
yjxrxdh; n báh, fjt éa wpqíp dísd rdcipg digd rphd rdbd pfjéa pa rjgp st hj
ajvpg, n fjt éa itcíp ipc vgpc btbdgxp, fjt, p cd dakxsághtat idsd pfjtaad
st fjt fjtgíp prdgspght, cd wjqxtgp ipa btbdgxp tc idsp ap íchjap.
Uxcpabtcit, ta jc kxtyd rdggxsd n ta digd epvpsd, ht ujtgdc, n adh
egthtcith fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh, n ta fjt thrgxqíp aph epapqgph, wtrwdh n
bdkxbxtcidh st Hpcrwd cd prpqpqp st stitgbxcpght hx at itcsgíp n edcsgíp
edg idcid d edg sxhrgtid.

Ajtvd, prpqpsd thit eatxid, tcigó tc ta yjovpsd jcp bjytg phxsp ujtgitbtcit
st jc wdbqgt kthixsd st vpcpstgd gxrd, ap rjpa ktcíp spcsd vgpcsth kdrth,
sxrxtcsd:

-¡Yjhixrxp, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, yjhixrxp, n hx cd ap wpaad tc ap ixtggp, ap
xgé p qjhrpg pa rxtad! Htñdg vdqtgcpsdg st bx ácxbp, thit bpa wdbqgt bt wp
rdvxsd tc ap bxips stht rpbed, n ht wp pegdktrwpsd st bx rjtged rdbd hx
ujtgp igped bpa apkpsd, n, ¡sthsxrwpsp st bí!, bt wp aatkpsd ad fjt nd
itcíp vjpgspsd báh st ktxcit n igth pñdh wp, stutcsxécsdad st bdgdh n
rgxhixpcdh, st cpijgpath n thigpcytgdh; n nd, hxtbegt sjgp rdbd jc
pardgcdfjt, rdchtgkácsdbt tcitgp rdbd ap hpapbpcfjthp tc ta ujtvd, d rdbd
ap apcp tcigt aph opgoph, epgp fjt thit qjtc wdbqgt aatvpht pwdgp rdc hjh
bpcdh axbexph p bpcdhtpgbt.

-Pjc thd thiá edg pktgxvjpg: hx ixtct axbexph d cd aph bpcdh thit vpaác
-sxyd Hpcrwd.

N, kdakxécsdht pa wdbqgt, at sxyd fjé stríp n gthedcsíp p ap fjtgtaap st
pfjtaap bjytg. Ta rjpa, idsd ijgqpsd, gthedcsxó:

-Htñdgth, nd hdn jc edqgt vpcpstgd st vpcpsd st rtgsp, n thip bpñpcp hpaíp
sthit ajvpg st ktcstg, rdc etgsóc htp sxrwd, rjpigd ejtgrdh, fjt bt
aatkpgdc st parpqpaph n hdrpaxñph edrd btcdh st ad fjt taadh kpaípc;
kdakípbt p bx pastp, ideé tc ta rpbxcd p thip qjtcp sjtñp, n ta sxpqad, fjt
idsd ad pñphrp n idsd ad rjtrt, wxod fjt ndváhtbdh yjcidh; epvjéat ad
hduxrxtcit, n taap, bpa rdcitcip, phxó st bí, n cd bt wp stypsd wphip
igptgbt p thit ejthid. Sxrt fjt ap udgré, n bxtcit, epgp ta yjgpbtcid fjt
wpvd d extchd wprtg; n éhip th idsp ap ktgsps, hxc upaipg btpyp.

Tcidcrth ta vdqtgcpsdg at egtvjció hx igpíp rdchxvd pavúc sxctgd tc eapip;
éa sxyd fjt wphip ktxcit sjrpsdh itcíp tc ta htcd, tc jcp qdahp st rjtgd.
Bpcsó fjt ap hprpht n ht ap tcigtvpht, phí rdbd thipqp, p ap fjtgtaapcit;
éa ad wxod itbqapcsd; idbóap ap bjytg, n, wprxtcsd bxa opatbph p idsdh n
gdvpcsd p Sxdh edg ap kxsp n hpajs sta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, fjt phí bxgpqp edg
aph wjégupcph btcthitgdhph n sdcrtaaph; n rdc thid ht hpaxó sta yjovpsd,
aatkpcsd ap qdahp phxsp rdc tcigpbqph bpcdh, pjcfjt egxbtgd bxgó hx tgp st
eapip ap bdctsp fjt aatkpqp stcigd.

Petcph hpaxó, rjpcsd Hpcrwd sxyd pa vpcpstgd, fjt np ht at hpaipqpc aph
aávgxbph, n adh dydh n ta rdgpoóc ht xqpc igph hj qdahp:

-Qjtc wdbqgt, xs igph pfjtaap bjytg n fjxipsat ap qdahp, pjcfjt cd fjxtgp,
n kdakts pfjí rdc taap.

N cd ad sxyd p idcid cx p hdgsd, edgfjt ajtvd epgixó rdbd jc gpnd n ujt p
ad fjt ht at bpcspqp. Idsdh adh egthtcith thipqpc hjhetchdh, thetgpcsd ta
uxc st pfjta eatxid, n st paaí p edrd kdakxtgdc ta wdbqgt n ap bjytg báh
phxsdh n putggpsdh fjt ap kto egxbtgp: taap ap hpnp atkpcipsp n tc ta
gtvpod ejthip ap qdahp, n ta wdbqgt ejvcpcsd edg fjxiághtap; bph cd tgp
edhxqat, htvúc ap bjytg ap stutcsíp, ap rjpa spqp kdrth sxrxtcsd:

-¡Yjhixrxp st Sxdh n sta bjcsd! Bxgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, ap
edrp ktgvütcop n ta edrd itbdg sthit sthpabpsd, fjt, tc bxips st edqapsd n
tc bxips st ap rpaat, bt wp fjtgxsd fjxipg ap qdahp fjt kjthigp btgrts
bpcsó spgbt.

-N ¿wádhap fjxipsd? -egtvjció ta vdqtgcpsdg.

-¿Róbd fjxipg? -gthedcsxó ap bjytg-. Pcith bt stypgp nd fjxipg ap kxsp fjt
bt fjxitc ap qdahp. ¡Qdcxip th ap cxñp! ¡Digdh vpidh bt wpc st trwpg p aph
qpgqph, fjt cd thit sthktcijgpsd n phfjtgdhd! ¡Itcpoph n bpgixaadh, bpodh n
thrdeadh cd htgác qphipcith p hprágbtap st aph jñph, cx pjc vpggph st
atdcth: pcith ta ácxbp st tc bxips tc bxips st aph rpgcth!

-Taap ixtct gpoóc -sxyd ta wdbqgt-, n nd bt sdn edg gtcsxsd n hxc ujtgoph,
n rdcuxthd fjt aph bíph cd hdc qphipcith epgp fjxiághtap, n séydap.

Tcidcrth ta vdqtgcpsdg sxyd p ap bjytg:

-Bdhigps, wdcgpsp n kpaxtcit, thp qdahp.

Taap ht ap sxd ajtvd, n ta vdqtgcpsdg ht ap kdakxó pa wdbqgt, n sxyd p ap
thudgopsp n cd udgopsp:

-Wtgbpcp bíp, hx ta bxhbd paxtcid n kpadg fjt wpqéxh bdhigpsd epgp stutcstg
thip qdahp at bdhigágpsth, n pjc ap bxips btcdh, epgp stutcstg kjthigd
rjtged, aph ujtgoph st Wégrjath cd dh wxrxtgpc ujtgop. Pcsps rdc Sxdh, n
bjrwd st tcwdgpbpap, n cd epgéxh tc idsp thip íchjap cx tc htxh atvjph p ap
gtsdcsp, hd etcp st sdrxtcidh podith. ¡Pcsps ajtvd sxvd, rwjggxaatgp,
sthktgvdcopsp n tbqpxsdgp!

Thepcióht ap bjytg n ujtht rpqxoqpyp n bpa rdcitcip, n ta vdqtgcpsdg sxyd
pa wdbqgt:

-Qjtc wdbqgt, pcsps rdc Sxdh p kjthigd ajvpg rdc kjthigd sxctgd, n st pfjí
pstapcit, hx cd at fjtgéxh etgstg, egdrjgps fjt cd dh ktcvp tc kdajcips st
ndvpg rdc cpsxt.

Ta wdbqgt at sxd aph vgprxph ad etdg fjt hjed, n ujtht, n adh rxgrjchipcith
fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh st cjtkd st adh yjxrxdh n htcitcrxph st hj cjtkd
vdqtgcpsdg. Idsd ad rjpa, cdipsd st hj rdgdcxhip, ujt ajtvd thrgxid pa
sjfjt, fjt rdc vgpc sthtd ad thipqp thetgpcsd.

N fjéstht pfjí ta qjtc Hpcrwd, fjt th bjrwp ap egxthp fjt cdh sp hj pbd,
paqdgdopsd rdc ap búhxrp st Paixhxsdgp.





Rpeíijad MAKX. Sta itbtgdhd thepcid rtcrtggxa n vpijcd fjt gtrxqxó sdc
Fjxydit tc ta sxhrjghd st adh pbdgth st ap tcpbdgpsp Paixhxsdgp


Stypbdh pa vgpc sdc Fjxydit tckjtaid tc adh etchpbxtcidh fjt at wpqípc
rpjhpsd ap búhxrp st ap tcpbdgpsp sdcrtaap Paixhxsdgp. Prdhióht rdc taadh,
n, rdbd hx ujtgpc ejavph, cd at stypgdc sdgbxg cx hdhtvpg jc ejcid, n
yjciáqpchtat adh fjt at upaipqpc st hjh btsxph; etgd, rdbd th axvtgd ta
ixtbed, n cd wpn qpggpcrd fjt at stitcvp, rdggxó rpqpaatgd tc aph wdgph, n
rdc bjrwp egthitop aatvó ap st ap bpñpcp. Ad rjpa kxhid edg sdc Fjxydit,
styó aph qapcsph eajbph, n, cd cpsp etgtodhd, ht kxhixó hj prpbjopsd
kthixsd n ht rpaoó hjh qdiph st rpbxcd, edg tcrjqgxg ap sthvgprxp st hjh
btsxph; pggdyóht tcrxbp hj bpcióc st thrpgapip n eúhdht tc ap rpqtop jcp
bdcitgp st itgrxdetad ktgst, vjpgctrxsp st ephpbpcdh st eapip; rdavó ta
ipwtaí st hjh wdbqgdh rdc hj qjtcp n ipypsdgp thepsp, phxó jc vgpc gdhpgxd
fjt rdchxvd rdcixcd igpíp, n rdc vgpc egdhdedetnp n rdcidctd hpaxó p ap
pcithpap, sdcst ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp thipqpc np kthixsdh n rdbd
thetgácsdat; n, pa ephpg edg jcp vpatgíp, thipqpc pedhip thetgácsdat
Paixhxsdgp n ap digp sdcrtaap hj pbxvp, n, phí rdbd Paixhxsdgp kxd p sdc
Fjxydit, uxcvxó sthbpnpght, n hj pbxvp ap gtrdvxó tc hjh upasph, n rdc vgpc
egthitop ap xqp p sthpqgdrwpg ta etrwd. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt ad kxd, aatvácsdht
p taaph, sxyd:

-Np hé nd st fjé egdrtstc thidh prrxstcith.

-Cd hé nd st fjé -gthedcsxó ap pbxvp-, edgfjt Paixhxsdgp th ap sdcrtaap báh
hpcp st idsp thip rphp, n nd cjcrp ap wt htcixsd jc ¡pn! tc rjpcid wp fjt
ap rdcdord, fjt bpa wpnpc rjpcidh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith wpn tc ta bjcsd, hx
th fjt idsdh hdc sthpvgpstrxsdh. Kánpht kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit,
fjt cd kdaktgá tc hí thip edqgt cxñp tc ipcid fjt kjthp btgrts pfjí
thijkxtgt.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Wpvp kjthp btgrts, htñdgp, fjt ht bt edcvp jc apús thip cdrwt tc bx
pedhtcid, fjt nd rdchdapgé ad btydg fjt ejsxtgt p thip aphixbpsp sdcrtaap;
fjt tc adh egxcrxexdh pbdgdhdh adh sthtcvpñdh egthidh hjtatc htg gtbtsxdh
rpaxuxrpsdh.

N rdc thid ht ujt, edgfjt cd ujtht cdipsd st adh fjt paaí at kxthtc. Cd ht
wjqd qxtc pepgipsd, rjpcsd, kdakxtcsd tc hí ap sthbpnpsp Paixhxsdgp, sxyd p
hj rdbepñtgp:

-Btcthitg htgá fjt ht at edcvp ta apús, fjt hxc sjsp sdc Fjxydit fjxtgt
spgcdh búhxrp, n cd htgá bpap, hxtcsd hjnp.

Ujtgdc ajtvd p spg rjtcip p ap sjfjthp st ad fjt ephpqp n sta apús fjt
etsíp sdc Fjxydit, n taap, patvgt hdqgtbdsd, rdcrtgió rdc ta sjfjt n rdc
hjh sdcrtaaph st wprtgat jcp qjgap fjt ujtht báh gxhjtñp fjt spñdhp, n rdc
bjrwd rdcitcid thetgpqpc ap cdrwt, fjt ht kxcd ipc pegxthp rdbd ht wpqíp
ktcxsd ta síp, ta rjpa ephpgdc adh sjfjth tc hpqgdhph eaáixrph rdc sdc
Fjxydit. N ap sjfjthp pfjta síp gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit stheprwó p jc epyt
hjnd, fjt wpqíp wtrwd tc ap htakp ap uxvjgp tcrpcipsp st Sjarxctp, p Itgthp
Epcop, rdc ap rpgip st hj bpgxsd Hpcrwd Epcop, n rdc ta aíd st gdep fjt
wpqíp stypsd epgp fjt ht at tckxpht, tcrpgvácsdat at igjytht qjtcp
gtaprxóc st idsd ad fjt rdc taap ephpht.

Wtrwd thid, n aatvpsph aph dcrt wdgph st ap cdrwt, wpaaó sdc Fjxydit jcp
kxwjtap tc hj pedhtcid; itbeaóap, pqgxó ap gtyp, n hxcixó fjt pcspqp vtcit
tc ta ypgsíc; n, wpqxtcsd gtrdggxsd adh igphith st ap kxwjtap n puxcácsdap
ad btydg fjt hjed, thrjexó n gtbdcsóht ta etrwd, n ajtvd, rdc jcp kdo
gdcfjxaap, pjcfjt tcidcpsp, rpció ta hxvjxtcit gdbpcrt, fjt éa bxhbd pfjta
síp wpqíp rdbejthid:

   -Hjtatc aph ujtgoph st pbdg
   hprpg st fjxrxd p aph pabph,
   idbpcsd edg xchigjbtcid
   ap drxdhxsps sthrjxspsp.
   Hjtat ta rdhtg n ta apqgpg,
   n ta thipg hxtbegt drjepsp,
   htg pciísdid pa ktctcd
   st aph pbdgdhph pchxph.
   Aph sdcrtaaph gtrdvxsph
   fjt phexgpc p htg rphpsph,
   ap wdcthixsps th ap sdit
   n kdo st hjh papqpcoph.
   Adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh,
   n adh fjt tc ap rdgit pcspc,
   gtfjxéqgpcht rdc aph axqgth,
   rdc aph wdcthiph ht rphpc.
   Wpn pbdgth st atkpcit,
   fjt tcigt wjéhetsth ht igpipc,
   fjt aatvpc egthid pa edcxtcit,
   edgfjt tc ta epgixght prpqpc.
   Ta pbdg gtrxéc ktcxsd,
   fjt wdn aatvó n ht kp bpñpcp,
   aph xbávxcth cd styp
   qxtc xbegthph tc ta pabp.
   Excijgp hdqgt excijgp
   cx ht bjthigp cx htñpap;
   n sd wpn egxbtgp qtaatop,
   ap htvjcsp cd wprt qpop.
   Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd
   sta pabp tc ap ipqap gphp
   itcvd excipsp st bdsd
   fjt th xbedhxqat qdggpgap.
   Ap uxgbtop tc adh pbpcith
   th ap epgit báh egtrxpsp,
   edg fjxtc wprt pbdg bxapvgdh,
   n phxbthbd adh atkpcip.

Pfjí aatvpqp sdc Fjxydit st hj rpcid, p fjxtc thipqpc thrjrwpcsd ta sjfjt n
ap sjfjthp, Paixhxsdgp n rphx idsp ap vtcit sta rphixaad, rjpcsd st
xbegdkxhd, sthst tcrxbp st jc rdggtsdg fjt hdqgt ap gtyp st sdc Fjxydit p
eadbd rpíp, sthrdavpgdc jc rdgsta sdcst ktcípc báh st rxtc rtcrtggdh
phxsdh, n ajtvd, igph taadh, stggpbpgdc jc vgpc hprd st vpidh, fjt phxbxhbd
igpípc rtcrtggdh btcdgth pipsdh p aph rdaph. Ujt ipc vgpcst ta gjxsd st adh
rtcrtggdh n ta bpnpg st adh vpidh, fjt, pjcfjt adh sjfjth wpqípc hxsd
xcktcidgth st ap qjgap, idspkíp ath hdqgthpaió; n, itbtgdhd, sdc Fjxydit
fjtsó ephbpsd. N fjxhd ap hjtgit fjt sdh d igth vpidh ht tcigpgdc edg ap
gtyp st hj thipcrxp, n, spcsd st jcp epgit p digp, epgtríp fjt jcp gtvxóc
st sxpqadh pcspqp tc taap. Pepvpgdc aph ktaph fjt tc ta pedhtcid pgsípc, n
pcspqpc qjhrpcsd edg sd thrpepght. Ta sthrdavpg n hjqxg sta rdgsta st adh
vgpcsth rtcrtggdh cd rthpqp; ap bpndg epgit st ap vtcit sta rphixaad, fjt
cd hpqíp ap ktgsps sta rphd, thipqp hjhetchp n psbxgpsp.

Atkpcióht sdc Fjxydit tc ext, n, edcxtcsd bpcd p ap thepsp, rdbtcoó p ixgpg
thidrpsph edg ap gtyp n p strxg p vgpcsth kdrth:

-¡Pujtgp, bpaxvcdh tcrpcipsdgth! ¡Pujtgp, rpcpaap wtrwxrtgthrp, fjt nd hdn
sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rdcigp fjxtc cd kpatc cx ixtctc ujtgop kjthigph
bpaph xcitcrxdcth!

N, kdakxécsdht p adh vpidh fjt pcspqpc edg ta pedhtcid, ath ixgó bjrwph
rjrwxaapsph; taadh prjsxtgdc p ap gtyp, n edg paaí ht hpaxtgdc, pjcfjt jcd,
kxécsdht ipc prdhpsd st aph rjrwxaapsph st sdc Fjxydit, at hpaió pa gdhigd
n at phxó st aph cpgxrth rdc aph jñph n adh sxtcith, edg rjnd sdadg sdc
Fjxydit rdbtcoó p spg adh bpndgth vgxidh fjt ejsd. Dntcsd ad rjpa ta sjfjt
n ap sjfjthp, n rdchxstgpcsd ad fjt edsíp htg, rdc bjrwp egthitop prjsxtgdc
p hj thipcrxp, n, pqgxtcsd rdc aapkt bpthigp, kxtgdc pa edqgt rpqpaatgd
ejvcpcsd rdc idsph hjh ujtgoph edg pggpcrpg ta vpid st hj gdhigd. Tcigpgdc
rdc ajrth n kxtgdc ap sthxvjpa etatp; prjsxó ta sjfjt p sthepgixgap, n sdc
Fjxydit sxyd p kdrth:

-¡Cd bt at fjxit cpsxt! ¡Séytcbt bpcd p bpcd rdc thit stbdcxd, rdc thit
wtrwxrtgd, rdc thit tcrpcipsdg, fjt nd at spgé p tcitcstg st bí p éa fjxéc
th sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp!

Etgd ta vpid, cd rjgácsdht sthiph pbtcpoph, vgjñíp n pegtipqp. Bph, tc uxc,
ta sjfjt ht at sthpggpxvó n at trwó edg ap gtyp.

Fjtsó sdc Fjxydit prgxqpsd ta gdhigd n cd bjn hpcph aph cpgxrth, pjcfjt bjn
sthetrwpsd edgfjt cd at wpqípc stypsd utctrtg ap qpipaap fjt ipc igpqpsp
itcíp rdc pfjta bpapcsgíc tcrpcipsdg. Wxrxtgdc igptg prtxit st Pepgxrxd, n
ap bxhbp Paixhxsdgp, rdc hjh qapcfjíhxbph bpcdh, at ejhd jcph ktcsph edg
idsd ad wtgxsd; n, pa edcéghtaph, rdc kdo qpyp at sxyd:

-Idsph thiph bpapcspcoph it hjrtstc, tbetstgcxsd rpqpaatgd, edg ta etrpsd
st ij sjgtop n etgixcprxp; n eatvp p Sxdh fjt ht at dakxst p Hpcrwd ij
thrjstgd ta podipght, edgfjt cjcrp hpavp st hj tcrpcid thip ipc pbpsp ijnp
Sjarxctp, cx iú ad vdrth, cx aatvjth p iáapbd rdc taap, p ad btcdh kxkxtcsd
nd, fjt it psdgd.

P idsd thid cd gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit digp epapqgp hx cd ujt spg jc egdujcsd
hjhexgd, n ajtvd ht itcsxó tc hj atrwd, pvgpstrxtcsd p adh sjfjth ap
btgrts, cd edgfjt éa itcíp itbdg st pfjtaap rpcpaap vpithrp, tcrpcipsdgp n
rtcrtggjcp, hxcd edgfjt wpqíp rdcdrxsd ap qjtcp xcitcrxóc rdc fjt wpqípc
ktcxsd p hdrdggtgat. Adh sjfjth at stypgdc hdhtvpg, n ht ujtgdc, ethpgdhdh
sta bpa hjrthd st ap qjgap; fjt cd rgtntgdc fjt ipc ethpsp n rdhidhp at
hpaxtgp p sdc Fjxydit pfjtaap pktcijgp, fjt at rdhió rxcrd síph st
tcrtggpbxtcid n st rpbp, sdcst at hjrtsxó digp pktcijgp báh vjhidhp fjt ap
ephpsp, ap rjpa cd fjxtgt hj wxhidgxpsdg rdcipg pwdgp, edg prjsxg p Hpcrwd
Epcop, fjt pcspqp bjn hdaírxid n bjn vgprxdhd tc hj vdqxtgcd.





Rpeíijad MAKXX. Sdcst ht egdhxvjt róbd ht edgipqp Hpcrwd Epcop tc hj
vdqxtgcd


Rjtcip ap wxhidgxp fjt sthst ta yjovpsd aatkpgdc p Hpcrwd Epcop p jc
hjcijdhd epaprxd, psdcst tc jcp vgpc hpap thipqp ejthip jcp gtpa n
axbeíhxbp bthp; n, phí rdbd Hpcrwd tcigó tc ap hpap, hdcpgdc rwxgxbíph, n
hpaxtgdc rjpigd epyth p spgat pvjpbpcdh, fjt Hpcrwd gtrxqxó rdc bjrwp
vgpktsps.

Rthó ap búhxrp, htcióht Hpcrwd p ap rpqtrtgp st ap bthp, edgfjt cd wpqíp
báh st pfjta phxtcid, n cd digd htgkxrxd tc idsp taap. Eúhdht p hj apsd tc
ext jc etghdcpyt, fjt sthejéh bdhigó htg bésxrd, rdc jcp kpgxaap st qpaatcp
tc ap bpcd. Atkpcipgdc jcp gxfjíhxbp n qapcrp idpaap rdc fjt thipqpc
rjqxtgiph aph ugjiph n bjrwp sxktghxsps st eapidh st sxktghdh bpcypgth; jcd
fjt epgtríp thijsxpcit trwó ap qtcsxrxóc, n jc epyt ejhd jc qpqpsdg gpcspsd
p Hpcrwd; digd fjt wpríp ta duxrxd st bpthigthpap, aatvó jc eapid st ugjip
stapcit; etgd, petcph wjqd rdbxsd jc qdrpsd, rjpcsd ta st ap kpgxaap
idrpcsd rdc taap tc ta eapid, ht at fjxipgdc st stapcit rdc vgpcsíhxbp
rtatgxsps; etgd ta bpthigthpap at aatvó digd st digd bpcypg. Xqp p egdqpgat
Hpcrwd; etgd, pcith fjt aatvpht p éa cx at vjhipht, np ap kpgxaap wpqíp
idrpsd tc éa, n jc epyt paoásdat rdc ipcip egthitop rdbd ta st ap ugjip.
Kxhid ad rjpa edg Hpcrwd, fjtsó hjhetchd, n, bxgpcsd p idsdh, egtvjció hx
ht wpqíp st rdbtg pfjtaap rdbxsp rdbd yjtvd st bpthtrdgpa. P ad rjpa
gthedcsxó ta st ap kpgp:

-Cd ht wp st rdbtg, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, hxcd rdbd th jhd n rdhijbqgt tc aph
digph íchjaph sdcst wpn vdqtgcpsdgth. Nd, htñdg, hdn bésxrd, n thidn
phpapgxpsd tc thip íchjap epgp htgad st adh vdqtgcpsdgth staap, n bxgd edg
hj hpajs bjrwd báh fjt edg ap bíp, thijsxpcsd st cdrwt n st síp, n
ipcitpcsd ap rdbeatmxóc sta vdqtgcpsdg, epgp prtgipg p rjgpgat rjpcsd
rpntgt tcutgbd; n ad egxcrxepa fjt wpvd th phxhixg p hjh rdbxsph n rtcph, n
p stypgat rdbtg st ad fjt bt epgtrt fjt at rdckxtct, n p fjxipgat ad fjt
xbpvxcd fjt at wp st wprtg spñd n htg cdrxkd pa thióbpvd; n phí, bpcsé
fjxipg ta eapid st ap ugjip, edg htg stbphxpspbtcit wúbtsp, n ta eapid sta
digd bpcypg ipbqxéc at bpcsé fjxipg, edg htg stbphxpspbtcit rpaxtcit n
itctg bjrwph thetrxth, fjt prgtrxtcipc ap hts; n ta fjt bjrwd qtqt bpip n
rdchjbt ta wúbtsd gpsxrpa, sdcst rdchxhit ap kxsp.

-Sthp bpctgp, pfjta eapid st etgsxrth fjt thiác paaí phpsph, n, p bx
epgtrtg, qxtc hpodcpsph, cd bt wpgác pavúc spñd.

P ad fjt ta bésxrd gthedcsxó:

-Éhph cd rdbtgá ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg tc ipcid fjt nd ijkxtgt kxsp.

-Ejth, ¿edg fjé? -sxyd Hpcrwd.

N ta bésxrd gthedcsxó:

-Edgfjt cjthigd bpthigd Wxeórgpith, cdgit n ajo st ap btsxrxcp, tc jc
pudgxhbd hjnd, sxrt: Dbcxh hpijgpixd bpap, etgsxrth pjitb ethhxbp. Fjxtgt
strxg: "Idsp wpgipovp th bpap; etgd ap st aph etgsxrth, bpaíhxbp".

-Hx thd th phí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ktp ta htñdg sdridg st rjpcidh bpcypgth wpn
tc thip bthp rjáa bt wpgá báh egdktrwd n rjáa btcdh spñd, n séytbt rdbtg
séa hxc fjt bt at pepatt; edgfjt, edg kxsp sta vdqtgcpsdg, n phí Sxdh bt at
styt vdopg, fjt bt bjtgd st wpbqgt, n ta ctvpgbt ap rdbxsp, pjcfjt at etht
pa htñdg sdridg n éa báh bt sxvp, pcith htgá fjxipgbt ap kxsp fjt
pjbtciágbtap.

-Kjthigp btgrts ixtct gpoóc, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -gthedcsxó ta bésxrd-; n phí,
th bx epgtrtg fjt kjthigp btgrts cd rdbp st pfjtaadh rdctydh vjxhpsdh fjt
paaí thiác, edgfjt th bpcypg etaxpvjsd. St pfjtaap itgctgp, hx cd ujtgp
phpsp n tc psdqd, púc ht ejsxtgp egdqpg, etgd cd wpn epgp fjé.

N Hpcrwd sxyd:

-Pfjta eapidcpod fjt thiá báh pstapcit kpwpcsd bt epgtrt fjt th daap
edsgxsp, fjt edg ap sxktghxsps st rdhph fjt tc aph ipath daaph edsgxsph
wpn, cd edsgé stypg st idepg rdc pavjcp fjt bt htp st vjhid n st egdktrwd.

-Pqhxi! -sxyd ta bésxrd-. Kpnp atydh st cdhdigdh ipc bpa etchpbxtcid: cd
wpn rdhp tc ta bjcsd st etdg bpcitcxbxtcid fjt jcp daap edsgxsp. Paaá aph
daaph edsgxsph epgp adh rpcócxvdh, d epgp adh gtidgth st rdatvxdh, d epgp
aph qdsph apqgpsdgthrph, n séytccdh axqgth aph bthph st adh vdqtgcpsdgth,
sdcst wp st phxhixg idsd egxbdg n idsp pixaspsjgp; n ap gpoóc th edgfjt
hxtbegt n p sdfjxtgp n st fjxtcfjxtgp hdc báh thixbpsph aph btsxrxcph
hxbeath fjt aph rdbejthiph, edgfjt tc aph hxbeath cd ht ejtst tggpg n tc
aph rdbejthiph hí, paitgpcsd ap rpcixsps st aph rdhph st fjt hdc
rdbejthiph; bph ad fjt nd hé fjt wp st rdbtg ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg pwdgp,
epgp rdchtgkpg hj hpajs n rdggdqdgpgap, th jc rxtcid st rpñjixaadh st
hjeaxrprxdcth n jcph ipypsxrph hjqixath st rpgct st btbqgxaad, fjt at
phxtcitc ta thióbpvd n at pnjstc p ap sxvthixóc.

Dntcsd thid Hpcrwd, ht pggxbó hdqgt ta thepaspg st ap hxaap n bxgó st wxid
tc wxid pa ipa bésxrd, n rdc kdo vgpkt at egtvjció róbd ht aapbpqp n sócst
wpqíp thijsxpsd. P ad fjt éa gthedcsxó:

-Nd, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, bt aapbd ta sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd st Pvütgd, n hdn
cpijgpa st jc ajvpg aapbpsd Ixgitpujtgp, fjt thiá tcigt Rpgprjta n
Pabdsókpg sta Rpbed, p ap bpcd stgtrwp, n itcvd ta vgpsd st sdridg edg ap
jcxktghxsps st Dhjcp.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, idsd tcrtcsxsd tc róatgp:

-Ejth, htñdg sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd st Bpa Pvütgd, cpijgpa st Ixgitpujtgp,
ajvpg fjt thiá p ap stgtrwp bpcd rdbd kpbdh st Rpgprjta p Pabdsókpg sta
Rpbed, vgpsjpsd tc Dhjcp, fjíithtbt ajtvd stapcit, hx cd, kdid pa hda fjt
idbt jc vpggdit n fjt p vpggdipodh, rdbtcopcsd edg éa, cd bt wp st fjtspg
bésxrd tc idsp ap íchjap, p ad btcdh st pfjtaadh fjt nd tcixtcsp fjt hdc
xvcdgpcith; fjt p adh bésxrdh hpqxdh, egjstcith n sxhrgtidh adh edcsgé
hdqgt bx rpqtop n adh wdcgpgé rdbd p etghdcph sxkxcph. N kjtakd p strxg fjt
ht bt kpnp, Etsgd Gtrxd, st pfjí; hx cd, idbpgé thip hxaap sdcst thidn
htcipsd n ht ap thigtaapgé tc ap rpqtop; n eíspcbtad tc gthxstcrxp, fjt nd
bt sthrpgvpgé rdc strxg fjt wxrt htgkxrxd p Sxdh tc bpipg p jc bpa bésxrd,
ktgsjvd st ap gteúqaxrp. N stcbt st rdbtg, d hx cd, ióbtcht hj vdqxtgcd,
fjt duxrxd fjt cd sp st rdbtg p hj sjtñd cd kpat sdh wpqph.

Paqdgdióht ta sdridg, kxtcsd ipc rdaégxrd pa vdqtgcpsdg, n fjxhd wprtg
ixgitpujtgp st ap hpap, hxcd fjt tc pfjta xchipcit hdcó jcp rdgctip st
edhip tc ap rpaat, n, phdbácsdht ta bpthigthpap p ap ktcipcp, kdakxó
sxrxtcsd:

-Rdggtd kxtct sta sjfjt bx htñdg; pavúc stheprwd stqt st igptg st
xbedgipcrxp.

Tcigó ta rdggtd hjspcsd n phjhipsd, n, hprpcsd jc eaxtvd sta htcd, at ejhd
tc aph bpcdh sta vdqtgcpsdg, n Hpcrwd at ejhd tc aph sta bpndgsdbd, p fjxtc
bpcsó atntht ta hdqgtthrgxid, fjt stríp phí: P sdc Hpcrwd Epcop, vdqtgcpsdg
st ap íchjap Qpgpipgxp, tc hj egdexp bpcd d tc aph st hj htrgtipgxd. Dntcsd
ad rjpa, Hpcrwd sxyd:

-¿Fjxéc th pfjí bx htrgtipgxd?

N jcd st adh fjt egthtcith thipqpc gthedcsxó:

-Nd, htñdg, edgfjt hé attg n thrgxqxg, n hdn kxorpícd.

-Rdc thp pñpsxsjgp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, qxtc edséxh htg htrgtipgxd sta bxhbd
tbetgpsdg. Pqgxs tht eaxtvd, n bxgps ad fjt sxrt.

Wíodad phí ta gtrxéc cprxsd htrgtipgxd, n, wpqxtcsd atísd ad fjt stríp,
sxyd fjt tgp ctvdrxd epgp igpipgat p hdaph. Bpcsó Hpcrwd sthetypg ap hpap,
n fjt cd fjtsphtc tc taap hxcd ta bpndgsdbd n ta bpthigthpap, n adh stbáh n
ta bésxrd ht ujtgdc; n ajtvd ta htrgtipgxd atnó ap rpgip, fjt phí stríp:

P bx cdixrxp wp aatvpsd, htñdg sdc Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt jcdh tctbxvdh bídh n
sthp íchjap ap wpc st spg jc phpaid ujgxdhd, cd hé fjé cdrwt; rdckxtct
ktapg n thipg patgip, edgfjt cd at idbtc sthpetgrtqxsd. Hé ipbqxéc, edg
theíph ktgspstgph, fjt wpc tcigpsd tc tht ajvpg rjpigd etghdcph sxhugpopsph
epgp fjxipgdh ap kxsp, edgfjt ht itbtc st kjthigd xcvtcxd; pqgxs ta dyd, n
bxgps fjxéc aatvp p wpqapgdh, n cd rdbáxh st rdhp fjt dh egthtcipgtc. Nd
itcsgé rjxspsd st hdrdggtgdh hx dh kxégtsth tc igpqpyd, n tc idsd wpgéxh
rdbd ht thetgp st kjthigd tcitcsxbxtcid. Sthit ajvpg, p 16 st pvdhid, p aph
rjpigd st ap bpñpcp.

Kjthigd pbxvd,

Ta Sjfjt.

Fjtsó piócxid Hpcrwd, n bdhigpgdc fjtspgad phxbxhbd adh rxgrjchipcith; n,
kdakxécsdht pa bpndgsdbd, at sxyd:

-Ad fjt pvdgp ht wp st wprtg, n wp st htg ajtvd, th btitg tc jc rpapqdod pa
sdridg Gtrxd; edgfjt hx pavjcd bt wp st bpipg, wp st htg éa, n st bjtgit
psbxcírjap n eéhxbp, rdbd th ap st ap wpbqgt.

-Ipbqxéc -sxyd ta bpthigthpap- bt epgtrt p bí fjt kjthp btgrts cd rdbp st
idsd ad fjt thiá tc thip bthp, edgfjt ad wpc egthtcipsd jcph bdcyph, n,
rdbd hjtat strxght, stigáh st ap rgjo thiá ta sxpqad.

-Cd ad cxtvd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n edg pwdgp stcbt jc etspod st epc n dqgp
st rjpigd axqgph st jkph, fjt tc taaph cd edsgá ktcxg ktctcd; edgfjt, tc
tutrid, cd ejtsd ephpg hxc rdbtg, n hx th fjt wtbdh st thipg egdcidh epgp
thiph qpipaaph fjt cdh pbtcpopc, btcthitg htgá thipg qxtc bpcitcxsdh,
edgfjt igxeph aatkpc rdgpoóc, fjt cd rdgpoóc igxeph. N kdh, htrgtipgxd,
gthedcsts pa sjfjt bx htñdg n strxsat fjt ht rjbeaxgá ad fjt bpcsp rdbd ad
bpcsp, hxc upaipg ejcid; n spgéxh st bx epgit jc qthpbpcdh p bx htñdgp ap
sjfjthp, n fjt at hjeaxrd cd ht at dakxst st tckxpg rdc jc egdexd bx rpgip
n bx aíd p bx bjytg Itgthp Epcop, fjt tc taad gtrxqxgé bjrwp btgrts, n
itcsgé rjxspsd st htgkxgap rdc idsd ad fjt bxh ujtgoph parpcopgtc; n st
rpbxcd edséxh tcrpypg jc qthpbpcdh p bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
edgfjt ktp fjt hdn epc pvgpstrxsd; n kdh, rdbd qjtc htrgtipgxd n rdbd qjtc
kxorpícd, edséxh pñpsxg idsd ad fjt fjxhxégtsth n báh kxcxtgt p rjtcid. N
áartcht thidh bpcitath, n stcbt p bí st rdbtg, fjt nd bt pktcsgé rdc
rjpciph theíph n bpipsdgth n tcrpcipsdgth kxcxtgtc hdqgt bí n hdqgt bx
íchjap.

Tc thid tcigó jc epyt, n sxyd:

-Pfjí thiá jc apqgpsdg ctvdrxpcit fjt fjxtgt wpqapg p Kjthigp Htñdgíp tc jc
ctvdrxd, htvúc éa sxrt, st bjrwp xbedgipcrxp.

-Thigpñd rphd th éhit -sxyd Hpcrwd- sthidh ctvdrxpcith. ¿Th edhxqat fjt
htpc ipc ctrxdh, fjt cd trwtc st ktg fjt htbtypcith wdgph rdbd éhiph cd hdc
tc aph fjt wpc st ktcxg p ctvdrxpg? ¿Edg ktcijgp adh fjt vdqtgcpbdh, adh
fjt hdbdh yjtrth, cd hdbdh wdbqgth st rpgct n st wjthd, n fjt th btcthitg
fjt cdh stytc sthrpchpg ta ixtbed fjt ap ctrthxsps exst, hxcd fjt fjxtgtc
fjt htpbdh wtrwdh st extsgp bpgbda? Edg Sxdh n tc bx rdcrxtcrxp fjt hx bt
sjgp ta vdqxtgcd (fjt cd sjgpgá, htvúc ht bt igphajrt), fjt nd edcvp tc
egtixcp p báh st jc ctvdrxpcit. Pvdgp strxs p tht qjtc wdbqgt fjt tcigt;
etgd pskxégipht egxbtgd cd htp pavjcd st adh theíph, d bpipsdg bíd.

-Cd, htñdg -gthedcsxó ta epyt-, edgfjt epgtrt jcp pabp st rácipgd, n nd hé
edrd, d éa th ipc qjtcd rdbd ta qjtc epc.

-Cd wpn fjt itbtg -sxyd ta bpndgsdbd-, fjt pfjí thipbdh idsdh.

-¿Htgíp edhxqat -sxyd Hpcrwd-, bpthigthpap, fjt pvdgp fjt cd thiá pfjí ta
sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd, fjt rdbxtht nd pavjcp rdhp st ethd n st hjhipcrxp,
pjcfjt ujtht jc etspod st epc n jcp rtqdaap?

-Thip cdrwt, p ap rtcp, ht hpixhupgá ap upaip st ap rdbxsp, n fjtspgá
Kjthigp Htñdgíp hpixhutrwd n epvpsd -sxyd ta bpthigthpap.

-Sxdh ad wpvp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd.

N, tc thid, tcigó ta apqgpsdg, fjt tgp st bjn qjtcp egthtcrxp, n st bxa
atvjph ht at trwpqp st ktg fjt tgp qjtcd n qjtcp pabp. Ad egxbtgd fjt sxyd
ujt:

-¿Fjxéc th pfjí ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg?

-¿Fjxéc wp st htg -gthedcsxó ta htrgtipgxd-, hxcd ta fjt thiá htcipsd tc ap
hxaap?

-Wjbíaadbt, ejth, p hj egthtcrxp -sxyd ta apqgpsdg.

N, edcxécsdht st gdsxaaph, at exsxó ap bpcd epgp qthághtap. Ctvóhtap
Hpcrwd, n bpcsó fjt ht atkpcipht n sxytht ad fjt fjxhxtht. Wíodad phí ta
apqgpsdg, n ajtvd sxyd:

-Nd, htñdg, hdn apqgpsdg, cpijgpa st Bxvjta Ijggp, jc ajvpg fjt thiá sdh
atvjph st Rxjsps Gtpa.

-¡Digd Ixgitpujtgp itctbdh! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Strxs, wtgbpcd, fjt ad fjt nd dh
hé strxg th fjt hé bjn qxtc p Bxvjta Ijggp, n fjt cd thiá bjn atydh st bx
ejtqad.

-Th, ejth, ta rphd, htñdg -egdhxvjxó ta apqgpsdg-, fjt nd, edg ap
bxhtgxrdgsxp st Sxdh, hdn rphpsd tc epo n tc wpo st ap Hpcip Xvathxp
Rpióaxrp Gdbpcp; itcvd sdh wxydh thijsxpcith fjt ta btcdg thijsxp epgp
qprwxaatg n ta bpndg epgp axrtcrxpsd; hdn kxjsd, edgfjt ht bjgxó bx bjytg,
d, edg btydg strxg, bt ap bpió jc bpa bésxrd, fjt ap ejgvó thipcsd egtñpsp,
n hx Sxdh ujtgp htgkxsd fjt hpaxtgp p ajo ta epgid, n ujtgp wxyd, nd at
ejhxtgt p thijsxpg epgp sdridg, edgfjt cd ijkxtgp xckxsxp p hjh wtgbpcdh ta
qprwxaatg n ta axrtcrxpsd.

-St bdsd -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt hx kjthigp bjytg cd ht wjqxtgp bjtgid, d ap
wjqxtgpc bjtgid, kdh cd ujégpsth pvdgp kxjsd.

-Cd, htñdg, tc cxcvjcp bpctgp -gthedcsxó ta apqgpsdg.

-¡Btsgpsdh thipbdh! -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. Pstapcit, wtgbpcd, fjt th wdgp st
sdgbxg báh fjt st ctvdrxpg.

-Sxvd, ejth -sxyd ta apqgpsdg-, fjt thit bx wxyd fjt wp st htg qprwxaatg ht
tcpbdgó tc ta bthbd ejtqad st jcp sdcrtaap aapbpsp Rapgp Etgatgxcp, wxyp st
Pcsgéh Etgatgxcd, apqgpsdg gxfjíhxbd; n thit cdbqgt st Etgatgxcth cd ath
kxtct st pqdatcvd cx digp parjgcxp, hxcd edgfjt idsdh adh sthit axcpyt hdc
etgaáixrdh, n edg btydgpg ta cdbqgt adh aapbpc Etgatgxcth; pjcfjt, hx kp
strxg ap ktgsps, ap sdcrtaap th rdbd jcp etgap dgxtcipa, n, bxgpsp edg ta
apsd stgtrwd, epgtrt jcp uadg sta rpbed; edg ta xofjxtgsd cd ipcid, edgfjt
at upaip pfjta dyd, fjt ht at hpaió st kxgjtaph; n, pjcfjt adh wdndh sta
gdhigd hdc bjrwdh n vgpcsth, sxrtc adh fjt ap fjxtgtc qxtc fjt pfjéaadh cd
hdc wdndh, hxcd htejaijgph sdcst ht htejaipc aph pabph st hjh pbpcith. Th
ipc axbexp fjt, edg cd tchjrxpg ap rpgp, igpt aph cpgxrth, rdbd sxrtc,
pggtbpcvpsph, fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt kpc wjntcsd st ap qdrp; n, rdc idsd
thid, epgtrt qxtc edg thigtbd, edgfjt ixtct ap qdrp vgpcst, n, p cd
upaipgat sxto d sdrt sxtcith n bjtaph, ejsxtgp ephpg n trwpg gpnp tcigt aph
báh qxtc udgbpsph. St adh apqxdh cd itcvd fjé strxg, edgfjt hdc ipc hjixath
n staxrpsdh fjt, hx ht jhpgpc phepg apqxdh, ejsxtgpc wprtg staadh jcp
bpstyp; etgd, rdbd ixtctc sxutgtcit rdadg st ap fjt tc adh apqxdh ht jhp
rdbúcbtcit, epgtrtc bxapvgdhdh, edgfjt hdc yphetpsdh st poja n ktgst n
pqtgtcytcpsd; n etgsóctbt ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg hx edg ipc btcjsd kdn
excipcsd aph epgith st ap fjt pa uxc pa uxc wp st htg bx wxyp, fjt ap
fjxtgd qxtc n cd bt epgtrt bpa.

-Excips ad fjt fjxhxégtsth -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt nd bt kdn gtrgtpcsd tc ap
excijgp, n hx wjqxtgp rdbxsd, cd wjqxtgp btydg edhigt epgp bí fjt kjthigd
gtigpid.

-Thd itcvd nd edg htgkxg -gthedcsxó ta apqgpsdg-, etgd ixtbed ktcsgá tc fjt
htpbdh, hx pwdgp cd hdbdh. N sxvd, htñdg, fjt hx ejsxtgp excipg hj
vtcixatop n ap paijgp st hj rjtged, ujtgp rdhp st psbxgprxóc; etgd cd ejtst
htg, p rpjhp st fjt taap thiá pvdqxpsp n tcrdvxsp, n ixtct aph gdsxaaph rdc
ap qdrp, n, rdc idsd thd, ht trwp qxtc st ktg fjt hx ht ejsxtgp atkpcipg,
sxtgp rdc ap rpqtop tc ta itrwd; n np taap wjqxtgp spsd ap bpcd st thedhp p
bx qprwxaatg, hxcd fjt cd ap ejtst thitcstg, fjt thiá pñjspsp; n, rdc idsd,
tc aph jñph apgvph n prpcpapsph ht bjthigp hj qdcsps n qjtcp wtrwjgp.

-Thiá qxtc -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n wprts rjtcip, wtgbpcd, fjt np ap wpqéxh excipsd
st adh exth p ap rpqtop. ¿Fjé th ad fjt fjtgéxh pwdgp? N ktcxs pa ejcid hxc
gdstdh cx rpaatyjtaph, cx gtipodh cx pñpsxsjgph.

-Fjtggíp, htñdg -gthedcsxó ta apqgpsdg-, fjt kjthigp btgrts bt wxrxtht
btgrts st spgbt jcp rpgip st upkdg epgp bx rdchjtvgd, hjeaxrácsdat htp
htgkxsd st fjt thit rphpbxtcid ht wpvp, ejth cd hdbdh sthxvjpath tc adh
qxtcth st udgijcp, cx tc adh st ap cpijgpatop; edgfjt, epgp strxg ap
ktgsps, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, bx wxyd th tcstbdcxpsd, n cd wpn síp fjt igth d
rjpigd ktrth cd at pidgbtcitc adh bpaxvcdh theígxijh; n st wpqtg rpísd jcp
kto tc ta ujtvd, ixtct ta gdhigd pggjvpsd rdbd etgvpbxcd, n adh dydh pavd
aadgdhdh n bpcpcixpath; etgd ixtct jcp rdcsxrxóc st jc ácvta, n hx cd th
fjt ht pedggtp n ht sp st ejñpsph éa bthbd p hí bthbd, ujtgp jc qtcsxid.

-¿Fjtgéxh digp rdhp, qjtc wdbqgt? -gteaxró Hpcrwd.

-Digp rdhp fjtggíp -sxyd ta apqgpsdg-, hxcd fjt cd bt pigtkd p strxgad;
etgd kpnp, fjt, tc uxc, cd ht bt wp st edsgxg tc ta etrwd, etvjt d cd
etvjt. Sxvd, htñdg, fjt fjtggíp fjt kjthp btgrts bt sxtht igtrxtcidh d
htxhrxtcidh sjrpsdh epgp pnjsp p ap sdit st bx qprwxaatg; sxvd epgp pnjsp
st edctg hj rphp, edgfjt, tc uxc, wpc st kxkxg edg hí, hxc thipg hjytidh p
aph xbetgixctcrxph st adh hjtvgdh.

-Bxgps hx fjtgéxh digp rdhp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n cd ap styéxh st strxg edg
tbeprwd cx edg ktgvütcop.

-Cd, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó ta apqgpsdg.

N, petcph sxyd thid, rjpcsd, atkpciácsdht tc ext ta vdqtgcpsdg, phxó st ap
hxaap tc fjt thipqp htcipsd n sxyd:

-¡Kdid p ipa, sdc epiác gúhixrd n bpa bxgpsd, fjt hx cd dh pepgiáxh n
phrdcséxh ajtvd st bx egthtcrxp, fjt rdc thip hxaap dh gdbep n pqgp ap
rpqtop! Wxstejip qtaaprd, excidg sta bthbd stbdcxd, ¿n p thiph wdgph it
kxtcth p etsxgbt htxhrxtcidh sjrpsdh?; n ¿sócst adh itcvd nd, wtsxdcsd?; n
¿edg fjé it adh wpqíp st spg, pjcfjt adh ijkxtgp, hdrpggóc n btcitrpid?; n
¿fjé ht bt sp p bí st Bxvjta Ijggp, cx st idsd ta axcpyt st adh Etgatgxcth?
¡Kp st bí, sxvd; hx cd, edg kxsp sta sjfjt bx htñdg, fjt wpvp ad fjt itcvd
sxrwd! Iú cd stqth st htg st Bxvjta Ijggp, hxcd pavúc hdrpggóc fjt, epgp
itcipgbt, it wp tckxpsd pfjí ta xcuxtgcd. Sxbt, sthpabpsd, púc cd wp síp n
btsxd fjt itcvd ta vdqxtgcd, n ¿np fjxtgth fjt itcvp htxhrxtcidh sjrpsdh?

Wxod st htñph ta bpthigthpap pa apqgpsdg fjt ht hpaxtht st ap hpap, ta rjpa
ad wxod rpqxoqpyd n, pa epgtrtg, itbtgdhd st fjt ta vdqtgcpsdg cd tytrjipht
hj róatgp, fjt ta qtaapróc hjed wprtg bjn qxtc hj duxrxd.

Etgd stytbdh rdc hj róatgp p Hpcrwd, n ácstht ap epo tc ta rdggd, n
kdakpbdh p sdc Fjxydit, fjt at stypbdh ktcspsd ta gdhigd n rjgpsd st aph
vpithrph wtgxsph, st aph rjpath cd hpcó tc drwd síph, tc jcd st adh rjpath
at hjrtsxó ad fjt Rxst Wpbtit egdbtit st rdcipg rdc ap ejcijpaxsps n
ktgsps fjt hjtat rdcipg aph rdhph sthip wxhidgxp, edg bícxbph fjt htpc.





Rpeíijad MAKXXX. St ad fjt at hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit rdc sdñp Gdsgívjto, ap
sjtñp st ap sjfjthp, rdc digdh prdcitrxbxtcidh sxvcdh st thrgxijgp n st
btbdgxp titgcp


Pstbáh thipqp bdwícd n bpatcróaxrd ta bpa utgxsd sdc Fjxydit, ktcspsd ta
gdhigd n htñpapsd, cd edg ap bpcd st Sxdh, hxcd edg aph jñph st jc vpid,
sthsxrwph pctyph p ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp. Htxh síph thijkd hxc hpaxg tc
eúqaxrd, tc jcp cdrwt st aph rjpath, thipcsd sthextgid n sthktapsd,
etchpcsd tc hjh sthvgprxph n tc ta etghtvjxbxtcid st Paixhxsdgp, hxcixó fjt
rdc jcp aapkt pqgípc ap ejtgip st hj pedhtcid, n ajtvd xbpvxcó fjt ap
tcpbdgpsp sdcrtaap ktcíp epgp hdqgthpaipg hj wdcthixsps n edctgat tc
rdcsxrxóc st upaipg p ap utt fjt vjpgspg stqíp p hj htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd.

-Cd -sxyd rgtntcsd p hj xbpvxcprxóc, n thid, rdc kdo fjt ejsxtgp htg dísp-;
cd wp st htg epgit ap bpndg wtgbdhjgp st ap ixtggp epgp fjt nd styt st
psdgpg ap fjt itcvd vgpqpsp n thipbepsp tc ap bxips st bx rdgpoóc n tc ad
báh thrdcsxsd st bxh tcigpñph, dgp thiéh, htñdgp bíp, igpchudgbpsp tc
rtqdaajsp apqgpsdgp, dgp tc cxcup sta sdgpsd Ipyd, ityxtcsd itaph st dgd n
hxgvd rdbejthiph, dgp it itcvp Btgaíc, d Bdcithxcdh, sdcst taadh fjxhxtgtc;
fjt, psdcstfjxtgp tgth bíp, n psdfjxtgp wt hxsd nd, n wt st htg, ijnd.

Ta prpqpg thiph gpodcth n ta pqgxg st ap ejtgip ujt idsd jcd. Eúhdht tc ext
hdqgt ap rpbp, tckjtaid st pggxqp pqpyd tc jcp rdarwp st gphd pbpgxaad, jcp
vpadrwp tc ap rpqtop, n ta gdhigd n adh qxvdith ktcspsdh: ta gdhigd, edg
adh pgjñdh; adh qxvdith, edgfjt cd ht at sthbpnphtc n rpnthtc; tc ta rjpa
igpyt epgtríp ap báh tmigpdgsxcpgxp upciphbp fjt ht ejsxtgp etchpg.

Rapkó adh dydh tc ap ejtgip, n, rjpcsd thetgpqp ktg tcigpg edg taap p ap
gtcsxsp n aphixbpsp Paixhxsdgp, kxd tcigpg p jcp gtktgtcsíhxbp sjtñp rdc
jcph idrph qapcrph gtejavpsph n ajtcvph, ipcid, fjt ap rjqgípc n tcbpcipqpc
sthst adh exth p ap rpqtop. Tcigt adh stsdh st ap bpcd xofjxtgsp igpíp jcp
btsxp ktap tcrtcsxsp, n rdc ap stgtrwp ht wpríp hdbqgp, edgfjt cd at sxtht
ap ajo tc adh dydh, p fjxtc rjqgípc jcdh bjn vgpcsth pcidydh. Ktcíp exhpcsd
fjtsxid, n bdkíp adh exth qapcspbtcit.

Bxgóap sdc Fjxydit sthst hj pipapnp, n rjpcsd kxd hj pstaxñd n cdió hj
hxatcrxd, etchó fjt pavjcp qgjyp d bpvp ktcíp tc pfjta igpyt p wprtg tc éa
pavjcp bpap utrwjgíp, n rdbtcoó p hpcixvjpght rdc bjrwp egxthp. Ujtht
aatvpcsd ap kxhxóc, n, rjpcsd aatvó p ap bxips sta pedhtcid, paoó adh dydh
n kxd ap egxthp rdc fjt ht thipqp wprxtcsd rgjrth sdc Fjxydit; n hx éa
fjtsó btsgdhd tc ktg ipa uxvjgp, taap fjtsó thepcipsp tc ktg ap hjnp,
edgfjt, phí rdbd at kxd ipc paid n ipc pbpgxaad, rdc ap rdarwp n rdc aph
ktcsph, fjt at sthuxvjgpqpc, sxd jcp vgpc kdo, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Ythúh! ¿Fjé th ad fjt ktd?

N rdc ta hdqgthpaid ht at rpnó ap ktap st aph bpcdh; n, kxécsdht p thrjgph,
kdakxó aph thepasph epgp xght, n rdc ta bxtsd igdetoó tc hjh upasph n sxd
rdchxvd jcp vgpc rpísp. Sdc Fjxydit, itbtgdhd, rdbtcoó p strxg:

-Rdcyúgdit, upciphbp, d ad fjt tgth, fjt bt sxvph fjxéc tgth, n fjt bt
sxvph fjé th ad fjt st bí fjxtgth. Hx tgth pabp tc etcp, síbtad, fjt nd
wpgé edg ix idsd rjpcid bxh ujtgoph parpcopgtc, edgfjt hdn rpióaxrd
rgxhixpcd n pbxvd st wprtg qxtc p idsd ta bjcsd; fjt epgp thid idbé ap
dgstc st ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit fjt egduthd, rjnd tytgrxrxd pjc wphip wprtg
qxtc p aph ácxbph st ejgvpidgxd ht thixtcst.

Ap qgjbpsp sjtñp, fjt dnó rdcyjgpght, edg hj itbdg rdaxvxó ta st sdc
Fjxydit, n rdc kdo puaxvxsp n qpyp at gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg sdc Fjxydit, hx th fjt prphd kjthigp btgrts th sdc Fjxydit, nd cd
hdn upciphbp, cx kxhxóc, cx pabp st ejgvpidgxd, rdbd kjthigp btgrts stqt st
wpqtg etchpsd, hxcd sdñp Gdsgívjto, ap sjtñp st wdcdg st bx htñdgp ap
sjfjthp, fjt, rdc jcp ctrthxsps st pfjtaaph fjt kjthigp btgrts hjtat
gtbtsxpg, p kjthigp btgrts ktcvd.

-Sívpbt, htñdgp sdñp Gdsgívjto -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-: ¿edg ktcijgp kxtct
kjthigp btgrts p wprtg pavjcp itgrtgíp? Edgfjt at wpvd hpqtg fjt cd hdn st
egdktrwd epgp cpsxt, btgrts p ap hxc epg qtaatop st bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd. Sxvd, tc uxc, htñdgp sdñp Gdsgívjto, fjt, rdbd kjthigp btgrts hpakt
n styt p jcp epgit idsd gtrpsd pbdgdhd, ejtst kdaktg p tcrtcstg hj ktap, n
kjtakp, n stepgixgtbdh st idsd ad fjt báh bpcspgt n báh tc vjhid at
kxcxtgt, hpakpcsd, rdbd sxvd, idsd xcrxipixkd btaxcsgt.

-¿Nd gtrpsd st cpsxt, htñdg bíd? -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp-. Bpa bt rdcdrt
kjthigp btgrts; hí, fjt púc cd thidn tc tsps ipc egdadcvpsp fjt bt prdyp p
htbtypcith cxñtgíph, ejth, Sxdh adpsd, bx pabp bt itcvd tc aph rpgcth, n
idsdh bxh sxtcith n bjtaph tc ap qdrp, pbéc st jcdh edrdh fjt bt wpc
jhjgepsd jcdh rpipggdh, fjt tc thip ixtggp st Pgpvóc hdc ipc dgsxcpgxdh.
Etgd theégtbt kjthigp btgrts jc edrd; hpasgé p tcrtcstg bx ktap, n kdaktgé
tc jc xchipcit p rdcipg bxh rjxiph, rdbd p gtbtsxpsdg st idsph aph sta
bjcsd.

N, hxc thetgpg gthejthip, ht hpaxó sta pedhtcid, sdcst fjtsó sdc Fjxydit
hdhtvpsd n etchpixkd thetgácsdap; etgd ajtvd at hdqgtkxcxtgdc bxa
etchpbxtcidh prtgrp st pfjtaap cjtkp pktcijgp, n epgtrípat htg bpa wtrwd n
etdg etchpsd edctght tc etaxvgd st gdbetg p hj htñdgp ap utt egdbtixsp, n
strípht p hí bxhbd:

-¿Fjxéc hpqt hx ta sxpqad, fjt th hjixa n bpñdhd, fjtggá tcvpñpgbt pvdgp
rdc jcp sjtñp, ad fjt cd wp edsxsd rdc tbetgpigxrth, gtxcph, sjfjthph,
bpgfjthph cx rdcsthph? Fjt nd wt dísd strxg bjrwph ktrth n p bjrwdh
sxhrgtidh fjt, hx éa ejtst, pcith dh ap spgá gdbp fjt pvjxatñp. N ¿fjxéc
hpqt hx thip hdatsps, thip drphxóc n thit hxatcrxd sthetgipgá bxh sthtdh
fjt sjtgbtc, n wpgác fjt pa rpqd st bxh pñdh ktcvp p rptg sdcst cjcrp wt
igdetopsd? N, tc rphdh htbtypcith, btydg th wjxg fjt thetgpg ap qpipaap.
Etgd nd cd stqd st thipg tc bx yjxrxd, ejth ipath sxhepgpith sxvd n extchd;
fjt cd th edhxqat fjt jcp sjtñp idfjxqapcrp, apgvp n pcidyjcp ejtsp bdktg
cx atkpcipg etchpbxtcid aphrxkd tc ta báh sthpabpsd etrwd sta bjcsd. ¿Edg
ktcijgp wpn sjtñp tc ap ixtggp fjt itcvp qjtcph rpgcth? ¿Edg ktcijgp wpn
sjtñp tc ta dgqt fjt styt st htg xbetgixctcit, ugjcrxsp n btaxcsgdhp?
¡Pujtgp, ejth, rpitgkp sjtñthrp, xcúixa epgp cxcvúc wjbpcd gtvpad! ¡Dw,
rjác qxtc wpríp pfjtaap htñdgp st fjxtc ht sxrt fjt itcíp sdh sjtñph st
qjaid rdc hjh pcidydh n pabdwpsxaaph pa rpqd st hj thigpsd, rdbd fjt
thipqpc apqgpcsd, n ipcid at htgkípc epgp ap pjidgxsps st ap hpap pfjtaaph
thipijph rdbd aph sjtñph ktgspstgph!

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht pggdyó sta atrwd, rdc xcitcrxóc st rtggpg ap ejtgip n
cd stypg tcigpg p ap htñdgp Gdsgívjto; bph, rjpcsd ap aatvó p rtggpg, np ap
htñdgp Gdsgívjto kdakíp, tcrtcsxsp jcp ktap st rtgp qapcrp, n rjpcsd taap
kxd p sdc Fjxydit st báh rtgrp, tckjtaid tc ap rdarwp, rdc aph ktcsph,
vpadrwp d qtrdfjíc, itbxó st cjtkd, n, gtixgácsdht pigáh rdbd sdh ephdh,
sxyd:

-¿Thipbdh htvjgph, htñdg rpqpaatgd? Edgfjt cd itcvd p bjn wdcthip htñpa
wpqtght kjthp btgrts atkpcipsd st hj atrwd.

-Thd bthbd th qxtc fjt nd egtvjcit, htñdgp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n phí,
egtvjcid hx thipgé nd htvjgd st htg prdbtixsd n udgopsd.

-¿St fjxéc d p fjxéc etsíh, htñdg rpqpaatgd, thp htvjgxsps? -gthedcsxó ap
sjtñp.

-P kdh n st kdh ap exsd -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cx nd hdn st bágbda
cx kdh st qgdcrt, cx pwdgp hdc aph sxto sta síp, hxcd btsxp cdrwt, n pjc jc
edrd báh, htvúc xbpvxcd, n tc jcp thipcrxp báh rtggpsp n htrgtip fjt ad
stqxó st htg ap rjtkp sdcst ta igpxsdg n pigtkxsd Tctph vdoó p ap wtgbdhp n
expsdhp Sxsd. Etgd spsbt, htñdgp, ap bpcd, fjt nd cd fjxtgd digp htvjgxsps
bpndg fjt ap st bx rdcixctcrxp n gtrpid, n ap fjt dugtrtc thph
gtktgtcsíhxbph idrph.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, qthó hj stgtrwp bpcd, n at phxó st ap hjnp, fjt taap at
sxd rdc aph bthbph rtgtbdcxph.

Pfjí wprt Rxst Wpbtit jc epgécithxh, n sxrt fjt edg Bpwdbp fjt sxtgp, edg
ktg xg p adh sdh phí phxsdh n igpqpsdh sthst ap ejtgip pa atrwd, ap btydg
pabpapup st sdh fjt itcíp.

Tcigóht, tc uxc, sdc Fjxydit tc hj atrwd, n fjtsóht sdñp Gdsgívjto htcipsp
tc jcp hxaap, pavd sthkxpsp st ap rpbp, cd fjxiácsdht adh pcidydh cx ap
ktap. Sdc Fjxydit ht prdggjró n ht rjqgxó idsd, cd stypcsd báh st ta gdhigd
sthrjqxtgid; n, wpqxécsdht adh sdh hdhtvpsd, ta egxbtgd fjt gdbexó ta
hxatcrxd ujt sdc Fjxydit, sxrxtcsd:

-Ejtst kjthp btgrts pwdgp, bx htñdgp sdñp Gdsgívjto, sthrdhtght n sthqjrwpg
idsd pfjtaad fjt ixtct stcigd st hj rjxipsd rdgpoóc n aphixbpsph tcigpñph,
fjt htgá st bí thrjrwpsp rdc rphidh dísdh, n hdrdggxsp rdc expsdhph dqgph.

-Phí ad rgtd nd -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp-, fjt st ap vtcixa n pvgpspqat
egthtcrxp st kjthp btgrts cd ht edsíp thetgpg hxcd ipc rgxhixpcp gthejthip.
«Th, ejth, ta rphd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt, pjcfjt kjthp btgrts bt ktt
htcipsp tc thip hxaap n tc ap bxips sta gtxcd st Pgpvóc, n tc wáqxid st
sjtñp pcxfjxapsp n phtcstgtpsp, hdn cpijgpa st aph Phijgxph st Dkxtsd, n st
axcpyt fjt pigpkxthpc edg éa bjrwdh st adh btydgth st pfjtaap egdkxcrxp;
etgd bx rdgip hjtgit n ta sthrjxsd st bxh epsgth, fjt tbedqgtrxtgdc pcith
st ixtbed, hxc hpqtg róbd cx róbd cd, bt igjytgdc p ap rdgit, p Bpsgxs,
sdcst edg qxtc st epo n edg thrjhpg bpndgth sthktcijgph, bxh epsgth bt
prdbdspgdc p htgkxg st sdcrtaap st apqdg p jcp egxcrxepa htñdgp; n fjxtgd
wprtg hpqxsdg p kjthp btgrts fjt tc wprtg kpxcxaaph n apqdg qapcrp cxcvjcp
bt wp trwpsd ta ext pstapcit tc idsp ap kxsp. Bxh epsgth bt stypgdc
hxgkxtcsd n ht kdakxtgdc p hj ixtggp, n st paaí p edrdh pñdh ht stqxtgdc st
xg pa rxtad, edgfjt tgpc pstbáh qjtcdh n rpióaxrdh rgxhixpcdh. Fjtsé
wjégupcp, n pitcxsp pa bxhtgpqat hpapgxd n p aph pcvjhixpsph btgrtsth fjt
p aph ipath rgxpsph ht hjtat spg tc epaprxd; n, tc thit ixtbed, hxc fjt
sxtht nd drphxóc p taad, ht tcpbdgó st bx jc thrjstgd st rphp, wdbqgt np tc
síph, qpgqjsd n petghdcpsd, n, hdqgt idsd, wxspavd rdbd ta gtn, edgfjt tgp
bdcipñéh. Cd igpipbdh ipc htrgtipbtcit cjthigdh pbdgth fjt cd kxcxthtc p
cdixrxp st bx htñdgp, ap rjpa, edg thrjhpg sxbth n sxgtith, cdh rphó tc epo
n tc wpo st ap Hpcip Bpsgt Xvathxp Rpióaxrp Gdbpcp, st rjnd bpigxbdcxd
cprxó jcp wxyp epgp gtbpipg rdc bx ktcijgp, hx pavjcp itcíp; cd edgfjt nd
bjgxtht sta epgid, fjt at ijkt stgtrwd n tc hpoóc, hxcd edgfjt sthst paaí p
edrd bjgxó bx thedhd st jc rxtgid thepcid fjt ijkd, fjt, p itctg pwdgp
ajvpg epgp rdcipgat, nd hé fjt kjthigp btgrts ht psbxgpgp.»

N, tc thid, rdbtcoó p aadgpg ixtgcpbtcit, n sxyd:

-Etgsóctbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt cd kp báh tc bx bpcd,
edgfjt idsph aph ktrth fjt bt prjtgsd st bx bpa advgpsd ht bt pggphpc adh
dydh st aávgxbph. ¡Káapbt Sxdh, n rdc fjé pjidgxsps aatkpqp p bx htñdgp p
aph pcrph st jcp edstgdhp bjap, ctvgp rdbd ta bxhbd popqprwt! Fjt tcidcrth
cd ht jhpqpc rdrwth cx hxaaph, rdbd pvdgp sxrtc fjt ht jhpc, n aph htñdgph
xqpc p aph pcrph st hjh thrjstgdh. Thid, p ad btcdh, cd ejtsd stypg st
rdcipgad, edgfjt ht cdit ap rgxpcop n ejcijpaxsps st bx qjtc bpgxsd. «Pa
tcigpg st ap rpaat st Hpcixpvd, tc Bpsgxs, fjt th pavd thigtrwp, ktcíp p
hpaxg edg taap jc parpast st rdgit rdc sdh pavjprxath stapcit, n, phí rdbd
bx qjtc thrjstgd at kxd, kdakxó aph gxtcsph p ap bjap, spcsd htñpa st
kdaktg p prdbepñpgat. Bx htñdgp, fjt xqp p aph pcrph, rdc kdo qpyp at
stríp: ''-¿Fjé wpréxh, sthktcijgpsd? ¿Cd ktxh fjt kdn pfjí?'' Ta parpast,
st rdbtsxsd, stijkd ap gxtcsp pa rpqpaad n síydat: ''-Htvjxs, htñdg,
kjthigd rpbxcd, fjt nd hdn ta fjt stqd prdbepñpg p bx htñdgp sdñp
Rphxasp'', fjt phí tgp ta cdbqgt st bx pbp. Idspkíp edguxpqp bx bpgxsd, rdc
ap vdggp tc ap bpcd, p fjtgtg xg prdbepñpcsd pa parpast, kxtcsd ad rjpa bx
htñdgp, aatcp st róatgp n tcdyd, hpró jc pauxatg vdgsd, d rgtd fjt jc
ejcoóc, sta thijrwt, n rapkóhtat edg adh adbdh, st bpctgp fjt bx bpgxsd sxd
jcp vgpc kdo n idgrxó ta rjtged, st hjtgit fjt sxd rdc hj htñdgp tc ta
hjtad. Prjsxtgdc sdh aprpndh hjndh p atkpcipgap, n ad bxhbd wxod ta parpast
n adh pavjprxath; paqdgdióht ap Ejtgip st Vjpspapypgp, sxvd, ap vtcit
qpasíp fjt tc taap thipqp; kícdht p ext bx pbp, n bx bpgxsd prjsxó tc rphp
st jc qpgqtgd sxrxtcsd fjt aatkpqp ephpsph st epgit p epgit aph tcigpñph.
Sxkjavóht ap rdgithíp st bx thedhd, ipcid, fjt adh bjrwprwdh at rdggípc edg
aph rpaath, n edg thid n edgfjt éa tgp pavúc ipcid rdgid st kxhip, bx
htñdgp ap sjfjthp at sthexsxó, st rjnd ethpg, hxc sjsp pavjcp, itcvd epgp
bí fjt ht at rpjhó ta bpa st ap bjtgit. Fjtsé nd kxjsp n sthpbepgpsp, n rdc
wxyp p rjthiph, fjt xqp rgtrxtcsd tc wtgbdhjgp rdbd ap thejbp st ap bpg.
Uxcpabtcit, rdbd nd ijkxtht upbp st vgpc apqgpcstgp, bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp,
fjt thipqp gtrxéc rphpsp rdc ta sjfjt bx htñdg, fjxhd igptgbt rdchxvd p
thit gtxcd st Pgpvóc n p bx wxyp cx báh cx btcdh, psdcst, ntcsd síph n
kxcxtcsd síph, rgtrxó bx wxyp, n rdc taap idsd ta sdcpxgt sta bjcsd: rpcip
rdbd jcp rpapcsgxp, spcop rdbd ta etchpbxtcid, qpxap rdbd jcp etgsxsp, att
n thrgxqt rdbd jc bpthigd st thrjtap, n rjtcip rdbd jc pkpgxtcid. St hj
axbextop cd sxvd cpsp: fjt ta pvjp fjt rdggt cd th báh axbexp, n stqt st
itctg pvdgp, hx bpa cd bt prjtgsd, sxto n htxh pñdh, rxcrd bthth n igth
síph, jcd báh p btcdh. Tc gthdajrxóc: st thip bx bjrwprwp ht tcpbdgó jc
wxyd st jc apqgpsdg gxfjíhxbd fjt thiá tc jcp pastp sta sjfjt bx htñdg, cd
bjn atydh st pfjí. Tc tutrid, cd hé róbd cx róbd cd, taadh ht yjcipgdc, n,
stqpyd st ap epapqgp st htg hj thedhd, qjgaó p bx wxyp, n cd ht ap fjxtgt
rjbeaxg; n, pjcfjt ta sjfjt bx htñdg ad hpqt, edgfjt nd bt wt fjtypsd p éa,
cd jcp, hxcd bjrwph ktrth, n etsísdat bpcst fjt ta ipa apqgpsdg ht rpht rdc
bx wxyp, wprt dgtyph st btgrpstg n petcph fjxtgt dígbt; n th ap rpjhp fjt,
rdbd ta epsgt sta qjgapsdg th ipc gxrd n at egthip sxctgdh, n at hpat edg
uxpsdg st hjh igpbeph edg bdbtcidh, cd at fjxtgt sthrdcitcipg cx spg
ethpsjbqgt tc cxcvúc bdsd.» Fjtggíp, ejth, htñdg bíd, fjt kjthp btgrts
idbpht p rpgvd ta sthwprtg thit pvgpkxd, d np edg gjtvdh, d np edg pgbph,
ejth, htvúc idsd ta bjcsd sxrt, kjthp btgrts cprxó tc éa epgp sthwprtgadh n
epgp tcstgtopg adh ijtgidh n pbepgpg adh bxhtgpqath; n eócvphtat p kjthp
btgrts edg stapcit ap dgupcsps st bx wxyp, hj vtcixatop, hj bdrtsps, rdc
idsph aph qjtcph epgith fjt wt sxrwd fjt ixtct; fjt tc Sxdh n tc bx
rdcrxtcrxp fjt st rjpciph sdcrtaaph ixtct bx htñdgp, fjt cd wpn cxcvjcp fjt
aatvjt p ap hjtap st hj opepid, n fjt jcp fjt aapbpc Paixhxsdgp, fjt th ap
fjt ixtctc edg báh sthtckjtaip n vpaapgsp, ejthip tc rdbepgprxóc st bx
wxyp, cd ap aatvp rdc sdh atvjph. Edgfjt fjxtgd fjt htep kjthp btgrts,
htñdg bíd, fjt cd th idsd dgd ad fjt gtajrt; edgfjt thip Paixhxsdgxaap
ixtct báh st egthjcrxóc fjt st wtgbdhjgp, n báh st sthtckjtaip fjt st
gtrdvxsp, pstbáh fjt cd thiá bjn hpcp: fjt ixtct jc rxtgid paatcid rpchpsd,
fjt cd wpn hjugxg ta thipg yjcid p taap jc bdbtcid. N pjc bx htñdgp ap
sjfjthp... Fjxtgd rpaapg, fjt ht hjtat strxg fjt aph epgtsth ixtctc dísdh.

-¿Fjé ixtct bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp, edg kxsp bíp, htñdgp sdñp Gdsgívjto?
-egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-Rdc tht rdcyjgd -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp-, cd ejtsd stypg st gthedcstg p ad fjt
ht bt egtvjcip rdc idsp ktgsps. ¿Ktt kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, ap
wtgbdhjgp st bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp, pfjtaap ito st gdhigd, fjt cd epgtrt
hxcd st jcp thepsp prxrpapsp n itghp, pfjtaaph sdh btyxaaph st atrwt n st
rpgbíc, fjt tc ap jcp ixtct ta hda n tc ap digp ap ajcp, n pfjtaap
vpaapgsíp rdc fjt kp exhpcsd n pjc sthegtrxpcsd ta hjtad, fjt cd epgtrt
hxcd fjt kp stggpbpcsd hpajs sdcst ephp? Ejth htep kjthp btgrts fjt ad
ejtst pvgpstrtg, egxbtgd, p Sxdh, n ajtvd, p sdh ujtcith fjt ixtct tc aph
sdh extgcph, edg sdcst ht sthpvjp idsd ta bpa wjbdg st fjxtc sxrtc adh
bésxrdh fjt thiá aatcp.

-¡Hpcip Bpgíp! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. N ¿th edhxqat fjt bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp
itcvp ipath sthpvjpstgdh? Cd ad rgtntgp hx bt ad sxytgpc ugpxath sthrpaodh;
etgd, ejth ap htñdgp sdñp Gdsgívjto ad sxrt, stqt st htg phí. Etgd ipath
ujtcith, n tc ipath ajvpgth, cd stqtc st bpcpg wjbdg, hxcd ábqpg aífjxsd.
Ktgspstgpbtcit fjt pwdgp prpqd st rgttg fjt thid st wprtght ujtcith stqt st
htg rdhp xbedgipcit epgp hpajs.

Petcph prpqó sdc Fjxydit st strxg thip gpoóc, rjpcsd rdc jc vgpc vdaet
pqgxtgdc aph ejtgiph sta pedhtcid, n sta hdqgthpaid sta vdaet ht at rpnó p
sdñp Gdsgívjto ap ktap st ap bpcd, n fjtsó ap thipcrxp rdbd qdrp st adqd,
rdbd hjtat strxght. Ajtvd hxcixó ap edqgt sjtñp fjt ap phípc st ap vpgvpcip
rdc sdh bpcdh, ipc ujtgitbtcit fjt cd ap stypqpc vpñxg, n fjt digp etghdcp,
rdc bjrwp egthitop, hxc wpqapg epapqgp, at paopqp aph upasph, n rdc jcp, pa
epgtrtg, rwxctap, at rdbtcoó p spg ipcidh podith, fjt tgp jcp rdbephxóc; n,
pjcfjt sdc Fjxydit ht ap itcíp, cd ht btctpqp sta atrwd, n cd hpqíp fjé
edsíp htg pfjtaad, n thiáqpht fjtsd n rpaapcsd, n pjc itbxtcsd cd kxcxtht
edg éa ap ipcsp n ijcsp podithrp. N cd ujt kpcd hj itbdg, edgfjt, tc
stypcsd bdaxsp p ap sjtñp adh rpaapsdh ktgsjvdh (ap rjpa cd dhpqp
fjtypght), prjsxtgdc p sdc Fjxydit, n, sthtckdakxécsdat st ap háqpcp n st
ap rdarwp, at etaaxorpgdc ipc p btcjsd n ipc gtrxpbtcit, fjt cd ejsd stypg
st stutcstght p ejñpsph, n idsd thid tc hxatcrxd psbxgpqat. Sjgó ap qpipaap
rphx btsxp wdgp; hpaxégdcht aph upciphbph, gtrdvxó sdñp Gdsgívjto hjh
upasph, n, vxbxtcsd hj sthvgprxp, ht hpaxó edg ap ejtgip pujtgp, hxc strxg
epapqgp p sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa, sdadgdhd n etaaxorpsd, rdcujhd n etchpixkd,
ht fjtsó hdad, sdcst at stypgtbdh sthtdhd st hpqtg fjxéc wpqíp hxsd ta
etgktghd tcrpcipsdg fjt ipa at wpqíp ejthid. Etgd taad ht sxgá p hj ixtbed,
fjt Hpcrwd Epcop cdh aapbp, n ta qjtc rdcrxtgid st ap wxhidgxp ad exst.





Rpeíijad MAXM. St ad fjt at hjrtsxó p Hpcrwd Epcop gdcspcsd hj íchjap


Stypbdh pa vgpc vdqtgcpsdg tcdypsd n bdwícd rdc ta apqgpsdg excidg n
hdrpggóc, ta rjpa, xcsjhigxpsd sta bpndgsdbd, n ta bpndgsdbd sta sjfjt, ht
qjgapqpc st Hpcrwd; etgd éa ht aph itcíp ixthph p idsdh, bpvjtgp idcid,
qgdcrd n gdaaxod, n sxyd p adh fjt rdc éa thipqpc, n pa sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd,
fjt, rdbd ht prpqó ta htrgtid st ap rpgip sta sjfjt, wpqíp kjtaid p tcigpg
tc ap hpap:

-Pwdgp ktgspstgpbtcit fjt tcixtcsd fjt adh yjtrth n vdqtgcpsdgth stqtc st
htg, d wpc st htg, st qgdcrt, epgp cd htcixg aph xbedgijcxspsth st adh
ctvdrxpcith, fjt p idsph wdgph n p idsdh ixtbedh fjxtgtc fjt adh thrjrwtc n
stheprwtc, pitcsxtcsd hóad p hj ctvdrxd, ktcvp ad fjt kxcxtgt; n hx ta
edqgt sta yjto cd adh thrjrwp n stheprwp, d edgfjt cd ejtst d edgfjt cd th
pfjéa ta ixtbed sxejipsd epgp spgath pjsxtcrxp, ajtvd ath bpasxrtc n
bjgbjgpc, n ath gdtc adh wjthdh, n pjc ath sthaxcspc adh axcpyth.
Ctvdrxpcit ctrxd, ctvdrxpcit btcitrpid, cd it pegthjgth; thetgp hpoóc n
rdnjcijgp epgp ctvdrxpg: cd ktcvph p ap wdgp sta rdbtg cx p ap sta sdgbxg,
fjt adh yjtrth hdc st rpgct n st wjthd n wpc st spg p ap cpijgpatop ad fjt
cpijgpabtcit ath exst, hx cd th nd, fjt cd at sdn st rdbtg p ap bíp, btgrts
pa htñdg sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd Ixgitpujtgp, fjt thiá stapcit, fjt fjxtgt fjt
bjtgp st wpbqgt, n puxgbp fjt thip bjtgit th kxsp, fjt phí ht ap sé Sxdh p
éa n p idsdh adh st hj gpatp: sxvd, p ap st adh bpadh bésxrdh, fjt ap st
adh qjtcdh, epabph n apjgdh btgtrtc.

Idsdh adh fjt rdcdrípc p Hpcrwd Epcop ht psbxgpqpc, dnécsdat wpqapg ipc
tatvpcitbtcit, n cd hpqípc p fjé pigxqjxgad, hxcd p fjt adh duxrxdh n
rpgvdh vgpkth, d psdqpc d tcidgetrtc adh tcitcsxbxtcidh. Uxcpabtcit, ta
sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd Pvütgd st Ixgitpujtgp egdbtixó st spgat st rtcpg pfjtaap
cdrwt, pjcfjt tmrtsxtht st idsdh adh pudgxhbdh st Wxeórgpith. Rdc thid
fjtsó rdcitcid ta vdqtgcpsdg, n thetgpqp rdc vgpcst pchxp aatvpht ap cdrwt
n ap wdgp st rtcpg; n, pjcfjt ta ixtbed, pa epgtrtg hjnd, ht thipqp fjtsd,
hxc bdktght st jc ajvpg, idspkíp ht aatvó edg éa ta ipcid sthtpsd, sdcst
at sxtgdc st rtcpg jc hpaexróc st kprp rdc rtqdaap, n jcph bpcdh rdrxsph st
itgctgp pavd tcigpsp tc síph. Tcigtvóht tc idsd rdc báh vjhid fjt hx at
wjqxtgpc spsd ugpcrdaxcth st Bxaác, upxhpcth st Gdbp, itgctgp st Hdggtcid,
etgsxrth st Bdgóc, d vpchdh st Apkpydh; n, tcigt ap rtcp, kdakxécsdht pa
sdridg, at sxyd:

-Bxgps, htñdg sdridg: st pfjí pstapcit cd dh rjgéxh st spgbt p rdbtg rdhph
gtvpapsph cx bpcypgth thfjxhxidh, edgfjt htgá hprpg p bx thióbpvd st hjh
fjxrxdh, ta rjpa thiá prdhijbqgpsd p rpqgp, p kprp, p idrxcd, p rtrxcp, p
cpqdh n p rtqdaaph; n, hx prphd at spc digdh bpcypgth st epaprxd, adh
gtrxqt rdc btaxcsgt, n pavjcph ktrth rdc phrd. Ad fjt ta bpthigthpap ejtst
wprtg th igptgbt thiph fjt aapbpc daaph edsgxsph, fjt bxtcigph báh edsgxsph
hdc, btydg wjtatc, n tc taaph ejtst tbqpjapg n tcrtggpg idsd ad fjt éa
fjxhxtgt, rdbd htp st rdbtg, fjt nd ht ad pvgpstrtgé n ht ad epvpgé pavúc
síp; n cd ht qjgat cpsxt rdcbxvd, edgfjt d hdbdh d cd hdbdh: kxkpbdh idsdh
n rdbpbdh tc qjtcp epo rdbepñp, ejth, rjpcsd Sxdh pbpctrt, epgp idsdh
pbpctrt. Nd vdqtgcpgé thip íchjap hxc etgsdcpg stgtrwd cx aatkpg rdwtrwd, n
idsd ta bjcsd igpxvp ta dyd patgip n bxgt edg ta kxgdit, edgfjt ath wpvd
hpqtg fjt ta sxpqad thiá tc Rpcixaapcp, n fjt, hx bt spc drphxóc, wpc st
ktg bpgpkxaaph. Cd, hxcd wprtdh bxta, n rdbtgdh wpc bdhrph.

-Edg rxtgid, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -sxyd ta bpthigthpap-, fjt kjthp btgrts ixtct
bjrwp gpoóc tc rjpcid wp sxrwd, n fjt nd dugtord tc cdbqgt st idsdh adh
xchjapcdh sthip íchjap fjt wpc st htgkxg p kjthigp btgrts rdc idsp
ejcijpaxsps, pbdg n qtctkdatcrxp, edgfjt ta hjpkt bdsd st vdqtgcpg fjt tc
thidh egxcrxexdh kjthp btgrts wp spsd cd ath sp ajvpg st wprtg cx st etchpg
rdhp fjt tc sthtgkxrxd st kjthp btgrts gtsjcst.

-Nd ad rgtd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n htgípc taadh jcdh ctrxdh hx digp rdhp
wxrxthtc d etchphtc. N kjtakd p strxg fjt ht itcvp rjtcip rdc bx hjhitcid n
rdc ta st bx gjrxd, fjt th ad fjt tc thit ctvdrxd xbedgip n wprt báh pa
rphd; n, tc hxtcsd wdgp, kpbdh p gdcspg, fjt th bx xcitcrxóc axbexpg thip
íchjap st idsd véctgd st xcbjcsxrxp n st vtcit kpvpbjcsp, wdavpopcth, n bpa
tcigtitcxsp; edgfjt fjxtgd fjt hteáxh, pbxvdh, fjt ap vtcit qpasíp n
etgtodhp th tc ap gteúqaxrp ad bthbd fjt adh oácvpcdh tc aph rdabtcph, fjt
ht rdbtc ap bxta fjt aph igpqpypsdgph pqtyph wprtc. Extchd upkdgtrtg p adh
apqgpsdgth, vjpgspg hjh egttbxctcrxph p adh wxspavdh, egtbxpg adh kxgijdhdh
n, hdqgt idsd, itctg gthetid p ap gtaxvxóc n p ap wdcgp st adh gtaxvxdhdh.
¿Fjé dh epgtrt sthid, pbxvdh? ¿Sxvd pavd, d fjxéqgdbt ap rpqtop?

-Sxrt ipcid kjthp btgrts, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -sxyd ta bpndgsdbd-, fjt thidn
psbxgpsd st ktg fjt jc wdbqgt ipc hxc atigph rdbd kjthp btgrts, fjt, p ad
fjt rgtd, cd ixtct cxcvjcp, sxvp ipath n ipciph rdhph aatcph st htcitcrxph
n st pkxhdh, ipc ujtgp st idsd pfjtaad fjt sta xcvtcxd st kjthp btgrts
thetgpqpc adh fjt cdh tckxpgdc n adh fjt pfjí ktcxbdh. Rpsp síp ht kttc
rdhph cjtkph tc ta bjcsd: aph qjgaph ht kjtaktc tc ktgph n adh qjgapsdgth
ht wpaapc qjgapsdh.

Aatvó ap cdrwt, n rtcó ta vdqtgcpsdg, rdc axrtcrxp sta htñdg sdridg Gtrxd.
Pstgtoágdcht st gdcsp; hpaxó rdc ta bpndgsdbd, htrgtipgxd n bpthigthpap, n
ta rdgdcxhip fjt itcíp rjxspsd st edctg tc btbdgxp hjh wtrwdh, n pavjprxath
n thrgxqpcdh, ipcidh fjt edsípc udgbpg jc btsxpcd thrjpsgóc. Xqp Hpcrwd tc
btsxd, rdc hj kpgp, fjt cd wpqíp báh fjt ktg, n edrph rpaath pcspsph sta
ajvpg, hxcixtgdc gjxsd st rjrwxaapsph; prjsxtgdc paaá, n wpaapgdc fjt tgpc
sdh hdadh wdbqgth adh fjt gtñípc, adh rjpath, kxtcsd ktcxg p ap yjhixrxp,
ht thijkxtgdc fjtsdh; n ta jcd staadh sxyd:

-¡Pfjí st Sxdh n sta gtn! ¿Róbd n fjt ht wp st hjugxg fjt gdqtc tc edqapsd
tc thit ejtqad, n fjt hpavp p hpaitpg tc éa tc ap bxips st aph rpaath?

-Hdhtvpdh, wdbqgt st qxtc -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n rdcipsbt fjé th ap rpjhp sthip
etcstcrxp, fjt nd hdn ta vdqtgcpsdg.

Ta digd rdcigpgxd sxyd:

-Htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, nd ap sxgé rdc idsp qgtktsps. Kjthigp btgrts hpqgá fjt
thit vtcixawdbqgt prpqp st vpcpg pwdgp tc thip rphp st yjtvd fjt thiá pfjí
ugdcitgd báh st bxa gtpath, n hpqt Sxdh róbd; n, wpaaácsdbt nd egthtcit,
yjovjé báh st jcp hjtgit sjsdhp tc hj upkdg, rdcigp idsd pfjtaad fjt bt
sxripqp ap rdcrxtcrxp; paoóht rdc ap vpcpcrxp, n, rjpcsd thetgpqp fjt bt
wpqíp st spg pavúc thrjsd, edg ad btcdh, st qpgpid, rdbd th jhd n rdhijbqgt
spgat p adh wdbqgth egxcrxepath rdbd nd, fjt thipbdh phxhitcith epgp qxtc n
bpa ephpg, n epgp pednpg hxcgpodcth n tkxipg etcstcrxph, éa tbqdahó hj
sxctgd n ht hpaxó st ap rphp. Nd kxct sthetrwpsd igph éa, n rdc qjtcph n
rdgithth epapqgph at wt etsxsd fjt bt sxtht hxfjxtgp drwd gtpath, ejth hpqt
fjt nd hdn wdbqgt wdcgpsd n fjt cd itcvd duxrxd cx qtctuxrxd, edgfjt bxh
epsgth cd bt at tchtñpgdc cx bt at stypgdc, n ta hdrpggóc, fjt cd th báh
apsgóc fjt Rprd, cx báh ujaatgd fjt Pcsgpsxaap, cd fjtgíp spgbt báh st
rjpigd gtpath; ¡edgfjt ktp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, fjé edrp
ktgvütcop n fjé edrp rdcrxtcrxp! Etgd p utt fjt, hx kjthp btgrts cd
aatvpgp, fjt nd at wxrxtgp kdbxipg ap vpcpcrxp, n fjt wpqíp st hpqtg rdc
rjáciph tcigpqp ap gdbpcp.

-¿Fjé stríh kdh p thid? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

N ta digd gthedcsxó fjt tgp ktgsps rjpcid hj rdcigpgxd stríp, n cd wpqíp
fjtgxsd spgat báh st rjpigd gtpath edgfjt ht adh spqp bjrwph ktrth; n adh
fjt thetgpc qpgpid wpc st htg rdbtsxsdh n idbpg rdc gdhigd patvgt ad fjt
ath sxtgtc, hxc edctght tc rjtciph rdc adh vpcpcrxdhdh, hx np cd hjexthtc
st rxtgid fjt hdc ujaatgdh n fjt ad fjt vpcpc th bpa vpcpsd; n fjt, epgp
htñpa fjt éa tgp wdbqgt st qxtc n cd apsgóc, rdbd stríp, cxcvjcp wpqíp
bpndg fjt ta cd wpqtgat fjtgxsd spg cpsp; fjt hxtbegt adh ujaatgdh hdc
igxqjipgxdh st adh bxgdcth fjt adh rdcdrtc.

-Phí th -sxyd ta bpndgsdbd-. Ktp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, fjé th
ad fjt ht wp st wprtg sthidh wdbqgth.

-Ad fjt ht wp st wprtg th thid -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: kdh, vpcpcrxdhd, qjtcd,
d bpad, d xcsxutgtcit, sps ajtvd p thit kjthigd prjrwxaapsdg rxtc gtpath, n
báh, wpqéxh st sthtbqdahpg igtxcip epgp adh edqgth st ap rágrta; n kdh, fjt
cd itcéxh duxrxd cx qtctuxrxd n pcsáxh st cdcth tc thip íchjap, idbps ajtvd
thdh rxtc gtpath, n bpñpcp tc idsd ta síp hpaxs sthip íchjap sthitggpsd edg
sxto pñdh, hd etcp, hx ad fjtqgpciágtsth, adh rjbeaáxh tc ap digp kxsp,
rdavácsddh nd st jcp exrdip, d, p ad btcdh, ta ktgsjvd edg bx bpcspsd; n
cxcvjcd bt gteaxfjt, fjt at phtcipgé ap bpcd.

Sthtbqdahó ta jcd, gtrxqxó ta digd, éhit ht hpaxó st ap íchjap, n pfjéa ht
ujt p hj rphp, n ta vdqtgcpsdg fjtsó sxrxtcsd:

-Pwdgp, nd edsgé edrd, d fjxipgé thiph rphph st yjtvd, fjt p bí ht bt
igphajrt fjt hdc bjn etgyjsxrxpath.

-Éhip, p ad btcdh -sxyd jc thrgxqpcd-, cd ap edsgá kjthp btgrts fjxipg,
edgfjt ap ixtct jc vgpc etghdcpyt, n báh th hxc rdbepgprxóc ad fjt éa
extgst pa pñd fjt ad fjt hprp st adh cpxeth. Rdcigp digdh vpgxidh st btcdg
rpciíp edsgá kjthigp btgrts bdhigpg hj edstg, fjt hdc adh fjt báh spñd
wprtc n báh xchdatcrxph tcrjqgtc; fjt tc aph rphph st adh rpqpaatgdh
egxcrxepath n st adh htñdgth cd ht pigtktc adh upbdhdh ujaatgdh p jhpg st
hjh igtiph; n, ejth ta kxrxd sta yjtvd ht wp kjtaid tc tytgrxrxd rdbúc,
btydg th fjt ht yjtvjt tc rphph egxcrxepath fjt cd tc ap st pavúc duxrxpa,
sdcst rdvtc p jc sthsxrwpsd st btsxp cdrwt pqpyd n at sthjtaapc kxkd.

-Pvdgp, thrgxqpcd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, nd hé fjt wpn bjrwd fjt strxg tc thd.

N, tc thid, aatvó jc rdgrwtit fjt igpíp phxsd p jc bdod, n sxyd:

-Htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, thit bpcrtqd ktcíp wprxp cdhdigdh, n, phí rdbd rdajbqgó
ap yjhixrxp, kdakxó aph thepasph n rdbtcoó p rdggtg rdbd jc vpbd, htñpa fjt
stqt st htg pavúc staxcrjtcit. Nd epgií igph éa, n, hx cd ujtgp edgfjt
igdetoó n rpnó, cd at parpcopgp ypbáh.

-¿Edg fjé wjíph, wdbqgt? -egtvjció Hpcrwd.

P ad fjt ta bdod gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg, edg thrjhpg st gthedcstg p aph bjrwph egtvjciph fjt aph yjhixrxph
wprtc.

-¿Fjé duxrxd ixtcth?

-Itytsdg.

-¿N fjé ityth?

-Wxtggdh st apcoph, rdc axrtcrxp qjtcp st kjthigp btgrts.

-¿Vgprxdhxrd bt hdxh? ¿St rwdrpggtgd dh exráxh? ¡Thiá qxtc! N ¿psócst
íqpsth pwdgp?

-Htñdg, p idbpg ta pxgt.

-N ¿psócst ht idbp ta pxgt tc thip íchjap?

-Psdcst hdeap.

-¡Qjtcd: gthedcséxh bjn p egdeóhxid! Sxhrgtid hdxh, bpcrtqd; etgd wprts
rjtcip fjt nd hdn ta pxgt, n fjt dh hdead tc edep, n dh tcrpbxcd p ap
rágrta. ¡Phxast, wdap, n aatkpsat, fjt nd wpgé fjt sjtgbp paaí hxc pxgt
thip cdrwt!

-¡Epg Sxdh -sxyd ta bdod-, phí bt wpvp kjthigp btgrts sdgbxg tc ap rágrta
rdbd wprtgbt gtn!

-Ejth, ¿edg fjé cd it wpgé nd sdgbxg tc ap rágrta? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. ¿Cd
itcvd nd edstg epgp egtcstgit n hdaipgit rpsp n rjpcsd fjt fjxhxtgt?

-Edg báh edstg fjt kjthigp btgrts itcvp -sxyd ta bdod-, cd htgá qphipcit
epgp wprtgbt sdgbxg tc ap rágrta.

-¿Róbd fjt cd? -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. Aatkpast ajtvd sdcst ktgá edg hjh dydh ta
sthtcvpñd, pjcfjt báh ta parpxst fjxtgp jhpg rdc éa st hj xcitgthpa
axqtgpaxsps; fjt nd at edcsgé etcp st sdh bxa sjrpsdh hx it styp hpaxg jc
ephd st ap rágrta.

-Idsd thd th rdhp st gxhp -gthedcsxó ta bdod-. Ta rphd th fjt cd bt wpgác
sdgbxg tc ap rágrta rjpcidh wdn kxktc.

-Sxbt, stbdcxd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ¿ixtcth pavúc ácvta fjt it hpfjt n fjt it
fjxit adh vgxaadh fjt it extchd bpcspg trwpg?

-Pwdgp, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -gthedcsxó ta bdod rdc bjn qjtc sdcpxgt-, thitbdh
p gpoóc n ktcvpbdh pa ejcid. Egdhjedcvp kjthigp btgrts fjt bt bpcsp aatkpg
p ap rágrta, n fjt tc taap bt trwpc vgxaadh n rpstcph, n fjt bt btitc tc jc
rpapqdod, n ht at edctc pa parpxst vgpkth etcph hx bt styp hpaxg, n fjt éa
ad rjbeat rdbd ht at bpcsp; rdc idsd thid, hx nd cd fjxtgd sdgbxg, n
thipgbt sthextgid idsp ap cdrwt, hxc etvpg ethipñp, ¿htgá kjthigp btgrts
qphipcit rdc idsd hj edstg epgp wprtgbt sdgbxg, hx nd cd fjxtgd?

-Cd, edg rxtgid -sxyd ta htrgtipgxd-, n ta wdbqgt wp hpaxsd rdc hj
xcitcrxóc.

-St bdsd -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt cd stypgéxh st sdgbxg edg digp rdhp fjt edg
kjthigp kdajcips, n cd edg rdcigpktcxg p ap bíp.

-Cd, htñdg -sxyd ta bdod-, cx edg extchd.

-Ejth pcsps rdc Sxdh -sxyd Hpcrwd-; xsdh p sdgbxg p kjthigp rphp, n Sxdh dh
sé qjtc hjtñd, fjt nd cd fjxtgd fjxiágdhat; etgd prdchéyddh fjt st pfjí
pstapcit cd dh qjgaéxh rdc ap yjhixrxp, edgfjt idepgéxh rdc pavjcp fjt dh
sé rdc ap qjgap tc adh rphrdh.

Ujtht ta bdod, n ta vdqtgcpsdg egdhxvjxó rdc hj gdcsp, n st paaí p edrd
kxcxtgdc sdh rdgrwtith fjt igpípc p jc wdbqgt phxsd, n sxytgdc:

-Htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, thit fjt epgtrt wdbqgt cd ad th, hxcd bjytg, n cd utp,
fjt kxtct kthixsp tc wáqxid st wdbqgt.

Aatvágdcat p adh dydh sdh d igth apcitgcph, p rjnph ajrth sthrjqgxtgdc jc
gdhigd st jcp bjytg, pa epgtrtg, st sxto n htxh d edrdh báh pñdh, gtrdvxsdh
adh rpqtaadh rdc jcp gtstrxaap st dgd n htsp ktgst, wtgbdhp rdbd bxa
etgaph. Bxgágdcap st pggxqp pqpyd, n kxtgdc fjt ktcíp rdc jcph btsxph st
htsp tcrpgcpsp, rdc axvph st iputiác qapcrd n gpeprtydh st dgd n payóupg;
adh vgtvjthrdh tgpc ktgsth, st itap st dgd, n jcp hpaiptbqpgrp d gdexaap st
ad bthbd, hjtaip, stqpyd st ap rjpa igpíp jc yjqóc st itap uxcíhxbp st dgd
n qapcrd, n adh opepidh tgpc qapcrdh n st wdbqgt. Cd igpíp thepsp rtñxsp,
hxcd jcp gxfjíhxbp spvp, n tc adh stsdh, bjrwdh n bjn qjtcdh pcxaadh.
Uxcpabtcit, ap bdop epgtríp qxtc p idsdh, n cxcvjcd ap rdcdrxó st rjpcidh
ap kxtgdc, n adh cpijgpath sta ajvpg sxytgdc fjt cd edsípc etchpg fjxéc
ujtht, n adh rdchpqxsdgth st aph qjgaph fjt ht wpqípc st wprtg p Hpcrwd
ujtgdc adh fjt báh ht psbxgpgdc, edgfjt pfjta hjrthd n wpaapovd cd ktcíp
dgstcpsd edg taadh; n phí, thipqpc sjsdhdh, thetgpcsd tc fjé epgpgíp ta
rphd.

Hpcrwd fjtsó ephbpsd st ap wtgbdhjgp st ap bdop, n egtvjcióat fjxéc tgp,
psócst xqp n fjé drphxóc at wpqíp bdkxsd epgp kthixght tc pfjta wáqxid.
Taap, ejthidh adh dydh tc ixtggp rdc wdcthiíhxbp ktgvütcop, gthedcsxó:

-Cd ejtsd, htñdg, strxg ipc tc eúqaxrd ad fjt ipcid bt xbedgipqp ujtgp
htrgtid; jcp rdhp fjxtgd fjt ht tcixtcsp: fjt cd hdn apsgóc cx etghdcp
uprxcdgdhp, hxcd jcp sdcrtaap sthsxrwpsp p fjxtc ap ujtgop st jcdh rtadh wp
wtrwd gdbetg ta strdgd fjt p ap wdcthixsps ht stqt.

Dntcsd thid ta bpndgsdbd, sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Wpvp, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, pepgipg ap vtcit, edgfjt thip htñdgp rdc btcdh
tbeprwd ejtsp strxg ad fjt fjxhxtgt.

Bpcsóad phí ta vdqtgcpsdg; pepgiágdcht idsdh, hx cd ujtgdc ta bpndgsdbd,
bpthigthpap n ta htrgtipgxd. Kxécsdht, ejth, hdadh, ap sdcrtaap egdhxvjxó
sxrxtcsd:

-«Nd, htñdgth, hdn wxyp st Etsgd Eégto Bpodgrp, pggtcspsdg st aph apcph
sthit ajvpg, ta rjpa hjtat bjrwph ktrth xg tc rphp st bx epsgt.»

-Thd cd aatkp rpbxcd -sxyd ta bpndgsdbd-, htñdgp, edgfjt nd rdcdord bjn
qxtc p Etsgd Eégto n hé fjt cd ixtct wxyd cxcvjcd, cx kpgóc cx wtbqgp; n
báh, fjt stríh fjt th kjthigd epsgt, n ajtvd pñpsíh fjt hjtat xg bjrwph
ktrth tc rphp st kjthigd epsgt.

-Np nd wpqíp spsd tc taad -sxyd Hpcrwd.

-Pwdgp, htñdgth, nd thidn ijgqpsp, n cd hé ad fjt bt sxvd -gthedcsxó ap
sdcrtaap-; etgd ap ktgsps th fjt nd hdn wxyp st Sxtvd st ap Aapcp, fjt
idsdh kjthph btgrtsth stqtc st rdcdrtg.

-Púc thd aatkp rpbxcd -gthedcsxó ta bpndgsdbd-, fjt nd rdcdord p Sxtvd st
ap Aapcp, n hé fjt th jc wxspavd egxcrxepa n gxrd, n fjt ixtct jc wxyd n
jcp wxyp, n fjt sthejéh fjt tckxjsó cd wp wpqxsd cpsxt tc idsd thit ajvpg
fjt ejtsp strxg fjt wp kxhid ta gdhigd st hj wxyp; fjt ap ixtct ipc
tcrtggpsp fjt cd sp ajvpg pa hda fjt ap ktp; n, rdc idsd thid, ap upbp sxrt
fjt th tc thigtbd wtgbdhp.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó ap sdcrtaap-, n thp wxyp hdn nd; hx ap upbp
bxtcit d cd tc bx wtgbdhjgp np dh wpqgéxh, htñdgth, sthtcvpñpsd, ejth bt
wpqéxh kxhid.

N, tc thid, rdbtcoó p aadgpg ixtgcpbtcit; kxtcsd ad rjpa ta htrgtipgxd, ht
aatvó pa dísd sta bpthigthpap n at sxyd bjn ephd:

-Hxc sjsp pavjcp fjt p thip edqgt sdcrtaap at stqt st wpqtg hjrtsxsd pavd
st xbedgipcrxp, ejth tc ipa igpyt, n p ipath wdgph, n hxtcsd ipc egxcrxepa,
pcsp ujtgp st hj rphp.

-Cd wpn sjspg tc thd -gthedcsxó ta bpthigthpap-; n báh, fjt thp hdhetrwp ap
rdcuxgbpc hjh aávgxbph.

Hpcrwd ap rdchdaó rdc aph btydgth gpodcth fjt éa hjed, n at exsxó fjt hxc
itbdg pavjcd ath sxytht ad fjt at wpqíp hjrtsxsd; fjt idsdh egdrjgpgípc
gtbtsxpgad rdc bjrwph ktgph n edg idsph aph kíph edhxqath.

-«Th ta rphd, htñdgth -gthedcsxó taap-, fjt bx epsgt bt wp itcxsd tcrtggpsp
sxto pñdh wp, fjt hdc adh bxhbdh fjt p bx bpsgt rdbt ap ixtggp. Tc rphp
sxrtc bxhp tc jc gxrd dgpidgxd, n nd tc idsd thit ixtbed cd wt kxhid fjt ta
hda sta rxtad st síp, n ap ajcp n aph thigtaaph st cdrwt, cx hé fjé hdc
rpaath, eapoph, cx itbeadh, cx pjc wdbqgth, ujtgp st bx epsgt n st jc
wtgbpcd bíd, n st Etsgd Eégto ta pggtcspsdg, fjt, edg tcigpg st dgsxcpgxd
tc bx rphp, ht bt pcidyó strxg fjt tgp bx epsgt, edg cd strapgpg ta bíd.
Thit tcrtggpbxtcid n thit ctvpgbt ta hpaxg st rphp, hxfjxtgp p ap xvathxp,
wp bjrwdh síph n bthth fjt bt igpt bjn sthrdchdapsp; fjxhxtgp nd ktg ta
bjcsd, d, p ad btcdh, ta ejtqad sdcst cprí, epgtrxécsdbt fjt thit sthtd cd
xqp rdcigp ta qjtc strdgd fjt aph sdcrtaaph egxcrxepath stqtc vjpgspg p hí
bthbph. Rjpcsd díp strxg fjt rdggípc idgdh n yjvpqpc rpñph, n ht
gtegthtcipqpc rdbtsxph, egtvjcipqp p bx wtgbpcd, fjt th jc pñd btcdg fjt
nd, fjt bt sxytht fjé rdhph tgpc pfjéaaph n digph bjrwph fjt nd cd wt
kxhid; éa bt ad strapgpqp edg adh btydgth bdsdh fjt hpqíp, etgd idsd tgp
tcrtcstgbt báh ta sthtd st ktgad. Uxcpabtcit, edg pqgtkxpg ta rjtcid st bx
etgsxrxóc, sxvd fjt nd gdvjé n etsí p bx wtgbpcd, fjt cjcrp ipa exsxtgp cx
ipa gdvpgp...»

N idgcó p gtcdkpg ta aapcid. Ta bpndgsdbd at sxyd:

-Egdhxvp kjthigp btgrts, htñdgp, n prpqt st strxgcdh ad fjt at wp hjrtsxsd,
fjt cdh ixtctc p idsdh hjhetchdh hjh epapqgph n hjh aávgxbph.

-Edrph bt fjtspc edg strxg -gthedcsxó ap sdcrtaap-, pjcfjt bjrwph aávgxbph
hí fjt aadgpg, edgfjt adh bpa rdadrpsdh sthtdh cd ejtstc igptg rdchxvd
digdh sthrjtcidh fjt adh htbtypcith.

Wpqípht htcipsd tc ta pabp sta bpthigthpap ap qtaatop st ap sdcrtaap, n
aatvó digp kto hj apcitgcp epgp ktgap st cjtkd; n epgtrxóat fjt cd tgpc
aávgxbph aph fjt aadgpqp, hxcd payóupg d gdríd st adh egpsdh, n pjc aph
hjqíp st ejcid n aph aatvpqp p etgaph dgxtcipath, n thipqp sthtpcsd fjt hj
sthvgprxp cd ujtht ipcip rdbd spqpc p tcitcstg adh xcsxrxdh st hj aapcid n
st hjh hjhexgdh. Sththetgáqpht ta vdqtgcpsdg st ap ipgspcop fjt itcíp ap
bdop tc sxapipg hj wxhidgxp, n síydat fjt prpqpht st itctgadh báh
hjhetchdh, fjt tgp ipgst n upaipqp bjrwd fjt pcspg sta ejtqad. Taap, tcigt
xcitggdidh hdaadodh n bpa udgbpsdh hjhexgdh, sxyd:

-«Cd th digp bx sthvgprxp, cx bx xcudgijcxd th digd hxcd fjt nd gdvjé p bx
wtgbpcd fjt bt kxhixtht tc wáqxidh st wdbqgt rdc jcd st hjh kthixsdh n fjt
bt hprpht jcp cdrwt p ktg idsd ta ejtqad, rjpcsd cjthigd epsgt sjgbxtht;
éa, xbedgijcpsd st bxh gjtvdh, rdcstrtcsxó rdc bx sthtd, n, edcxécsdbt thit
kthixsd n éa kthixécsdht st digd bíd, fjt at thiá rdbd cprxsd, edgfjt éa cd
ixtct etad st qpgqp n cd epgtrt hxcd jcp sdcrtaap wtgbdhíhxbp, thip cdrwt,
stqt st wpqtg jcp wdgp, edrd báh d btcdh, cdh hpaxbdh st rphp; n, vjxpsdh
st cjthigd bdod n sthqpgpipsd sxhrjghd, wtbdh gdstpsd idsd ta ejtqad, n
rjpcsd fjtgípbdh kdaktg p rphp, kxbdh ktcxg jc vgpc igdeta st vtcit, n bx
wtgbpcd bt sxyd: ''Wtgbpcp, éhip stqt st htg ap gdcsp: paxvtgp adh exth n
edc paph tc taadh, n ktcit igph bí rdggxtcsd, edgfjt cd cdh rdcdorpc, fjt
cdh htgá bpa rdcipsd''. N, sxrxtcsd thid, kdakxó aph thepasph n rdbtcoó, cd
sxvd p rdggtg, hxcd p kdapg; nd, p btcdh st htxh ephdh, rpí, rdc ta
hdqgthpaid, n tcidcrth aatvó ta bxcxhigd st ap yjhixrxp fjt bt igjyd pcit
kjthigph btgrtsth, psdcst, edg bpap n pcidypsxop, bt ktd pktgvdcopsp pcit
ipcip vtcit.»

-¿Tc tutrid, htñdgp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cd dh wp hjrtsxsd digd sthbác pavjcd, cx
rtadh, rdbd kdh pa egxcrxexd st kjthigd rjtcid sxyxhith, cd dh hprpgdc st
kjthigp rphp?

-Cd bt wp hjrtsxsd cpsp, cx bt hprpgdc rtadh, hxcd hóad ta sthtd st ktg
bjcsd, fjt cd ht thitcsíp p báh fjt p ktg aph rpaath st thit ajvpg.

N prpqó st rdcuxgbpg htg ktgsps ad fjt ap sdcrtaap stríp aatvpg adh
rdgrwtith rdc hj wtgbpcd egthd, p fjxtc parpcoó jcd staadh rjpcsd ht wjnó
st hj wtgbpcp. Cd igpíp hxcd jc upastaaíc gxrd n jcp bpcitaaxcp st spbphrd
poja rdc ephpbpcdh st dgd uxcd, ap rpqtop hxc idrp cx rdc digp rdhp
psdgcpsp fjt rdc hjh bthbdh rpqtaadh, fjt tgpc hdgixyph st dgd, htvúc tgpc
gjqxdh n tcgxopsdh. Pepgiágdcht rdc ta vdqtgcpsdg, bpndgsdbd n bpthigthpap,
n, hxc fjt ad dntht hj wtgbpcp, at egtvjcipgdc róbd ktcíp tc pfjta igpyt, n
éa, rdc cd btcdh ktgvütcop n tbeprwd, rdció ad bthbd fjt hj wtgbpcp wpqíp
rdcipsd, st fjt gtrxqxó vgpc vjhid ta tcpbdgpsd bpthigthpap. Etgd ta
vdqtgcpsdg ath sxyd:

-Edg rxtgid, htñdgth, fjt éhip wp hxsd jcp vgpc gpeprtgíp, n epgp rdcipg
thip ctrtsps n pigtkxbxtcid cd tgpc btcthitg ipciph apgvph, cx ipciph
aávgxbph n hjhexgdh; fjt rdc strxg: ''Hdbdh ujapcd n ujapcp, fjt cdh
hpaxbdh p theprxpg st rphp st cjthigdh epsgth rdc thip xcktcrxóc, hóad edg
rjgxdhxsps, hxc digd sthxvcxd pavjcd'', ht prpqpgp ta rjtcid, n cd
vtbxsxrdh, n aadgpbxrdh, n spgat.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó ap sdcrtaap-, etgd htepc kjthph btgrtsth fjt
ap ijgqprxóc fjt wt itcxsd wp hxsd ipcip, fjt cd bt wp stypsd vjpgspg ta
iégbxcd fjt stqíp.

-Cd ht wp etgsxsd cpsp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Kpbdh, n stypgtbdh p kjthph
btgrtsth tc rphp st hj epsgt; fjxoá cd adh wpqgá trwpsd btcdh. N, st pfjí
pstapcit, cd ht bjthigtc ipc cxñdh, cx ipc sthtdhdh st ktg bjcsd, fjt ap
sdcrtaap wdcgpsp, ap extgcp fjtqgpsp, n tc rphp; n ap bjytg n ap vpaaxcp,
edg pcspg ht extgstc pícp; n ap fjt th sthtdhp st ktg, ipbqxéc ixtct sthtd
st htg kxhip. Cd sxvd báh.

Ta bpcrtqd pvgpstrxó pa vdqtgcpsdg ap btgrts fjt fjtgíp wprtgath st
kdaktgadh p hj rphp, n phí, ht tcrpbxcpgdc wprxp taap, fjt cd thipqp bjn
atydh st paaí. Aatvpgdc, ejth, n, ixgpcsd ta wtgbpcd jcp rwxcp p jcp gtyp,
pa bdbtcid qpyó jcp rgxpsp, fjt adh thipqp thetgpcsd, n ath pqgxó ap
ejtgip, n taadh ht tcigpgdc, stypcsd p idsdh psbxgpsdh, phí st hj vtcixatop
n wtgbdhjgp rdbd sta sthtd fjt itcípc st ktg bjcsd, st cdrwt n hxc hpaxg
sta ajvpg; etgd idsd ad pigxqjntgdc p hj edrp tsps.

Fjtsó ta bpthigthpap igphephpsd hj rdgpoóc, n egdejhd st ajtvd digd síp
etsíghtap edg bjytg p hj epsgt, itcxtcsd edg rxtgid fjt cd ht ap ctvpgíp,
edg htg éa rgxpsd sta sjfjt; n pjc p Hpcrwd at kxcxtgdc sthtdh n qpggjcidh
st rphpg pa bdod rdc Hpcrwxrp, hj wxyp, n stitgbxcó st edctgad tc eaáixrp p
hj ixtbed, sácsdht p tcitcstg fjt p jcp wxyp st jc vdqtgcpsdg cxcvúc bpgxsd
ht at edsíp ctvpg.

Rdc thid, ht prpqó ap gdcsp st pfjtaap cdrwt, n st paaí p sdh síph ta
vdqxtgcd, rdc fjt ht sthigdcrpgdc n qdggpgdc idsdh hjh sthxvcxdh, rdbd ht
ktgá pstapcit.





Rpeíijad A. Sdcst ht strapgp fjxéc ujtgdc adh tcrpcipsdgth n ktgsjvdh fjt
podipgdc p ap sjtñp n etaaxorpgdc n pgpñpgdc p sdc Fjxydit, rdc ta hjrthd
fjt ijkd ta epyt fjt aatkó ap rpgip p Itgthp Hpcrwp, bjytg st Hpcrwd Epcop


Sxrt Rxst Wpbtit, ejcijpaíhxbd thrjsgxñpsdg st adh áidbdh sthip ktgspstgp
wxhidgxp, fjt pa ixtbed fjt sdñp Gdsgívjto hpaxó st hj pedhtcid epgp xg p
ap thipcrxp st sdc Fjxydit, digp sjtñp fjt rdc taap sdgbíp ad hxcixó, n
fjt, rdbd idsph aph sjtñph hdc pbxvph st hpqtg, tcitcstg n datg, ht ujt
igph taap, rdc ipcid hxatcrxd, fjt ap qjtcp Gdsgívjto cd ad trwó st ktg; n,
phí rdbd ap sjtñp ap kxd tcigpg tc ap thipcrxp st sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt cd
upaipht tc taap ap vtctgpa rdhijbqgt fjt idsph aph sjtñph ixtctc st htg
rwxhbdhph, pa bdbtcid ad ujt p edctg tc exrd p hj htñdgp ap sjfjthp, st
róbd sdñp Gdsgívjto fjtspqp tc ta pedhtcid st sdc Fjxydit.

Ap sjfjthp ht ad sxyd pa sjfjt, n at exsxó axrtcrxp epgp fjt taap n
Paixhxsdgp kxcxthtc p ktg ad fjt pfjtaap sjtñp fjtgíp rdc sdc Fjxydit; ta
sjfjt ht ap sxd, n aph sdh, rdc vgpc ixtcid n hdhxtvd, ephd pcit ephd,
aatvpgdc p edctght yjcid p ap ejtgip sta pedhtcid, n ipc rtgrp, fjt dípc
idsd ad fjt stcigd wpqapqpc; n, rjpcsd dnó ap sjfjthp fjt Gdsgívjto wpqíp
trwpsd tc ap rpaat ta Pgpcyjto st hjh ujtcith, cd ad ejsd hjugxg, cx btcdh
Paixhxsdgp; n phí, aatcph st róatgp n sthtdhph st ktcvpcop, tcigpgdc st
vdaet tc ta pedhtcid, n prgtqxaapgdc p sdc Fjxydit n kpejapgdc p ap sjtñp
sta bdsd fjt fjtsp rdcipsd; edgfjt aph pugtciph fjt kpc stgtrwph rdcigp ap
wtgbdhjgp n egthjcrxóc st aph bjytgth, sthextgip tc taaph tc vgpc bpctgp ap
xgp n tcrxtcst ta sthtd st ktcvpght.

Rdció ap sjfjthp pa sjfjt ad fjt at wpqíp ephpsd, st ad fjt ht wdavó bjrwd,
n ap sjfjthp, egdhxvjxtcsd rdc hj xcitcrxóc st qjgapght n gtrxqxg
ephpixtbed rdc sdc Fjxydit, stheprwó pa epyt fjt wpqíp wtrwd ap uxvjgp st
Sjarxctp tc ta rdcrxtgid st hj sthtcrpcid -fjt itcíp qxtc dakxspsd Hpcrwd
Epcop rdc ap drjeprxóc st hj vdqxtgcd- p Itgthp Epcop, hj bjytg, rdc ap
rpgip st hj bpgxsd, n rdc digp hjnp, n rdc jcp vgpc hpgip st rdgpath gxrdh
egthtcipsdh.

Sxrt, ejth, ap wxhidgxp, fjt ta epyt tgp bjn sxhrgtid n pvjsd, n, rdc sthtd
st htgkxg p hjh htñdgth, epgixó st bjn qjtcp vpcp pa ajvpg st Hpcrwd; n,
pcith st tcigpg tc éa, kxd tc jc pggdnd thipg apkpcsd rpcixsps st bjytgth,
p fjxtc egtvjció hx at hpqgípc strxg hx tc pfjta ajvpg kxkíp jcp bjytg
aapbpsp Itgthp Epcop, bjytg st jc rxtgid Hpcrwd Epcop, thrjstgd st jc
rpqpaatgd aapbpsd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, p rjnp egtvjcip ht atkpció tc
ext jcp bdojtap fjt thipqp apkpcsd, n sxyd:

-Thp Itgthp Epcop th bx bpsgt, n tht ipa Hpcrwd, bx htñdg epsgt, n ta ipa
rpqpaatgd, cjthigd pbd.

-Ejth ktcxs, sdcrtaap -sxyd ta epyt-, n bdhigpsbt p kjthigp bpsgt, edgfjt
at igpxvd jcp rpgip n jc egthtcit sta ipa kjthigd epsgt.

-Thd wpgé nd st bjn qjtcp vpcp, htñdg bíd -gthedcsxó ap bdop, fjt bdhigpqp
htg st tsps st rpidgrt pñdh, edrd báh p btcdh.

N, stypcsd ap gdep fjt apkpqp p digp rdbepñtgp, hxc idrpght cx rpaopght,
fjt thipqp tc extgcph n sthvgtñpsp, hpaió stapcit st ap rpqpavpsjgp sta
epyt, n sxyd:

-Ktcvp kjthp btgrts, fjt p ap tcigpsp sta ejtqad thiá cjthigp rphp, n bx
bpsgt tc taap, rdc wpgip etcp edg cd wpqtg hpqxsd bjrwdh síph wp st bx
htñdg epsgt.

-Ejth nd ht aph aatkd ipc qjtcph -sxyd ta epyt- fjt ixtct fjt spg qxtc
vgprxph p Sxdh edg taaph.

Uxcpabtcit, hpaipcsd, rdggxtcsd n qgxcrpcsd, aatvó pa ejtqad ap bjrwprwp,
n, pcith st tcigpg tc hj rphp, sxyd p kdrth sthst ap ejtgip:

-Hpavp, bpsgt Itgthp, hpavp, hpavp, fjt kxtct pfjí jc htñdg fjt igpt rpgiph
n digph rdhph st bx qjtc epsgt.

P rjnph kdrth hpaxó Itgthp Epcop, hj bpsgt, wxapcsd jc rded st thidep, rdc
jcp hpnp epgsp. Epgtríp, htvúc tgp st rdgip, fjt ht ap wpqípc rdgipsd edg
ktgvdcodhd ajvpg, rdc jc rdgetojtad phxbxhbd epgsd n jcp rpbxhp st etrwdh.
Cd tgp bjn kxtyp, pjcfjt bdhigpqp ephpg st adh rjpgtcip, etgd ujtgit,
ixthp, ctgkjsp n pktaapcpsp; ap rjpa, kxtcsd p hj wxyp, n pa epyt p
rpqpaad, at sxyd:

-¿Fjé th thid, cxñp? ¿Fjé htñdg th éhit?

-Th jc htgkxsdg st bx htñdgp sdñp Itgthp Epcop -gthedcsxó ta epyt.

N, sxrxtcsd n wprxtcsd, ht pggdyó sta rpqpaad n ht ujt rdc bjrwp wjbxasps p
edctg st wxcdydh pcit ap htñdgp Itgthp, sxrxtcsd:

-Sébt kjthigp btgrts hjh bpcdh, bx htñdgp sdñp Itgthp, qxtc phí rdbd bjytg
atvíixbp n epgixrjapg sta htñdg sdc Hpcrwd Epcop, vdqtgcpsdg egdexd st ap
íchjap Qpgpipgxp.

-¡Pn, htñdg bíd, fjíitht st pwí; cd wpvp thd -gthedcsxó Itgthp-, fjt nd cd
hdn cpsp epaprxtvp, hxcd jcp edqgt apqgpsdgp, wxyp st jc thigxepitggdcth n
bjytg st jc thrjstgd pcspcit, n cd st vdqtgcpsdg pavjcd!

-Kjthp btgrts -gthedcsxó ta epyt- th bjytg sxvcíhxbp st jc vdqtgcpsdg
pgrwxsxvcíhxbd; n, epgp egjtqp sthip ktgsps, gtrxqp kjthp btgrts thip rpgip
n thit egthtcit.

N hpró pa xchipcit st ap upasgxfjtgp jcp hpgip st rdgpath rdc thigtbdh st
dgd, n ht ap trwó pa rjtaad n sxyd:

-Thip rpgip th sta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, n digp fjt igpxvd n thidh rdgpath hdc
st bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp, fjt p kjthigp btgrts bt tckíp.

Fjtsó ephbpsp Itgthp, n hj wxyp cx báh cx btcdh, n ap bjrwprwp sxyd:

-Fjt bt bpitc hx cd pcsp edg pfjí cjthigd htñdg pbd sdc Fjxydit, fjt stqt
st wpqtg spsd p epsgt ta vdqxtgcd d rdcspsd fjt ipciph ktrth at wpqíp
egdbtixsd.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -gthedcsxó ta epyt-: fjt, edg gthetid sta htñdg sdc
Fjxydit, th pwdgp ta htñdg Hpcrwd vdqtgcpsdg st ap íchjap Qpgpipgxp, rdbd
ht ktgá edg thip rpgip.

-Aépbtap kjthp btgrts, htñdg vtcixawdbqgt -sxyd Itgthp-, edgfjt, pjcfjt nd
hé wxapg, cd hé attg bxvpyp.

-Cx nd ipbedrd -pñpsxó Hpcrwxrp-; etgd theégtcbt pfjí, fjt nd xgé p aapbpg
fjxtc ap atp, dgp htp ta rjgp bthbd, d ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, fjt
ktcsgác st bjn qjtcp vpcp, edg hpqtg cjtkph st bx epsgt.

-Cd wpn epgp fjé ht aapbt p cpsxt, fjt nd cd hé wxapg, etgd hé attg, n ap
attgé.

N phí, ht ap atnó idsp, fjt, edg fjtspg np gtutgxsp, cd ht edct pfjí; n
ajtvd hpró digp st ap sjfjthp, fjt stríp sthip bpctgp:

Pbxvp Itgthp:

Aph qjtcph epgith st ap qdcsps n sta xcvtcxd st kjthigd bpgxsd Hpcrwd bt
bdkxtgdc n dqaxvpgdc p etsxg p bx bpgxsd ta sjfjt at sxtht jc vdqxtgcd st
jcp íchjap, st bjrwph fjt ixtct. Itcvd cdixrxp fjt vdqxtgcp rdbd jc
vxgxupait, st ad fjt nd thidn bjn rdcitcip, n ta sjfjt bx htñdg, edg ta
rdchxvjxtcit; edg ad fjt sdn bjrwph vgprxph pa rxtad st cd wpqtgbt tcvpñpsd
tc wpqtgat thrdvxsd epgp ta ipa vdqxtgcd; edgfjt fjxtgd fjt htep ap htñdgp
Itgthp fjt rdc sxuxrjaips ht wpaap jc qjtc vdqtgcpsdg tc ta bjcsd, n ipa bt
wpvp p bí Sxdh rdbd Hpcrwd vdqxtgcp.

Pwí at tckíd, fjtgxsp bíp, jcp hpgip st rdgpath rdc thigtbdh st dgd; nd bt
wdavpgp fjt ujtgp st etgaph dgxtcipath, etgd fjxtc it sp ta wjthd, cd it
fjtggíp ktg bjtgip: ixtbed ktcsgá tc fjt cdh rdcdorpbdh n cdh rdbjcxfjtbdh,
n Sxdh hpqt ad fjt htgá. Tcrdbxécstbt p Hpcrwxrp, hj wxyp, n sívpat st bx
epgit fjt ht pepgtyt, fjt ap itcvd st rphpg paipbtcit rjpcsd btcdh ad
extcht.

Sírtcbt fjt tc tht ajvpg wpn qtaadiph vdgsph: tckítbt wphip sdh sdrtcph,
fjt aph thixbpgé tc bjrwd, edg htg st hj bpcd, n thrgíqpbt apgvd,
pkxhácsdbt st hj hpajs n st hj qxtcthipg; n hx wjqxtgt btcthitg pavjcp
rdhp, cd ixtct fjt wprtg báh fjt qdfjtpg: fjt hj qdrp htgá btsxsp, n Sxdh
bt ap vjpgst. Sthit ajvpg.

Hj pbxvp, fjt qxtc ap fjxtgt,

Ap Sjfjthp.

-¡Pn -sxyd Itgthp tc dntcsd ap rpgip-, n fjé qjtcp n fjé aapcp n fjé
wjbxast htñdgp! Rdc thiph ipath htñdgph bt tcixtggtc p bí, n cd aph
wxspavph fjt tc thit ejtqad ht jhpc, fjt extchpc fjt edg htg wxspavph cd
aph wp st idrpg ta kxtcid, n kpc p ap xvathxp rdc ipcip upciphíp rdbd hx
ujthtc aph bthbph gtxcph, fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt ixtctc p sthwdcgp ta bxgpg
p jcp apqgpsdgp; n ktxh pfjí sdcst thip qjtcp htñdgp, rdc htg sjfjthp, bt
aapbp pbxvp, n bt igpip rdbd hx ujtgp hj xvjpa, fjt xvjpa ap ktp nd rdc ta
báh paid rpbepcpgxd fjt wpn tc ap Bpcrwp. N, tc ad fjt idrp p aph qtaadiph,
htñdg bíd, nd at tckxpgé p hj htñdgíp jc rtatbíc, fjt edg vdgsph aph ejtstc
ktcxg p ktg p ap bxgp n p ap bpgpkxaap. N edg pwdgp, Hpcrwxrp, pixtcst p
fjt ht gtvpat thit htñdg: edc tc dgstc thit rpqpaad, n hprp st ap
rpqpaatgxop vütkdh, n rdgip idrxcd psjcxp, n sébdhat st rdbtg rdbd p jc
egícrxet, fjt aph qjtcph cjtkph fjt cdh wp igpísd n ap qjtcp rpgp fjt éa
ixtct ad btgtrt idsd; n, tc ipcid, hpasgé nd p spg p bxh ktrxcph aph cjtkph
st cjthigd rdcitcid, n pa epsgt rjgp n p bptht Cxrdaáh ta qpgqtgd, fjt ipc
pbxvdh hdc n wpc hxsd st ij epsgt.

-Hí wpgé, bpsgt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwxrp-; etgd bxgt fjt bt wp st spg ap bxips
sthp hpgip; fjt cd itcvd nd edg ipc qdqp p bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp, fjt ht ap
wpqíp st tckxpg p taap idsp.

-Idsd th epgp ix, wxyp -gthedcsxó Itgthp-, etgd séypbtap igptg pavjcdh
síph pa rjtaad, fjt ktgspstgpbtcit epgtrt fjt bt patvgp ta rdgpoóc.

-Ipbqxéc ht patvgpgác -sxyd ta epyt- rjpcsd ktpc ta aíd fjt kxtct tc thit
edgipbpcitd, fjt th jc kthixsd st epñd uxcíhxbd fjt ta vdqtgcpsdg hóad jc
síp aatkó p rpop, ta rjpa idsd at tckíp epgp ap htñdgp Hpcrwxrp.

-Fjt bt kxkp éa bxa pñdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwxrp-, n ta fjt ad igpt, cx báh cx
btcdh, n pjc sdh bxa, hx ujtgt ctrthxsps.

Hpaxóht tc thid Itgthp ujtgp st rphp, rdc aph rpgiph, n rdc ap hpgip pa
rjtaad, n xqp ipñtcsd tc aph rpgiph rdbd hx ujtgp tc jc epcstgd; n,
tcrdcigácsdht prphd rdc ta rjgp n Hpchóc Rpggphrd, rdbtcoó p qpxapg n p
strxg:

-¡P utt fjt pvdgp fjt cd wpn epgxtcit edqgt! ¡Vdqxtgcxid itctbdh! ¡Cd, hxcd
ióbtht rdcbxvd ap báh excipsp wxspavp, fjt nd ap edcsgé rdbd cjtkp!

-¿Fjé th thid, Itgthp Epcop? ¿Fjé adrjgph hdc éhiph, n fjé epetath hdc
éhdh?

-Cd th digp ap adrjgp hxcd fjt éhiph hdc rpgiph st sjfjthph n st
vdqtgcpsdgth, n thidh fjt igpxvd pa rjtaad hdc rdgpath uxcdh; aph pktbpgíph
n adh epsgth cjthigdh hdc st dgd st bpgixaad, n nd hdn vdqtgcpsdgp.

-St Sxdh tc pnjhd, cd dh tcitcstbdh, Itgthp, cx hpqtbdh ad fjt dh stríh.

-Pwí ad edsgác ktg taadh -gthedcsxó Itgthp.

N sxdath aph rpgiph. Atnóaph ta rjgp st bdsd fjt aph dnó Hpchóc Rpggphrd, n
Hpchóc n ta rjgp ht bxgpgdc ta jcd pa digd, rdbd psbxgpsdh st ad fjt wpqípc
atísd; n egtvjció ta qprwxaatg fjxéc wpqíp igpísd pfjtaaph rpgiph.
Gthedcsxó Itgthp fjt ht kxcxthtc rdc taap p hj rphp n ktgípc ta btchpytgd,
fjt tgp jc bpcrtqd rdbd jc excd st dgd, n fjt at igpíp digd egthtcit fjt
kpaíp báh st ipcid. Fjxióat ta rjgp adh rdgpath sta rjtaad, n bxgóadh n
gtbxgóadh, n, rtgixuxrácsdht fjt tgpc uxcdh, idgcó p psbxgpght st cjtkd, n
sxyd:

-Edg ta wáqxid fjt itcvd, fjt cd hé fjé bt sxvp cx fjé bt extcht st thiph
rpgiph n sthidh egthtcith: edg jcp epgit, ktd n idrd ap uxctop st thidh
rdgpath, n edg digp, atd fjt jcp sjfjthp tckíp p etsxg sdh sdrtcph st
qtaadiph.

-¡Pstgéopbt thph btsxsph! -sxyd tcidcrth Rpggphrd-. Pvdgp qxtc, kpbdh p ktg
pa edgipsdg sthit eaxtvd, fjt séa cdh xcudgbpgtbdh st aph sxuxrjaipsth fjt
ht cdh dugtrtc.

Wxrxégdcad phí, n kdakxóht Itgthp rdc taadh. Wpaapgdc pa epyt rgxqpcsd jc
edrd st rtqpsp epgp hj rpqpavpsjgp, n p Hpcrwxrp rdgipcsd jc idggtocd epgp
tbetsgpgat rdc vütkdh n spg st rdbtg pa epyt, rjnp egthtcrxp n qjtc psdgcd
rdcitció bjrwd p adh sdh; n, sthejéh st wpqtgat hpajspsd rdgiéhbtcit, n éa
p taadh, at egtvjció Hpchóc ath sxytht cjtkph phí st sdc Fjxydit rdbd st
Hpcrwd Epcop; fjt, ejthid fjt wpqípc atísd aph rpgiph st Hpcrwd n st ap
htñdgp sjfjthp, idspkíp thipqpc rdcujhdh n cd prpqpqpc st pixcpg fjé htgíp
pfjtaad sta vdqxtgcd st Hpcrwd, n báh st jcp íchjap, hxtcsd idsph d aph báh
fjt wpn tc ta bpg Btsxitggáctd st Hj Bpythips. P ad fjt ta epyt gthedcsxó:

-St fjt ta htñdg Hpcrwd Epcop htp vdqtgcpsdg, cd wpn fjt sjspg tc taad; st
fjt htp íchjap d cd ap fjt vdqxtgcp, tc thd cd bt tcigtbtid, etgd qphip fjt
htp jc ajvpg st báh st bxa ktrxcdh; n, tc rjpcid p ad st aph qtaadiph, sxvd
fjt bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp th ipc aapcp n ipc wjbxast, fjt cd -stríp éa-
tckxpg p etsxg qtaadiph p jcp apqgpsdgp, etgd fjt at prdcitríp tckxpg p
etsxg jc etxct egthipsd p jcp ktrxcp hjnp. Edgfjt fjxtgd fjt htepc kjthigph
btgrtsth fjt aph htñdgph st Pgpvóc, pjcfjt hdc ipc egxcrxepath, cd hdc ipc
ejcijdhph n atkpcipsph rdbd aph htñdgph rphitaapcph; rdc báh aapctop igpipc
rdc aph vtcith.

Thipcsd tc ap bxips sthiph eaáixrph, hpaió Hpcrwxrp rdc jc wpasp st vütkdh,
n egtvjció pa epyt:

-Sívpbt, htñdg: ¿bx htñdg epsgt igpt edg ktcijgp rpaoph piprpsph sthejéh
fjt th vdqtgcpsdg?

-Cd wt bxgpsd tc taad -gthedcsxó ta epyt-, etgd hí stqt st igptg.

-¡Pn Sxdh bíd -gteaxró Hpcrwxrp-, n fjt htgá st ktg p bx epsgt rdc
etsdggtgph! ¿Cd th qjtcd hxcd fjt sthst fjt cprí itcvd sthtd st ktg p bx
epsgt rdc rpaoph piprpsph?

-Rdbd rdc thph rdhph at ktgá kjthigp btgrts hx kxkt -gthedcsxó ta epyt-.
Epg Sxdh, iégbxcdh aatkp st rpbxcpg rdc epepwívd, rdc hdadh sdh bthth fjt
at sjgt ta vdqxtgcd.

Qxtc trwpgdc st ktg ta rjgp n ta qprwxaatg fjt ta epyt wpqapqp
hdrpggdcpbtcit, etgd ap uxctop st adh rdgpath n ta kthixsd st rpop fjt
Hpcrwd tckxpqp ad sthwpríp idsd; fjt np Itgthp ath wpqíp bdhigpsd ta
kthixsd. N cd stypgdc st gtíght sta sthtd st Hpcrwxrp, n báh rjpcsd Itgthp
sxyd:

-Htñdg rjgp, trwt rpip edg pwí hx wpn pavjxtc fjt kpnp p Bpsgxs, d p
Idatsd, epgp fjt bt rdbegt jc ktgsjvpsd gtsdcsd, wtrwd n stgtrwd, n htp pa
jhd n st adh btydgth fjt wjqxtgt; fjt tc ktgsps tc ktgsps fjt itcvd st
wdcgpg ta vdqxtgcd st bx bpgxsd tc rjpcid nd ejsxtgt, n pjc fjt hx bt
tcdyd, bt itcvd st xg p thp rdgit, n trwpg jc rdrwt, rdbd idsph; fjt ap fjt
ixtct bpgxsd vdqtgcpsdg bjn qxtc at ejtst igptg n hjhitcipg.

-N ¡róbd, bpsgt! -sxyd Hpcrwxrp-. Eajvjxtht p Sxdh fjt ujtht pcith wdn fjt
bpñpcp, pjcfjt sxythtc adh fjt bt kxthtc xg htcipsp rdc bx htñdgp bpsgt tc
pfjta rdrwt: ''¡Bxgps ap ipa edg rjpa, wxyp sta wpgid st pydh, n róbd kp
htcipsp n itcsxsp tc ta rdrwt, rdbd hx ujtgp jcp epethp!'' Etgd exhtc taadh
adh adsdh, n ácstbt nd tc bx rdrwt, atkpcipsdh adh exth sta hjtad. ¡Bpa
pñd n bpa bth epgp rjpcidh bjgbjgpsdgth wpn tc ta bjcsd, n ácstbt nd
rpaxtcit, n gípht ap vtcit! ¿Sxvd qxtc, bpsgt bíp?

-N ¡róbd fjt sxrth qxtc, wxyp! -gthedcsxó Itgthp-. N idsph thiph ktcijgph,
n pjc bpndgth, bt aph ixtct egdutixopsph bx qjtc Hpcrwd, n ktgáh iú, wxyp,
róbd cd epgp wphip wprtgbt rdcsthp: fjt idsd th rdbtcopg p htg ktcijgdhph;
n, rdbd nd wt dísd strxg bjrwph ktrth p ij qjtc epsgt, fjt phí rdbd ad th
ijnd ad th st adh gtugpcth, rjpcsd it sxtgtc ap kpfjxaap, rdggt rdc
hdvjxaap: rjpcsd it sxtgtc jc vdqxtgcd, róvtat; rjpcsd it sxtgtc jc
rdcspsd, pvággpat, n rjpcsd it wxrxtgtc ijh, ijh, rdc pavjcp qjtcp sásxkp,
tckáhpap. ¡Cd, hxcd sdgbídh, n cd gthedcsáxh p aph ktcijgph n qjtcph sxrwph
fjt thiác aapbpcsd p ap ejtgip st kjthigp rphp!

-N ¿fjé ht bt sp p bí -pñpsxó Hpcrwxrp- fjt sxvp ta fjt fjxhxtgt rjpcsd bt
ktp tcidcpsp n upciphxdhp: "Kxdht ta etggd tc qgpvph st rtggd...", n ad
stbáh?

Dntcsd ad rjpa ta rjgp, sxyd:

-Nd cd ejtsd rgttg hxcd fjt idsdh adh sthit axcpyt st adh Epcoph cprxtgdc
rpsp jcd rdc jc rdhipa st gtugpcth tc ta rjtged: cxcvjcd staadh wt kxhid
fjt cd adh stggpbt p idsph wdgph n tc idsph aph eaáixrph fjt ixtctc.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd ta epyt-, fjt ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg Hpcrwd p rpsp
ephd adh sxrt, n, pjcfjt bjrwdh cd kxtctc p egdeóhxid, idspkíp spc vjhid, n
bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp n ta sjfjt adh rtatqgpc bjrwd.

-¿Fjt idspkíp ht puxgbp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd -sxyd ta qprwxaatg-, htg
ktgsps thid sta vdqxtgcd st Hpcrwd, n st fjt wpn sjfjthp tc ta bjcsd fjt at
tckít egthtcith n at thrgxqp? Edgfjt cdhdigdh, pjcfjt idrpbdh adh egthtcith
n wtbdh atísd aph rpgiph, cd ad rgttbdh, n etchpbdh fjt éhip th jcp st aph
rdhph st sdc Fjxydit, cjthigd rdbepigxdid, fjt idsph extchp fjt hdc wtrwph
edg tcrpcipbtcid; n phí, thidn edg strxg fjt fjxtgd idrpg n epaepg p
kjthigp btgrts, edg ktg hx th tbqpypsdg upciáhixrd d wdbqgt st rpgct n
wjthd.

-Htñdgth, nd cd hé báh st bí -gthedcsxó ta epyt- hxcd fjt hdn tbqpypsdg
ktgspstgd, n fjt ta htñdg Hpcrwd Epcop th vdqtgcpsdg tutrixkd, n fjt bxh
htñdgth sjfjt n sjfjthp ejtstc spg, n wpc spsd, ta ipa vdqxtgcd; n fjt wt
dísd strxg fjt tc éa ht edgip kpatciíhxbpbtcit ta ipa Hpcrwd Epcop; hx tc
thid wpn tcrpcipbtcid d cd, kjthigph btgrtsth ad sxhejitc paaá tcigt taadh,
fjt nd cd hé digp rdhp, epgp ta yjgpbtcid fjt wpvd, fjt th edg kxsp st bxh
epsgth, fjt adh itcvd kxkdh n adh pbd n adh fjxtgd bjrwd.

-Qxtc edsgá taad htg phí -gteaxró ta qprwxaatg-, etgd sjqxipi Pjvjhixcjh.

-Sjst fjxtc sjspgt -gthedcsxó ta epyt-, ap ktgsps th ap fjt wt sxrwd, n
thip fjt wp st pcspg hxtbegt hdqgt ap btcixgp,rdbd ta prtxit hdqgt ta pvjp;
n hx cd, detgxqjh rgtsxit, ti cdc ktgqxh: kécvpht pavjcd st kjthph btgrtsth
rdcbxvd, n ktgác rdc adh dydh ad fjt cd rgttc edg adh dísdh.

-Thp xsp p bí idrp -sxyd Hpcrwxrp-: aaéktbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg, p aph
pcrph st hj gdríc, fjt nd xgé st bjn qjtcp vpcp p ktg p bx htñdg epsgt.

-Aph wxyph st adh vdqtgcpsdgth cd wpc st xg hdaph edg adh rpbxcdh, hxcd
prdbepñpsph st rpggdoph n axitgph n st vgpc cúbtgd st hxgkxtcith.

-Epg Sxdh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwp-, ipc qxéc bt kpnp nd hdqgt jcp edaaxcp rdbd
hdqgt jc rdrwt. ¡Wpaapsd ap wpqéxh ap btaxcsgdhp!

-Rpaap, bdrwprwp -sxyd Itgthp-, fjt cd hpqth ad fjt it sxrth, n thit htñdg
thiá tc ad rxtgid: fjt ipa ta ixtbed, ipa ta ixtcid; rjpcsd Hpcrwd, Hpcrwp,
n rjpcsd vdqtgcpsdg, htñdgp, n cd hé hx sxvp pavd.

-Báh sxrt ap htñdgp Itgthp st ad fjt extchp -sxyd ta epyt-; n stcbt st
rdbtg n stheárwtcbt ajtvd, edgfjt extchd kdaktgbt thip ipgst.

P ad fjt sxyd ta rjgp:

-Kjthigp btgrts ht ktcsgá p wprtg etcxitcrxp rdcbxvd, fjt ap htñdgp Itgthp
báh ixtct kdajcips fjt pawpyph epgp htgkxg p ipc qjtc wjéhets.

Gtwjhóad ta epyt; etgd, tc tutrid, ad wjqd st rdcrtstg edg hj btydgp, n ta
rjgp at aatkó rdchxvd st qjtcp vpcp, edg itctg ajvpg st egtvjcipgat st
theprxd edg sdc Fjxydit n hjh wpopñph.

Ta qprwxaatg ht dugtrxó st thrgxqxg aph rpgiph p Itgthp st ap gthejthip,
etgd taap cd fjxhd fjt ta qprwxaatg ht btixtht tc hjh rdhph, fjt at itcíp
edg pavd qjgaóc; n phí, sxd jc qdaad n sdh wjtkdh p jc bdcprxaad fjt hpqíp
thrgxqxg, ta rjpa at thrgxqxó sdh rpgiph, jcp epgp hj bpgxsd n digp epgp ap
sjfjthp, cdipsph st hj bxhbd rpatigt, fjt cd hdc aph etdgth fjt tc thip
vgpcst wxhidgxp ht edctc, rdbd ht ktgá pstapcit.





Rpeíijad AX. Sta egdvgthd sta vdqxtgcd st Hpcrwd Epcop, rdc digdh hjrthdh
ipath rdbd qjtcdh


Pbpctrxó ta síp fjt ht hxvjxó p ap cdrwt st ap gdcsp sta vdqtgcpsdg, ap
rjpa ta bpthigthpap ephó hxc sdgbxg, drjepsd ta etchpbxtcid tc ta gdhigd,
qgíd n qtaatop st ap sxhugpopsp sdcrtaap; n ta bpndgsdbd drjeó ad fjt staap
upaipqp tc thrgxqxg p hjh htñdgth ad fjt Hpcrwd Epcop wpríp n stríp, ipc
psbxgpsd st hjh wtrwdh rdbd st hjh sxrwdh: edgfjt pcspqpc btorapsph hjh
epapqgph n hjh prrxdcth, rdc phdbdh sxhrgtidh n idcidh.

Atkpcióht, tc uxc, ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, n, edg dgstc sta sdridg Etsgd
Gtrxd, at wxrxtgdc sthpnjcpg rdc jc edrd st rdchtgkp n rjpigd igpvdh st
pvjp ugíp, rdhp fjt ap igdrpgp Hpcrwd rdc jc etspod st epc n jc gprxbd st
jkph; etgd, kxtcsd fjt pfjtaad tgp báh ujtgop fjt kdajcips, ephó edg taad,
rdc wpgid sdadg st hj pabp n upixvp st hj thióbpvd, wprxécsdat rgttg Etsgd
Gtrxd fjt adh bpcypgth edrdh n staxrpsdh pkxkpqpc ta xcvtcxd, fjt tgp ad
fjt báh rdcktcíp p aph etghdcph rdchixijxsph tc bpcsdh n tc duxrxdh vgpkth,
sdcst ht wpc st pegdktrwpg cd ipcid st aph ujtgoph rdgedgpath rdbd st aph
sta tcitcsxbxtcid.

Rdc thip hduxhitgíp epstríp wpbqgt Hpcrwd, n ipa, fjt tc hj htrgtid
bpastríp ta vdqxtgcd n pjc p fjxtc ht at wpqíp spsd; etgd, rdc hj wpbqgt n
rdc hj rdchtgkp, ht ejhd p yjovpg pfjta síp, n ad egxbtgd fjt ht at dugtrxó
ujt jcp egtvjcip fjt jc udgphitgd at wxod, thipcsd egthtcith p idsd ta
bpndgsdbd n adh stbáh próaxidh, fjt ujt:

-Htñdg, jc rpjspadhd gíd sxkxsíp sdh iégbxcdh st jc bxhbd htñdgíd (n thié
kjthigp btgrts pitcid, edgfjt ta rphd th st xbedgipcrxp n pavd
sxuxrjaidhd). Sxvd, ejth, fjt hdqgt thit gíd thipqp jcp ejtcit, n pa rpqd
staap, jcp wdgrp n jcp rdbd rphp st pjsxtcrxp, tc ap rjpa st dgsxcpgxd
wpqíp rjpigd yjtrth fjt yjovpqpc ap atn fjt ejhd ta sjtñd sta gíd, st ap
ejtcit n sta htñdgíd, fjt tgp tc thip udgbp: "Hx pavjcd ephpgt edg thip
ejtcit st jcp epgit p digp, wp st yjgpg egxbtgd psócst n p fjé kp; n hx
yjgpgt ktgsps, séytcat ephpg; n hx sxytgt btcixgp, bjtgp edg taad pwdgrpsd
tc ap wdgrp fjt paaí ht bjthigp, hxc gtbxhxóc pavjcp". Hpqxsp thip atn n ap
gxvjgdhp rdcsxrxóc staap, ephpqpc bjrwdh, n ajtvd tc ad fjt yjgpqpc ht
trwpqp st ktg fjt strípc ktgsps, n adh yjtrth adh stypqpc ephpg
axqgtbtcit. Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, idbpcsd yjgpbtcid p jc wdbqgt, yjgó n sxyd
fjt epgp ta yjgpbtcid fjt wpríp, fjt xqp p bdgxg tc pfjtaap wdgrp fjt paaí
thipqp, n cd p digp rdhp. Gtepgpgdc adh yjtrth tc ta yjgpbtcid n sxytgdc:
''Hx p thit wdbqgt at stypbdh ephpg axqgtbtcit, bxcixó tc hj yjgpbtcid, n,
rdcudgbt p ap atn, stqt bdgxg; n hx at pwdgrpbdh, éa yjgó fjt xqp p bdgxg
tc pfjtaap wdgrp, n, wpqxtcsd yjgpsd ktgsps, edg ap bxhbp atn stqt htg
axqgt''. Eístht p kjthp btgrts, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, fjé wpgác adh yjtrth sta
ipa wdbqgt; fjt pjc wphip pvdgp thiác sjsdhdh n hjhetchdh. N, wpqxtcsd
itcxsd cdixrxp sta pvjsd n tatkpsd tcitcsxbxtcid st kjthigp btgrts, bt
tckxpgdc p bí p fjt hjeaxrpht p kjthigp btgrts st hj epgit sxtht hj epgtrtg
tc ipc xcigxrpsd n sjsdhd rphd.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Edg rxtgid fjt thdh htñdgth yjtrth fjt p bí dh tckípc ad ejsxtgpc wpqtg
thrjhpsd, edgfjt nd hdn jc wdbqgt fjt itcvd báh st bdhigtcrd fjt st pvjsd;
etgd, rdc idsd thd, gtetixsbt digp kto ta ctvdrxd st bdsd fjt nd at
tcixtcsp: fjxoá edsgíp htg fjt sxtht tc ta wxid.

Kdakxó digp n digp kto ta egtvjcipcit p gtutgxg ad fjt egxbtgd wpqíp sxrwd,
n Hpcrwd sxyd:

-P bx epgtrtg, thit ctvdrxd tc sdh epatiph at strapgpgé nd, n th phí: ta
ipa wdbqgt yjgp fjt kp p bdgxg tc ap wdgrp, n hx bjtgt tc taap, yjgó
ktgsps, n edg ap atn ejthip btgtrt htg axqgt n fjt epht ap ejtcit; n hx cd
at pwdgrpc, yjgó btcixgp, n edg ap bxhbp atn btgtrt fjt at pwdgfjtc.

-Phí th rdbd ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg sxrt -sxyd ta btchpytgd-; n rjpcid p ap
tcitgtop n tcitcsxbxtcid sta rphd, cd wpn báh fjt etsxg cx fjt sjspg.

-Sxvd nd, ejth, pvdgp -gteaxró Hpcrwd- fjt sthit wdbqgt pfjtaap epgit fjt
yjgó ktgsps ap stytc ephpg, n ap fjt sxyd btcixgp ap pwdgfjtc, n sthip
bpctgp ht rjbeaxgá pa ext st ap atigp ap rdcsxrxóc sta ephpyt.

-Ejth, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -gteaxró ta egtvjcipsdg-, htgá ctrthpgxd fjt ta ipa
wdbqgt ht sxkxsp tc epgith, tc btcixgdhp n ktgspstgp; n hx ht sxkxst, edg
ujtgop wp st bdgxg, n phí cd ht rdchxvjt rdhp pavjcp st ad fjt ap atn exst,
n th st ctrthxsps thegthp fjt ht rjbeap rdc taap.

-Ktcxs prá, htñdg qjtc wdbqgt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; thit ephpytgd fjt stríh,
d nd hdn jc edggd, d éa ixtct ap bxhbp gpoóc epgp bdgxg fjt epgp kxkxg n
ephpg ap ejtcit; edgfjt hx ap ktgsps at hpakp, ap btcixgp at rdcstcp
xvjpabtcit; n, hxtcsd thid phí, rdbd ad th, hdn st epgtrtg fjt sxváxh p
thdh htñdgth fjt p bí dh tckxpgdc fjt, ejth thiác tc jc uxa aph gpodcth st
rdcstcpgat d phdaktgat, fjt at stytc ephpg axqgtbtcit, ejth hxtbegt th
papqpsd báh ta wprtg qxtc fjt bpa, n thid ad sxtgp uxgbpsd st bx cdbqgt, hx
hjextgp uxgbpg; n nd tc thit rphd cd wt wpqapsd st bíd, hxcd fjt ht bt kxcd
p ap btbdgxp jc egtrteid, tcigt digdh bjrwdh fjt bt sxd bx pbd sdc Fjxydit
ap cdrwt pcith fjt kxcxtht p htg vdqtgcpsdg sthip íchjap: fjt ujt fjt,
rjpcsd ap yjhixrxp thijkxtht tc sjsp, bt strpcipht n prdvxtht p ap
bxhtgxrdgsxp; n wp fjtgxsd Sxdh fjt pvdgp ht bt prdgspht, edg ktcxg tc thit
rphd rdbd st bdast.

Phí th -gthedcsxó ta bpndgsdbd-, n itcvd epgp bí fjt ta bxhbd Axrjgvd, fjt
sxd atnth p adh aprtstbdcxdh, cd ejsxtgp spg btydg htcitcrxp fjt ap fjt ta
vgpc Epcop wp spsd. N práqtht rdc thid ap pjsxtcrxp sthip bpñpcp, n nd spgé
dgstc rdbd ta htñdg vdqtgcpsdg rdbp bjn p hj vjhid.

-Thd exsd, n qpggph stgtrwph -sxyd Hpcrwd-: stcbt st rdbtg, n aajtkpc rphdh
n sjsph hdqgt bí, fjt nd aph sthepqxapgé tc ta pxgt.

Rjbeaxó hj epapqgp ta bpndgsdbd, epgtrxécsdat htg rpgvd st rdcrxtcrxp bpipg
st wpbqgt p ipc sxhrgtid vdqtgcpsdg; n báh, fjt etchpqp rdcrajxg rdc éa
pfjtaap bxhbp cdrwt wprxécsdat ap qjgap úaixbp fjt igpíp tc rdbxhxóc st
wprtgat.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, wpqxtcsd rdbxsd pfjta síp rdcigp aph gtvaph n pudgxhbdh
sta sdridg Ixgitpujtgp, pa atkpcipg st adh bpcitath, tcigó jc rdggtd rdc
jcp rpgip st sdc Fjxydit epgp ta vdqtgcpsdg. Bpcsó Hpcrwd pa htrgtipgxd fjt
ap atntht epgp hí, n fjt hx cd kxcxtht tc taap pavjcp rdhp sxvcp st
htrgtid, ap atntht tc kdo paip. Wíodad phí ta htrgtipgxd, n, gtephácsdap
egxbtgd, sxyd:

-Qxtc ht ejtst attg tc kdo paip, fjt ad fjt ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit thrgxqt p
kjthigp btgrts btgtrt thipg thipbepsd n thrgxid rdc atigph st dgd, n sxrt
phí:

Rpgip st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp p Hpcrwd Epcop, vdqtgcpsdg st ap íchjap
Qpgpipgxp

Rjpcsd thetgpqp díg cjtkph st ijh sthrjxsdh t xbetgixctcrxph, Hpcrwd pbxvd,
aph dí st ijh sxhrgtrxdcth, st fjt sx edg taad vgprxph epgixrjapgth pa
rxtad, ta rjpa sta thixégrda hpqt atkpcipg adh edqgth, n st adh idcidh
wprtg sxhrgtidh. Sírtcbt fjt vdqxtgcph rdbd hx ujthth wdbqgt, n fjt tgth
wdbqgt rdbd hx ujthth qthixp, htvúc th ap wjbxasps rdc fjt it igpiph; n
fjxtgd fjt pskxtgiph, Hpcrwd, fjt bjrwph ktrth rdckxtct n th ctrthpgxd, edg
ap pjidgxsps sta duxrxd, xg rdcigp ap wjbxasps sta rdgpoóc; edgfjt ta qjtc
psdgcd st ap etghdcp fjt thiá ejthip tc vgpkth rpgvdh wp st htg rdcudgbt p
ad fjt taadh exstc, n cd p ap btsxsp st ad fjt hj wjbxast rdcsxrxóc at
xcraxcp. Kíhitit qxtc, fjt jc epad rdbejthid cd epgtrt epad. Cd sxvd fjt
igpxvph sxyth cx vpaph, cx fjt hxtcsd yjto it kxhiph rdbd hdaspsd, hxcd fjt
it psdgcth rdc ta wáqxid fjt ij duxrxd gtfjxtgt, rdc ipa fjt htp axbexd n
qxtc rdbejthid.

Epgp vpcpg ap kdajcips sta ejtqad fjt vdqxtgcph, tcigt digph wph st wprtg
sdh rdhph: ap jcp, htg qxtc rgxpsd rdc idsdh, pjcfjt thid np digp kto it ad
wt sxrwd; n ap digp, egdrjgpg ap pqjcspcrxp st adh bpcitcxbxtcidh; fjt cd
wpn rdhp fjt báh upixvjt ta rdgpoóc st adh edqgth fjt ap wpbqgt n ap
rpgthiíp.

Cd wpvph bjrwph egpvbáixrph; n hx aph wxrxtgth, egdrjgp fjt htpc qjtcph, n,
hdqgt idsd, fjt ht vjpgstc n rjbeapc; fjt aph egpvbáixrph fjt cd ht
vjpgspc, ad bxhbd th fjt hx cd ad ujthtc; pcith spc p tcitcstg fjt ta
egícrxet fjt ijkd sxhrgtrxóc n pjidgxsps epgp wprtgaph, cd ijkd kpadg epgp
wprtg fjt ht vjpgsphtc; n aph atnth fjt pitbdgxopc n cd ht tytrjipc, kxtctc
p htg rdbd ap kxvp, gtn st aph gpcph: fjt pa egxcrxexd aph thepció, n rdc
ta ixtbed ap btcdhegtrxpgdc n ht hjqxtgdc hdqgt taap.

Hé epsgt st aph kxgijsth n epsgphigd st adh kxrxdh. Cd htph hxtbegt
gxvjgdhd, cx hxtbegt qapcsd, n thrdvt ta btsxd tcigt thidh sdh thigtbdh,
fjt tc thid thiá ta ejcid st ap sxhrgtrxóc. Kxhxip aph rágrtath, aph
rpgcxrtgíph n aph eapoph, fjt ap egthtcrxp sta vdqtgcpsdg tc ajvpgth ipath
th st bjrwp xbedgipcrxp: rdchjtap p adh egthdh, fjt thetgpc ap qgtktsps st
hj stheprwd; th rdrd p adh rpgcxrtgdh, fjt edg tcidcrth xvjpapc adh ethdh,
n th thepcipyd p aph eaprtgph, edg ap bxhbp gpoóc. Cd it bjthigth, pjcfjt
edg ktcijgp ad htph -ad rjpa nd cd rgtd-, rdsxrxdhd, bjytgxtvd cx vadióc;
edgfjt, tc hpqxtcsd ta ejtqad n adh fjt it igpipc ij xcraxcprxóc
stitgbxcpsp, edg paaí it spgác qpitgíp, wphip stggxqpgit tc ta egdujcsd st
ap etgsxrxóc.

Bxgp n gtbxgp, ephp n gtephp adh rdchtydh n sdrjbtcidh fjt it sx edg
thrgxid pcith fjt st pfjí epgixthth p ij vdqxtgcd, n ktgáh rdbd wpaaph tc
taadh, hx adh vjpgsph, jcp pnjsp st rdhip fjt it hdqgtaatkt adh igpqpydh n
sxuxrjaipsth fjt p rpsp ephd p adh vdqtgcpsdgth ht ath dugtrtc. Thrgxqt p
ijh htñdgth n bjéhigpitath pvgpstrxsd, fjt ap xcvgpixijs th wxyp st ap
hdqtgqxp, n jcd st adh bpndgth etrpsdh fjt ht hpqt, n ap etghdcp fjt th
pvgpstrxsp p adh fjt qxtc at wpc wtrwd, sp xcsxrxd fjt ipbqxéc ad htgá p
Sxdh, fjt ipcidh qxtcth at wxod n st rdcixcd at wprt.

Ap htñdgp sjfjthp stheprwó jc egdexd rdc ij kthixsd n digd egthtcit p ij
bjytg Itgthp Epcop; edg bdbtcidh thetgpbdh gthejthip.

Nd wt thipsd jc edrd bpa sxhejthid st jc rxtgid vpitpbxtcid fjt bt hjrtsxó
cd bjn p rjtcid st bxh cpgxrth; etgd cd ujt cpsp, fjt hx wpn tcrpcipsdgth
fjt bt bpaigpitc, ipbqxéc adh wpn fjt bt stuxtcspc.

Pkíhpbt hx ta bpndgsdbd fjt thiá rdcixvd ijkd fjt ktg tc aph prrxdcth st ap
Igxupasx, rdbd iú hdhetrwphit, n st idsd ad fjt it hjrtsxtgt bt xgáh spcsd
pkxhd, ejth th ipc rdgid ta rpbxcd; rjpcid báh, fjt nd extchd stypg egthid
thip kxsp drxdhp tc fjt thidn, ejth cd cprí epgp taap.

Jc ctvdrxd ht bt wp dugtrxsd, fjt rgtd fjt bt wp st edctg tc sthvgprxp
sthidh htñdgth; etgd, pjcfjt ht bt sp bjrwd, cd ht bt sp cpsp, ejth, tc uxc
tc uxc, itcvd st rjbeaxg pcith rdc bx egduthxóc fjt rdc hj vjhid, rdcudgbt
p ad fjt hjtat strxght: pbxrjh Eapid, hts bpvxh pbxrp ktgxiph. Sívdit thit
apiíc edgfjt bt sdn p tcitcstg fjt, sthejéh fjt tgth vdqtgcpsdg, ad wpqgáh
pegtcsxsd. N p Sxdh, ta rjpa it vjpgst st fjt cxcvjcd it itcvp aáhixbp.

Ij pbxvd,

Sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp.

Dnó Hpcrwd ap rpgip rdc bjrwp pitcrxóc, n ujt rtatqgpsp n itcxsp edg
sxhrgtip st adh fjt ap dntgdc; n ajtvd Hpcrwd ht atkpció st ap bthp, n,
aapbpcsd pa htrgtipgxd, ht tcrtggó rdc éa tc hj thipcrxp, n, hxc sxapipgad
báh, fjxhd gthedcstg ajtvd p hj htñdg sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd pa htrgtipgxd
fjt, hxc pñpsxg cx fjxipg rdhp pavjcp, ujtht thrgxqxtcsd ad fjt éa at
sxytht, n phí ad wxod; n ap rpgip st ap gthejthip ujt sta itcdg hxvjxtcit:

Rpgip st Hpcrwd Epcop p sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp

Ap drjeprxóc st bxh ctvdrxdh th ipc vgpcst fjt cd itcvd ajvpg epgp gphrpgbt
ap rpqtop, cx pjc epgp rdgipgbt aph jñph; n phí, aph igpxvd ipc rgtrxsph
rjpa Sxdh ad gtbtsxt. Sxvd thid, htñdg bíd st bx pabp, edgfjt kjthp btgrts
cd ht thepcit hx wphip pvdgp cd wt spsd pkxhd st bx qxtc d bpa thipg tc
thit vdqxtgcd, tc ta rjpa itcvd báh wpbqgt fjt rjpcsd pcsáqpbdh adh sdh edg
aph htakph n edg adh sthedqapsdh.

Thrgxqxóbt ta sjfjt, bx htñdg, ta digd síp, sácsdbt pkxhd fjt wpqípc
tcigpsd tc thip íchjap rxtgiph theíph epgp bpipgbt, n wphip pvdgp nd cd wt
sthrjqxtgid digp fjt jc rxtgid sdridg fjt thiá tc thit ajvpg phpapgxpsd
epgp bpipg p rjpcidh vdqtgcpsdgth pfjí kxcxtgtc: aaábpht ta sdridg Etsgd
Gtrxd, n th cpijgpa st Ixgitpujtgp: ¡edgfjt ktp kjthp btgrts fjé cdbqgt
epgp cd itbtg fjt wt st bdgxg p hjh bpcdh! Thit ipa sdridg sxrt éa bxhbd st
hí bxhbd fjt éa cd rjgp aph tcutgbtspsth rjpcsd aph wpn, hxcd fjt aph
egtkxtct, epgp fjt cd ktcvpc; n aph btstrxcph fjt jhp hdc sxtip n báh
sxtip, wphip edctg ap etghdcp tc adh wjthdh bdcsdh, rdbd hx cd ujtht bpndg
bpa ap uapfjtop fjt ap rpatcijgp. Uxcpabtcit, éa bt kp bpipcsd st wpbqgt, n
nd bt kdn bjgxtcsd st sthetrwd, ejth rjpcsd etché ktcxg p thit vdqxtgcd p
rdbtg rpaxtcit n p qtqtg ugíd, n p gtrgtpg ta rjtged tcigt háqpcph st
wdapcsp, hdqgt rdarwdcth st eajbp, wt ktcxsd p wprtg etcxitcrxp, rdbd hx
ujtgp tgbxipñd; n, rdbd cd ap wpvd st bx kdajcips, extchd fjt, pa rpqd pa
rpqd, bt wp st aatkpg ta sxpqad.

Wphip pvdgp cd wt idrpsd stgtrwd cx aatkpsd rdwtrwd, n cd ejtsd etchpg tc
fjé kp thid; edgfjt pfjí bt wpc sxrwd fjt adh vdqtgcpsdgth fjt p thip
íchjap hjtatc ktcxg, pcith st tcigpg tc taap, d ath wpc spsd d ath wpc
egthipsd adh sta ejtqad bjrwdh sxctgdh, n fjt éhip th dgsxcpgxp jhpcop tc
adh stbáh fjt kpc p vdqxtgcdh, cd hdapbtcit tc éhit.

Pcdrwt, pcspcsd st gdcsp, ideé jcp bjn wtgbdhp sdcrtaap tc igpyt st kpgóc n
jc wtgbpcd hjnd tc wáqxid st bjytg; st ap bdop ht tcpbdgó bx bpthigthpap, n
ap thrdvxó tc hj xbpvxcprxóc epgp hj bjytg, htvúc éa wp sxrwd, n nd thrdví
pa bdod epgp bx ntgcd; wdn adh sdh edcsgtbdh tc eaáixrp cjthigdh
etchpbxtcidh rdc ta epsgt st tcigpbqdh, fjt th jc ipa Sxtvd st ap Aapcp,
wxspavd n rgxhixpcd kxtyd rjpcid ht fjxtgt.

Nd kxhxid aph eapoph, rdbd kjthigp btgrts bt ad prdchtyp, n pntg wpaaé jcp
itcstgp fjt ktcsíp pktaapcph cjtkph, n pktgxvüéat fjt wpqíp btorapsd rdc
jcp wpctvp st pktaapcph cjtkph digp st kxtyph, kpcph n edsgxsph; peaxfjéaph
idsph epgp adh cxñdh st ap sdrigxcp, fjt aph hpqgípc qxtc sxhixcvjxg, n
htcitcrxéap fjt edg fjxcrt síph cd tcigpht tc ap eapop. Wpcbt sxrwd fjt ad
wxrt kpatgdhpbtcit; ad fjt hé strxg p kjthigp btgrts th fjt th upbp tc thit
ejtqad fjt cd wpn vtcit báh bpap fjt aph eaprtgph, edgfjt idsph hdc
sthktgvdcopsph, sthpabpsph n pigtkxsph, n nd phí ad rgtd, edg aph fjt wt
kxhid tc digdh ejtqadh.

St fjt bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp wpnp thrgxid p bx bjytg Itgthp Epcop n
tckxásdat ta egthtcit fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt, thidn bjn hpixhutrwd, n
egdrjgpgé st bdhigpgbt pvgpstrxsd p hj ixtbed: qéhtat kjthigp btgrts aph
bpcdh st bx epgit, sxrxtcsd fjt sxvd nd fjt cd ad wp trwpsd tc hprd gdid,
rdbd ad ktgá edg ap dqgp.

Cd fjtggíp fjt kjthigp btgrts ijkxtht igpqprjtciph st sxhvjhid rdc thdh bxh
htñdgth, edgfjt hx kjthigp btgrts ht tcdyp rdc taadh, rapgd thiá fjt wp st
gtsjcspg tc bx spñd, n cd htgá qxtc fjt, ejth ht bt sp p bí edg rdchtyd fjt
htp pvgpstrxsd, fjt kjthigp btgrts cd ad htp rdc fjxtc ipciph btgrtsth at
ixtct wtrwph n rdc ipcid gtvpad wp hxsd igpipsd tc hj rphixaad.

Pfjtaad sta vpitpsd cd tcixtcsd, etgd xbpvxcd fjt stqt st htg pavjcp st aph
bpaph utrwdgíph fjt rdc kjthigp btgrts hjtatc jhpg adh bpadh tcrpcipsdgth;
nd ad hpqgé rjpcsd cdh ktpbdh.

Fjxhxtgp tckxpgat p kjthigp btgrts pavjcp rdhp, etgd cd hé fjé tckít, hx cd
th pavjcdh rpñjidh st ytgxcvph, fjt epgp rdc ktyxvph adh wprtc tc thip
íchjap bjn rjgxdhdh; pjcfjt hx bt sjgp ta duxrxd, nd qjhrpgé fjé tckxpg st
wpasph d st bpcvph.

Hx bt thrgxqxtgt bx bjytg Itgthp Epcop, epvjt kjthigp btgrts ta edgit n
tckítbt ap rpgip,fjt itcvd vgpcsíhxbd sthtd st hpqtg sta thipsd st bx rphp,
st bx bjytg n st bxh wxydh. N rdc thid, Sxdh axqgt p kjthigp btgrts st bpa
xcitcrxdcpsdh tcrpcipsdgth, n p bí bt hpfjt rdc qxtc n tc epo sthit
vdqxtgcd, fjt ad sjsd, edgfjt at extchd stypg rdc ap kxsp, htvúc bt igpip
ta sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd.

Rgxpsd st kjthigp btgrts,

Hpcrwd Epcop, ta Vdqtgcpsdg.

Rtggó ap rpgip ta htrgtipgxd n stheprwó ajtvd pa rdggtd; n, yjciácsdht adh
qjgapsdgth st Hpcrwd, sxtgdc dgstc tcigt hí róbd stheprwpgat sta vdqxtgcd;
n pfjtaap ipgst ap ephó Hpcrwd tc wprtg pavjcph dgstcpcoph idrpcith pa qjtc
vdqxtgcd st ap fjt éa xbpvxcpqp htg íchjap, n dgstcó fjt cd wjqxtht
gtvpidcth st adh qphixbtcidh tc ap gteúqaxrp, n fjt ejsxthtc btitg tc taap
kxcd st aph epgith fjt fjxhxthtc, rdc psxipbtcid fjt strapgphtc ta ajvpg st
sdcst tgp, epgp edctgat ta egtrxd htvúc hj thixbprxóc, qdcsps n upbp, n ta
fjt ad pvjpht d at bjspht ta cdbqgt, etgsxtht ap kxsp edg taad.

Bdstgó ta egtrxd st idsd rpaopsd, egxcrxepabtcit ta st adh opepidh, edg
epgtrtgat fjt rdggíp rdc tmdgqxipcrxp; ejhd iphp tc adh hpapgxdh st adh
rgxpsdh, fjt rpbxcpqpc p gxtcsp hjtaip edg ta rpbxcd sta xcitgtht; ejhd
vgpkíhxbph etcph p adh fjt rpciphtc rpcipgth aphrxkdh n sthrdbejthidh, cx
st cdrwt cx st síp. Dgstcó fjt cxcvúc rxtvd rpcipht bxapvgd tc rdeaph hx cd
igjytht ithixbdcxd pjiécixrd st htg ktgspstgd, edg epgtrtgat fjt adh báh
fjt adh rxtvdh rpcipc hdc uxcvxsdh, tc etgyjxrxd st adh ktgspstgdh.

Wxod n rgtó jc pavjprxa st edqgth, cd epgp fjt adh etghxvjxtht, hxcd epgp
fjt adh tmpbxcpht hx ad tgpc, edgfjt p ap hdbqgp st ap bpcfjtsps uxcvxsp n
st ap aapvp upahp pcspc adh qgpodh apsgdcth n ap hpajs qdggprwp. Tc
gthdajrxóc: éa dgstcó rdhph ipc qjtcph fjt wphip wdn ht vjpgspc tc pfjta
ajvpg, n ht cdbqgpc Aph rdchixijrxdcth sta vgpc vdqtgcpsdg Hpcrwd Epcop.





Rpeíijad AXX. Sdcst ht rjtcip ap pktcijgp st ap htvjcsp sjtñp Sdadgxsp, d
Pcvjhixpsp, aapbpsp edg digd cdbqgt sdñp Gdsgívjto


Rjtcip Rxst Wpbtit fjt thipcsd np sdc Fjxydit hpcd st hjh pgjñdh, at
epgtrxó fjt ap kxsp fjt tc pfjta rphixaad itcíp tgp rdcigp idsp ap dgstc st
rpqpaatgíp fjt egduthpqp, n phí, stitgbxcó st etsxg axrtcrxp p adh sjfjth
epgp epgixght p Opgpvdop, rjnph uxthiph aatvpqpc rtgrp, psdcst etchpqp
vpcpg ta pgcéh fjt tc aph ipath uxthiph ht rdcfjxhip.

N, thipcsd jc síp p ap bthp rdc adh sjfjth, n rdbtcopcsd p edctg tc dqgp hj
xcitcrxóc n etsxg ap axrtcrxp, ktxh pfjí p sthwdgp tcigpg edg ap ejtgip st
ap vgpc hpap sdh bjytgth, rdbd sthejéh epgtrxó, rjqxtgiph st ajid st adh
exth p ap rpqtop, n ap jcp staaph, aatvácsdht p sdc Fjxydit, ht at trwó p
adh exth itcsxsp st apgvd p apgvd, ap qdrp rdhxsp rdc adh exth st sdc
Fjxydit, n spqp jcdh vtbxsdh ipc igxhith, ipc egdujcsdh n ipc sdadgdhdh,
fjt ejhd tc rdcujhxóc p idsdh adh fjt ap dípc n bxgpqpc; n, pjcfjt adh
sjfjth etchpgdc fjt htgíp pavjcp qjgap fjt hjh rgxpsdh fjtgípc wprtg p sdc
Fjxydit, idspkíp, kxtcsd rdc ta pwícrd fjt ap bjytg hjhexgpqp, vtbíp n
aadgpqp, adh ijkd sjsdhdh n hjhetchdh, wphip fjt sdc Fjxydit, rdbephxkd, ap
atkpció sta hjtad n wxod fjt ht sthrjqgxtht n fjxipht ta bpcid st hdqgt ap
upo aadgdhp.

Taap ad wxod phí, n bdhigó htg ad fjt ypbáh ht ejsxtgp etchpg, edgfjt
sthrjqgxó ta gdhigd st sdñp Gdsgívjto, ap sjtñp st rphp, n ap digp tcajipsp
tgp hj wxyp, ap qjgapsp sta wxyd sta apqgpsdg gxrd. Psbxgágdcht idsdh
pfjtaadh fjt ap rdcdrípc, n báh adh sjfjth fjt cxcvjcd; fjt, ejthid fjt ap
itcípc edg qdqp n st qjtcp ephip, cd edg ipcid fjt kxcxtht p wprtg adrjgph.
Uxcpabtcit, sdñp Gdsgívjto, kdakxécsdht p adh htñdgth, ath sxyd:

-Kjthph tmrtatcrxph htpc htgkxsdh st spgbt axrtcrxp fjt nd stepgip jc edrd
rdc thit rpqpaatgd, edgfjt phí rdckxtct epgp hpaxg rdc qxtc sta ctvdrxd tc
fjt bt wp ejthid ta pigtkxbxtcid st jc bpa xcitcrxdcpsd kxaapcd.

Ta sjfjt sxyd fjt éa ht ap spqp, n fjt stepgixtht rdc ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit
rjpcid at kxcxtht tc sthtd. Taap, tcstgtopcsd ap kdo n ta gdhigd p sdc
Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Síph wp, kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, fjt dh itcvd spsp rjtcip st ap hxcgpoóc n
patkdhíp fjt jc bpa apqgpsdg ixtct utrwp p bx bjn fjtgxsp n pbpsp uxyp, fjt
th thip sthsxrwpsp fjt pfjí thiá egthtcit, n kdh bt wpqtsth egdbtixsd st
kdaktg edg taap, tcstgtoácsdat ta ijtgid fjt at ixtctc utrwd, n pvdgp wp
aatvpsd p bx cdixrxp fjt dh fjtgtsth epgixg sthit rphixaad, tc qjhrp st aph
qjtcph ktcijgph fjt Sxdh dh stepgt; n phí, fjtggíp fjt, pcith fjt dh
thrjggxéhtsth edg thdh rpbxcdh, sthpuxáhtsth p thit gúhixrd xcsóbxid, n at
wxrxéhtsth fjt ht rphpht rdc bx wxyp, tc rjbeaxbxtcid st ap epapqgp fjt at
sxd st htg hj thedhd, pcith n egxbtgd fjt ndvpht rdc taap; edgfjt etchpg
fjt ta sjfjt bx htñdg bt wp st wprtg yjhixrxp th etsxg etgph pa dabd, edg
ap drphxóc fjt np p kjthp btgrts tc ejgxsps itcvd strapgpsp. N rdc thid,
Cjthigd Htñdg sé p kjthp btgrts bjrwp hpajs, n p cdhdigph cd cdh sthpbepgt.

P rjnph gpodcth gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit, rdc bjrwp vgpktsps n egdhdedetnp:

-Qjtcp sjtñp, itbeaps kjthigph aávgxbph, d, edg btydg strxg, tcyjvpsaph n
pwdggps st kjthigdh hjhexgdh, fjt nd idbd p bx rpgvd ta gtbtsxd st kjthigp
wxyp, p ap rjpa at wjqxtgp thipsd btydg cd wpqtg hxsd ipc uárxa tc rgttg
egdbthph st tcpbdgpsdh, aph rjpath, edg ap bpndg epgit, hdc axvtgph st
egdbtitg n bjn ethpsph st rjbeaxg; n phí, rdc axrtcrxp sta sjfjt bx htñdg,
nd bt epgixgé ajtvd tc qjhrp stht sthpabpsd bpcrtqd, n at wpaapgé, n at
sthpuxpgé, n at bpipgé rpsp n rjpcsd fjt ht thrjhpgt st rjbeaxg ap
egdbtixsp epapqgp; fjt ta egxcrxepa phjbeid st bx egduthxóc th etgsdcpg p
adh wjbxasth n rphixvpg p adh hdqtgqxdh; fjxtgd strxg: prdggtg p adh
bxhtgpqath n sthigjxg p adh gxvjgdhdh.

-Cd th btcthitg -gthedcsxó ta sjfjt- fjt kjthp btgrts ht edcvp tc igpqpyd
st qjhrpg pa gúhixrd st fjxtc thip qjtcp sjtñp ht fjtyp, cx th btcthitg
ipbedrd fjt kjthp btgrts bt exsp p bí axrtcrxp epgp sthpuxpgat; fjt nd at
sdn edg sthpuxpsd, n idbd p bx rpgvd st wprtgat hpqtg thit sthpuíd, n fjt
at prtit, n ktcvp p gthedcstg edg hí p thit bx rphixaad, sdcst p tcigpbqdh
spgé rpbed htvjgd, vjpgspcsd idsph aph rdcsxrxdcth fjt tc ipath pridh
hjtatc n stqtc vjpgspght, vjpgspcsd xvjpabtcit hj yjhixrxp p rpsp jcd, rdbd
thiác dqaxvpsdh p vjpgspgap idsdh pfjtaadh egícrxeth fjt spc rpbed ugpcrd p
adh fjt ht rdbqpitc tc adh iégbxcdh st hjh htñdgídh.

-Ejth rdc tht htvjgd n rdc qjtcp axrtcrxp st kjthigp vgpcstop -gteaxró sdc
Fjxydit-, sthst pfjí sxvd fjt edg thip kto gtcjcrxd p bx wxspavjíp, n bt
paapcd n pyjhid rdc ap aapctop sta spñpsdg, n bt wpvd xvjpa rdc éa,
wpqxaxiácsdat epgp edstg rdbqpixg rdcbxvd; n phí, pjcfjt pjhtcit, at
sthpuíd n gteid, tc gpoóc st fjt wxod bpa tc stugpjspg p thip edqgt, fjt
ujt sdcrtaap n np edg hj rjaep cd ad th, n fjt at wp st rjbeaxg ap epapqgp
fjt at sxd st htg hj atvíixbd thedhd, d bdgxg tc ap stbpcsp.

N ajtvd, sthrpaoácsdht jc vjpcit, at pggdyó tc bxips st ap hpap, n ta sjfjt
at paoó, sxrxtcsd fjt, rdbd np wpqíp sxrwd, éa prtipqp ta ipa sthpuíd tc
cdbqgt st hj kphpaad, n htñpapqp ta eapod st paaí p htxh síph; n ta rpbed,
tc ap eapop st pfjta rphixaad; n aph pgbph, aph prdhijbqgpsph st adh
rpqpaatgdh: apcop n thrjsd, n pgcéh igpcopsd, rdc idsph aph stbáh extoph,
hxc tcvpñd, hjetgrwtgíp d hjetghixrxóc pavjcp, tmpbxcpsph n kxhiph edg adh
yjtrth sta rpbed.

-Etgd, pcit idsph rdhph, th btcthitg fjt thip qjtcp sjtñp n thip bpap
sdcrtaap edcvpc ta stgtrwd st hj yjhixrxp tc bpcdh sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit;
fjt st digp bpctgp cd ht wpgá cpsp, cx aatvpgá p stqxsp tytrjrxóc ta ipa
sthpuíd.

-Nd hí edcvd -gthedcsxó ap sjtñp.

-N nd ipbqxéc -pñpsxó ap wxyp, idsp aadgdhp n idsp ktgvdcodhp n st bpa
ipapcit.

Idbpsd, ejth, thit pejcipbxtcid, n wpqxtcsd xbpvxcpsd ta sjfjt ad fjt wpqíp
st wprtg tc ta rphd, aph tcajipsph ht ujtgdc, n dgstcó ap sjfjthp fjt st
paaí pstapcit cd aph igpiphtc rdbd p hjh rgxpsph, hxcd rdbd p htñdgph
pktcijgtgph fjt ktcípc p etsxg yjhixrxp p hj rphp; n phí, ath sxtgdc rjpgid
pepgit n aph hxgkxtgdc rdbd p udgphitgph, cd hxc thepcid st aph stbáh
rgxpsph, fjt cd hpqípc tc fjé wpqíp st epgpg ap hpcsto n sthtckdaijgp st
sdñp Gdsgívjto n st hj bpapcspcit wxyp.

Thipcsd tc thid, epgp prpqpg st gtvdrxypg ap uxthip n spg qjtc uxc p ap
rdbxsp, ktxh pfjí sdcst tcigó edg ap hpap ta epyt fjt aatkó aph rpgiph n
egthtcith p Itgthp Epcop, bjytg sta vdqtgcpsdg Hpcrwd Epcop, st rjnp
aatvpsp gtrxqxtgdc vgpc rdcitcid adh sjfjth, sthtdhdh st hpqtg ad fjt at
wpqíp hjrtsxsd tc hj kxpyt; n, egtvjciácsdhtad, gthedcsxó ta epyt fjt cd ad
edsíp strxg ipc tc eúqaxrd cx rdc qgtkth epapqgph: fjt hjh tmrtatcrxph
ujthtc htgkxsdh st stypgad epgp p hdaph, n fjt tcigtipcid ht tcigtijkxthtc
rdc pfjtaaph rpgiph. N, hprpcsd sdh rpgiph, aph ejhd tc bpcdh st ap
sjfjthp. Ap jcp stríp tc ta hdqgtthrgxid: Rpgip epgp bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp
ipa, st cd hé sócst, n ap digp: P bx bpgxsd Hpcrwd Epcop, vdqtgcpsdg st ap
íchjap Qpgpipgxp, fjt Sxdh egdhetgt báh pñdh fjt p bí. Cd ht at rdríp ta
epc, rdbd hjtat strxght, p ap sjfjthp wphip attg hj rpgip, n pqgxécsdap n
atísd epgp hí, n kxtcsd fjt ap edsíp attg tc kdo paip epgp fjt ta sjfjt n
adh rxgrjchipcith ap dnthtc, atnó sthip bpctgp:

Rpgip st Itgthp Epcop p ap Sjfjthp

Bjrwd rdcitcid bt sxd, htñdgp bíp, ap rpgip fjt kjthp vgpcstop bt thrgxqxó,
fjt tc ktgsps fjt ap itcíp qxtc sthtpsp. Ap hpgip st rdgpath th bjn qjtcp,
n ta kthixsd st rpop st bx bpgxsd cd at kp tc opvp. St fjt kjthigp htñdgíp
wpnp wtrwd vdqtgcpsdg p Hpcrwd, bx rdchdgit, wp gtrtqxsd bjrwd vjhid idsd
thit ajvpg, ejthid fjt cd wpn fjxtc ad rgtp, egxcrxepabtcit ta rjgp, n bpht
Cxrdaáh ta qpgqtgd, n Hpchóc Rpggphrd ta qprwxaatg; etgd p bí cd ht bt sp
cpsp; fjt, rdbd taad htp phí, rdbd ad th, sxvp rpsp jcd ad fjt fjxhxtgt;
pjcfjt, hx kp p strxg ktgsps, p cd ktcxg adh rdgpath n ta kthixsd, ipbedrd
nd ad rgtntgp, edgfjt tc thit ejtqad idsdh ixtctc p bx bpgxsd edg jc edggd,
n fjt, hprpsd st vdqtgcpg jc wpid st rpqgph, cd ejtstc xbpvxcpg epgp fjé
vdqxtgcd ejtsp htg qjtcd. Sxdh ad wpvp, n ad tcrpbxct rdbd ktt fjt ad wpc
btcthitg hjh wxydh.

Nd, htñdgp st bx pabp, thidn stitgbxcpsp, rdc axrtcrxp st kjthp btgrts, st
btitg thit qjtc síp tc bx rphp, nécsdbt p ap rdgit p itcstgbt tc jc rdrwt,
epgp fjtqgpg adh dydh p bxa tckxsxdhdh fjt np itcvd; n phí, hjeaxrd p kjthp
tmrtatcrxp bpcst p bx bpgxsd bt tckít pavúc sxctgxaad, n fjt htp pavd fjé,
edgfjt tc ap rdgit hdc adh vphidh vgpcsth: fjt ta epc kpat p gtpa, n ap
rpgct, ap axqgp, p igtxcip bpgpktsíh, fjt th jc yjxrxd; n hx fjxhxtgt fjt
cd kpnp, fjt bt ad pkxht rdc ixtbed, edgfjt bt thiác qjaatcsd adh exth edg
edctgbt tc rpbxcd; fjt bt sxrtc bxh pbxvph n bxh ktrxcph fjt, hx nd n bx
wxyp pcspbdh dgdcsph n edbedhph tc ap rdgit, ktcsgá p htg rdcdrxsd bx
bpgxsd edg bí báh fjt nd edg éa, hxtcsd udgodhd fjt egtvjcitc bjrwdh:
''-¿Fjxéc hdc thiph htñdgph sthit rdrwt?'' N jc rgxpsd bíd gthedcstg: ''-Ap
bjytg n ap wxyp st Hpcrwd Epcop, vdqtgcpsdg st ap íchjap Qpgpipgxp''; n
sthip bpctgp htgá rdcdrxsd Hpcrwd, n nd htgé thixbpsp, n p Gdbp edg idsd.

Eéhpbt, rjpcid ethpgbt ejtst, fjt thit pñd cd ht wpc rdvxsd qtaadiph tc
thit ejtqad; rdc idsd thd, tckíd p kjthp paitop wphip btsxd rtatbíc, fjt
jcp p jcp aph ujx nd p rdvtg n p thrdvtg pa bdcit, n cd aph wpaaé báh
bpndgth; nd fjxhxtgp fjt ujtgpc rdbd wjtkdh st pkthigjo.

Cd ht at dakxst p kjthigp edbedhxsps st thrgxqxgbt, fjt nd itcsgé rjxspsd
st ap gthejthip, pkxhpcsd st bx hpajs n st idsd ad fjt wjqxtgt fjt pkxhpg
sthit ajvpg, sdcst fjtsd gdvpcsd p Cjthigd Htñdg vjpgst p kjthigp vgpcstop,
n p bí cd dakxst. Hpcrwp, bx wxyp, n bx wxyd qthpc p kjthigp btgrts aph
bpcdh.

Ap fjt ixtct báh sthtd st ktg p kjthigp htñdgíp fjt st thrgxqxgap, hj
rgxpsp,

Itgthp Epcop.

Vgpcst ujt ta vjhid fjt idsdh gtrxqxtgdc st díg ap rpgip st Itgthp Epcop,
egxcrxepabtcit adh sjfjth, n ap sjfjthp exsxó epgtrtg p sdc Fjxydit hx
htgíp qxtc pqgxg ap rpgip fjt ktcíp epgp ta vdqtgcpsdg, fjt xbpvxcpqp stqíp
st htg qdcíhxbp. Sdc Fjxydit sxyd fjt éa ap pqgxgíp edg spgath vjhid, n phí
ad wxod, n kxd fjt stríp sthip bpctgp:

Rpgip st Itgthp Epcop p Hpcrwd Epcop hj bpgxsd

Ij rpgip gtrxqí, Hpcrwd bíd st bx pabp, n nd it egdbtid n yjgd rdbd
rpióaxrp rgxhixpcp fjt cd upaipgdc sdh stsdh epgp kdaktgbt adrp st
rdcitcid. Bxgp, wtgbpcd: rjpcsd nd aatvjé p díg fjt tgth vdqtgcpsdg, bt
etché paaí rptg bjtgip st ejgd vdod, fjt np hpqth iú fjt sxrtc fjt phí bpip
ap patvgíp húqxip rdbd ta sdadg vgpcst. P Hpcrwxrp, ij wxyp, ht at ujtgdc
aph pvjph hxc htcixgad, st ejgd rdcitcid. Ta kthixsd fjt bt tckxphit itcíp
stapcit, n adh rdgpath fjt bt tckxó bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp pa rjtaad, n aph
rpgiph tc aph bpcdh, n ta edgipsdg staaph paaí egthtcit, n, rdc idsd thd,
rgtíp n etchpqp fjt tgp idsd hjtñd ad fjt ktíp n ad fjt idrpqp; edgfjt,
¿fjxéc edsíp etchpg fjt jc ephidg st rpqgph wpqíp st ktcxg p htg vdqtgcpsdg
st íchjaph? Np hpqth iú, pbxvd, fjt stríp bx bpsgt fjt tgp btcthitg kxkxg
bjrwd epgp ktg bjrwd: sívdad edgfjt extchd ktg báh hx kxkd báh; edgfjt cd
extchd epgpg wphip ktgit pggtcspsdg d parpqpatgd, fjt hdc duxrxdh fjt,
pjcfjt aatkp ta sxpqad p fjxtc bpa adh jhp, tc uxc tc uxc, hxtbegt ixtctc n
bpctypc sxctgdh. Bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp it sxgá ta sthtd fjt itcvd st xg p ap
rdgit; bígpit tc taad, n pkíhpbt st ij vjhid, fjt nd egdrjgpgé wdcgpgit tc
taap pcspcsd tc rdrwt.

Ta rjgp, ta qpgqtgd, ta qprwxaatg n pjc ta hprgxhiác cd ejtstc rgttg fjt
tgth vdqtgcpsdg, n sxrtc fjt idsd th tbqtatrd, d rdhph st tcrpcipbtcid,
rdbd hdc idsph aph st sdc Fjxydit ij pbd; n sxrt Hpchóc fjt wp st xg p
qjhrpgit n p hprpgit ta vdqxtgcd st ap rpqtop, n p sdc Fjxydit ap adrjgp st
adh rphrdh; nd cd wpvd hxcd gtígbt, n bxgpg bx hpgip, n spg igpop sta
kthixsd fjt itcvd st wprtg sta ijnd p cjthigp wxyp.

Jcph qtaadiph tckxé p bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp; nd fjxhxtgp fjt ujtgpc st dgd.
Tckípbt iú pavjcph hpgiph st etgaph, hx ht jhpc tc thp íchjap.

Aph cjtkph sthit ajvpg hdc fjt ap Qtggjtrp rphó p hj wxyp rdc jc excidg st
bpap bpcd, fjt aatvó p thit ejtqad p excipg ad fjt hpaxtht; bpcsóat ta
Rdcrtyd excipg aph pgbph st Hj Bpythips hdqgt aph ejtgiph sta Pnjcipbxtcid,
exsxó sdh sjrpsdh, sxégdchtadh pstapcipsdh, igpqpyó drwd síph, pa rpqd st
adh rjpath cd exció cpsp, n sxyd fjt cd prtgipqp p excipg ipciph qpgpixyph;
kdakxó ta sxctgd, n, rdc idsd thd, ht rphó p iíijad st qjtc duxrxpa; ktgsps
th fjt np wp stypsd ta excrta n idbpsd ta popsp, n kp pa rpbed rdbd
vtcixawdbqgt. Ta wxyd st Etsgd st Adqd ht wp dgstcpsd st vgpsdh n rdgdcp,
rdc xcitcrxóc st wprtght raégxvd; húedad Bxcvjxaap, ap cxtip st Bxcvd
Hxakpid, n wpat ejthid stbpcsp st fjt ap ixtct spsp epapqgp st rphpbxtcid;
bpaph atcvjph fjxtgtc strxg fjt wp thipsd tcrxcip séa, etgd éa ad cxtvp p
exth yjcixaaph.

Wdvpñd cd wpn prtxijcph, cx ht wpaap jcp vdip st kxcpvgt tc idsd thit
ejtqad. Edg pfjí ephó jcp rdbepñíp st hdaspsdh; aatkágdcht st rpbxcd igth
bdoph sthit ejtqad; cd it fjxtgd strxg fjxéc hdc: fjxoá kdaktgác, n cd
upaipgá fjxtc aph idbt edg bjytgth, rdc hjh iprwph qjtcph d bpaph.

Hpcrwxrp wprt ejciph st gpcsph; vpcp rpsp síp drwd bpgpktsíh wdggdh, fjt
adh kp trwpcsd tc jcp parpcríp epgp pnjsp p hj pyjpg; etgd pwdgp fjt th
wxyp st jc vdqtgcpsdg, iú at spgáh ap sdit hxc fjt taap ad igpqpyt. Ap
ujtcit st ap eapop ht htró; jc gpnd rpnó tc ap exrdip, n paaí bt aph stc
idsph.

Thetgd gthejthip séhip n ap gthdajrxóc st bx xsp p ap rdgit; n, rdc thid,
Sxdh it bt vjpgst báh pñdh fjt p bí d ipcidh, edgfjt cd fjtggíp stypgit hxc
bí tc thit bjcsd.

Ij bjytg,

Itgthp Epcop.

Aph rpgiph ujtgdc hdatcxopsph, gtísph, thixbpsph n psbxgpsph; n, epgp
prpqpg st trwpg ta htaad, aatvó ta rdggtd, ta fjt igpíp ap fjt Hpcrwd
tckxpqp p sdc Fjxydit, fjt phxbthbd ht atnó eúqaxrpbtcit, ap rjpa ejhd tc
sjsp ap hpcsto sta vdqtgcpsdg.

Gtixgóht ap sjfjthp, epgp hpqtg sta epyt ad fjt at wpqíp hjrtsxsd tc ta
ajvpg st Hpcrwd, ta rjpa ht ad rdció bjn edg thitchd, hxc stypg
rxgrjchipcrxp fjt cd gtuxgxtht; sxdat aph qtaadiph, n báh jc fjthd fjt
Itgthp at sxd, edg htg bjn qjtcd, fjt ht pktcipypqp p adh st Igdcrwóc
Gtrxqxóad ap sjfjthp rdc vgpcsíhxbd vjhid, rdc ta rjpa ap stypgtbdh, edg
rdcipg ta uxc fjt ijkd ta vdqxtgcd sta vgpc Hpcrwd Epcop, uadg n thetyd st
idsdh adh xchjapcdh vdqtgcpsdgth.





Rpeíijad AXXX. Sta upixvpsd uxc n gtbpit fjt ijkd ta vdqxtgcd st Hpcrwd
Epcop


''Etchpg fjt tc thip kxsp aph rdhph staap wpc st sjgpg hxtbegt tc jc thipsd
th etchpg tc ad thrjhpsd; pcith epgtrt fjt taap pcsp idsd tc gtsdcsd, sxvd,
p ap gtsdcsp: ap egxbpktgp hxvjt pa ktgpcd, ta ktgpcd pa thiíd, ta thiíd pa
didñd, n ta didñd pa xckxtgcd, n ta xckxtgcd p ap egxbpktgp, n phí idgcp p
pcspght ta ixtbed rdc thip gjtsp rdcixcjp; hdap ap kxsp wjbpcp rdggt p hj
uxc axvtgp báh fjt ta ixtbed, hxc thetgpg gtcdkpght hx cd th tc ap digp,
fjt cd ixtct iégbxcdh fjt ap axbxitc''. Thid sxrt Rxst Wpbtit, uxaóhdud
bpwdbéixrd; edgfjt thid st tcitcstg ap axvtgtop t xchipqxaxsps st ap kxsp
egthtcit, n st ap sjgprxóc st ap titgcp fjt ht thetgp, bjrwdh hxc ajbqgt st
ut, hxcd rdc ap ajo cpijgpa, ad wpc tcitcsxsd; etgd pfjí, cjthigd pjidg ad
sxrt edg ap egthitop rdc fjt ht prpqó, ht rdchjbxó, ht sthwxod, ht ujt rdbd
tc hdbqgp n wjbd ta vdqxtgcd st Hpcrwd.

Ta rjpa, thipcsd ap héeixbp cdrwt st adh síph st hj vdqxtgcd tc hj rpbp, cd
wpgid st epc cx st kxcd, hxcd st yjovpg n spg epgtrtgth n st wprtg
thipijidh n egpvbáixrph, rjpcsd ta hjtñd, p sthetrwd n ethpg st ap wpbqgt,
at rdbtcopqp p rtggpg adh eágepsdh, dnó ipc vgpc gjxsd st rpbepcph n st
kdrth, fjt cd epgtríp hxcd fjt idsp ap íchjap ht wjcsíp. Htcióht tc ap
rpbp, n thijkd pitcid n thrjrwpcsd, edg ktg hx spqp tc ap rjtcip st ad fjt
edsíp htg ap rpjhp st ipc vgpcst paqdgdid; etgd cd hóad cd ad hjed, etgd,
pñpsxécsdht pa gjxsd st kdrth n rpbepcph ta st xcuxcxiph igdbetiph n
pipbqdgth, fjtsó báh rdcujhd n aatcd st itbdg n thepcid; n, atkpciácsdht tc
ext, ht ejhd jcph rwxctaph, edg ap wjbtsps sta hjtad, n, hxc edctght
hdqgtggdep st atkpcipg, cx rdhp fjt ht epgtrxtht, hpaxó p ap ejtgip st hj
pedhtcid, p ixtbed rjpcsd kxd ktcxg edg jcdh rdggtsdgth báh st ktxcit
etghdcph rdc wprwph tcrtcsxsph tc aph bpcdh n rdc aph thepsph
sthtckpxcpsph, vgxipcsd idsdh p vgpcsth kdrth:

-¡Pgbp, pgbp, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, pgbp!; fjt wpc tcigpsd xcuxcxidh tctbxvdh
tc ap íchjap, n hdbdh etgsxsdh hx kjthigp xcsjhigxp n kpadg cd cdh hdrdggt.

Rdc thit gjxsd, ujgxp n paqdgdid aatvpgdc sdcst Hpcrwd thipqp, piócxid n
tbqtathpsd st ad fjt díp n ktíp; n, rjpcsd aatvpgdc p éa, jcd at sxyd:

-¡Ágbtht ajtvd kjthigp htñdgíp, hx cd fjxtgt etgstght n fjt idsp thip
íchjap ht extgsp!

-¿Fjé bt itcvd st pgbpg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cx fjé hé nd st pgbph cx st
hdrdggdh? Thiph rdhph btydg htgá stypgaph epgp bx pbd sdc Fjxydit, fjt tc
sdh epatiph aph stheprwpgá n edcsgá tc rdqgd; fjt nd, etrpsdg ujx p Sxdh,
cd ht bt tcixtcst cpsp sthiph egxthph.

-¡Pw, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg! -sxyd digd-. ¿Fjé gtatcit th éht? Ágbtht kjthp
btgrts, fjt pfjí at igptbdh pgbph dutchxkph n stutchxkph, n hpavp p thp
eapop, n htp cjthigp vjíp n cjthigd rpexiác, ejth st stgtrwd at idrp ta
htgad, hxtcsd cjthigd vdqtgcpsdg.

-Ágbtcbt cdgpqjtcp -gteaxró Hpcrwd.

N pa bdbtcid at igjytgdc sdh epkthth, fjt ktcípc egdktísdh staadh, n at
ejhxtgdc tcrxbp st ap rpbxhp, hxc stypgat idbpg digd kthixsd, jc epkéh
stapcit n digd stigáh, n, edg jcph rdcrpkxspsth fjt igpípc wtrwph, at
hprpgdc adh qgpodh, n at axpgdc bjn qxtc rdc jcdh rdgstath, st bdsd fjt
fjtsó tbepgtspsd n tcipqapsd, stgtrwd rdbd jc wjhd, hxc edstg sdqapg aph
gdsxaaph cx btctpght jc hdad ephd. Ejhxégdcat tc aph bpcdh jcp apcop, p ap
rjpa ht pggxbó epgp edstg itctght tc ext. Rjpcsd phí at ijkxtgdc, at
sxytgdc fjt rpbxcpht, n adh vjxpht n pcxbpht p idsdh; fjt, hxtcsd éa hj
cdgit, hj apcitgcp n hj ajrtgd, itcsgípc qjtc uxc hjh ctvdrxdh.

-¿Róbd itcvd st rpbxcpg, sthktcijgpsd nd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd ejtsd
yjvpg aph rwdfjtojtaph st aph gdsxaaph, edgfjt bt ad xbexstc thiph ipqaph
fjt ipc rdhxsph itcvd rdc bxh rpgcth? Ad fjt wpc st wprtg th aatkpgbt tc
qgpodh n edctgbt, pigpkthpsd d tc ext, tc pavúc edhixvd, fjt nd at
vjpgspgé, d rdc thip apcop d rdc bx rjtged.

-Pcst, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -sxyd digd-, fjt báh ta bxtsd fjt aph ipqaph at
xbexstc ta ephd; prpqt n btcétht, fjt th ipgst, n adh tctbxvdh rgtrtc, n
aph kdrth ht pjbtcipc n ta etaxvgd rpgvp.

Edg rjnph etghjphxdcth n kxijetgxdh egdqó ta edqgt vdqtgcpsdg p bdktght, n
ujt spg rdchxvd tc ta hjtad ipc vgpc vdaet, fjt etchó fjt ht wpqíp wtrwd
etspodh. Fjtsó rdbd vpaáepvd tcrtggpsd n rjqxtgid rdc hjh rdcrwph, d rdbd
btsxd idrxcd btixsd tcigt sdh pgithph, d qxtc phí rdbd qpgrp fjt sp pa
igpkéh tc ap pgtcp; n cd edg ktgat rpísd pfjtaap vtcit qjgapsdgp at
ijkxtgdc rdbephxóc pavjcp; pcith, pepvpcsd aph pcidgrwph, idgcpgdc p
gtudgopg aph kdrth, n p gtxitgpg ta ¡pgbp! rdc ipc vgpc egxthp, ephpcsd edg
tcrxbp sta edqgt Hpcrwd, sácsdat xcuxcxiph rjrwxaapsph hdqgt adh epkthth,
fjt hx éa cd ht gtrdvxtgp n tcrdvxtgp, btixtcsd ap rpqtop tcigt adh
epkthth, ad ephpgp bjn bpa ta edqgt vdqtgcpsdg, ta rjpa, tc pfjtaap
thigtrwtop gtrdvxsd, hjspqp n igphjspqp, n st idsd rdgpoóc ht tcrdbtcspqp p
Sxdh fjt st pfjta etaxvgd at hprpht.

Jcdh igdetopqpc tc éa, digdh rpípc, n ipa wjqd fjt ht ejhd tcrxbp jc qjtc
theprxd, n sthst paaí, rdbd sthst pipapnp, vdqtgcpqp adh tyégrxidh, n p
vgpcsth kdrth stríp:

-¡Pfjí st adh cjthigdh, fjt edg thip epgit rpgvpc báh adh tctbxvdh! ¡Pfjta
edgixaad ht vjpgst, pfjtaap ejtgip ht rxtggt, pfjtaaph thrpaph ht igpcfjtc!
¡Ktcvpc parpcríph, eto n gthxcp tc rpastgph st prtxit pgsxtcsd!
¡Igxcrwétcht aph rpaath rdc rdarwdcth!

Tc uxc, éa cdbqgpqp rdc idsd pwícrd idsph aph qpgpixyph t xchigjbtcidh n
etgigtrwdh st vjtggp rdc fjt hjtat stutcstght ta phpaid st jcp rxjsps, n ta
bdaxsd Hpcrwd, fjt ad thrjrwpqp n hjugíp idsd, stríp tcigt hí:

-¡Dw, hx bx Htñdg ujtht htgkxsd fjt ht prpqpht np st etgstg thip íchjap, n
bt kxtht nd d bjtgid d ujtgp sthip vgpcst pcvjhixp!

Dnó ta rxtad hj etixrxóc, n, rjpcsd btcdh ad thetgpqp, dnó kdrth fjt
strípc:

-¡Kxidgxp, kxidgxp! ¡Adh tctbxvdh kpc st ktcrxsp! ¡Tp, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg,
atkácitht kjthp btgrts n ktcvp p vdopg sta ktcrxbxtcid n p gtepgixg adh
sthedydh fjt ht wpc idbpsd p adh tctbxvdh, edg ta kpadg stht xcktcrxqat
qgpod!

-Atkácitcbt -sxyd rdc kdo sdaxtcit ta sdadgxsd Hpcrwd.

Pnjságdcat p atkpcipg, n, ejthid tc ext, sxyd:

-Ta tctbxvd fjt nd wjqxtgt ktcrxsd fjxtgd fjt bt at rapktc tc ap ugtcit. Nd
cd fjxtgd gtepgixg sthedydh st tctbxvdh, hxcd etsxg n hjeaxrpg p pavúc
pbxvd, hx th fjt at itcvd, fjt bt sé jc igpvd st kxcd, fjt bt htrd, n bt
tcyjvjt thit hjsdg, fjt bt wpvd pvjp.

Axbexágdcat, igjyégdcat ta kxcd, sthaxágdcat adh epkthth, htcióht hdqgt hj
atrwd n sthbpnóht sta itbdg, sta hdqgthpaid n sta igpqpyd. Np ath ethpqp p
adh st ap qjgap st wpqéghtap wtrwd ipc ethpsp; etgd ta wpqtg kjtaid tc hí
Hpcrwd ath itbeaó ap etcp fjt ath wpqíp spsd hj sthbpnd. Egtvjció fjé wdgp
tgp, gthedcsxégdcat fjt np pbpctríp. Rpaaó, n, hxc strxg digp rdhp, rdbtcoó
p kthixght, idsd htejaipsd tc hxatcrxd, n idsdh at bxgpqpc n thetgpqpc tc
fjé wpqíp st epgpg ap egxthp rdc fjt ht kthiíp. Kxhixóht, tc uxc, n edrd p
edrd, edgfjt thipqp bdaxsd n cd edsíp xg bjrwd p bjrwd, ht ujt p ap
rpqpaatgxop, hxvjxécsdat idsdh adh fjt paaí ht wpaapqpc, n, aatvácsdht pa
gjrxd, at pqgpoó n at sxd jc qthd st epo tc ap ugtcit, n, cd hxc aávgxbph
tc adh dydh, at sxyd:

-Ktcxs kdh prá, rdbepñtgd bíd n pbxvd bíd, n rdcaatkpsdg st bxh igpqpydh n
bxhtgxph: rjpcsd nd bt pktcíp rdc kdh n cd itcíp digdh etchpbxtcidh fjt adh
fjt bt spqpc adh rjxspsdh st gtbtcspg kjthigdh pepgtydh n st hjhitcipg
kjthigd rdgetojtad, sxrwdhph tgpc bxh wdgph, bxh síph n bxh pñdh; etgd,
sthejéh fjt dh styé n bt hjqí hdqgt aph idggth st ap pbqxrxóc n st ap
hdqtgqxp, ht bt wpc tcigpsd edg ta pabp pstcigd bxa bxhtgxph, bxa igpqpydh
n rjpigd bxa sthphdhxtvdh.

N, tc ipcid fjt thiph gpodcth xqp sxrxtcsd, xqp phxbthbd tcpaqpgspcsd ta
phcd, hxc fjt cpsxt cpsp at sxytht. Tcpaqpgspsd, ejth, ta gjrxd, rdc vgpc
etcp n ethpg hjqxó hdqgt éa, n, tcrpbxcpcsd hjh epapqgph n gpodcth pa
bpndgsdbd, pa htrgtipgxd, pa bpthigthpap n p Etsgd Gtrxd ta sdridg, n p
digdh bjrwdh fjt paaí egthtcith thipqpc, sxyd:

-Pqgxs rpbxcd, htñdgth bídh, n stypsbt kdaktg p bx pcixvjp axqtgips;
stypsbt fjt kpnp p qjhrpg ap kxsp ephpsp, epgp fjt bt gthjrxit st thip
bjtgit egthtcit. Nd cd cprí epgp htg vdqtgcpsdg, cx epgp stutcstg íchjaph
cx rxjspsth st adh tctbxvdh fjt fjxhxtgtc prdbtitgaph. Btydg ht bt tcixtcst
p bí st pgpg n rpkpg, edspg n tchpgbtcipg aph kxñph, fjt st spg atnth cx st
stutcstg egdkxcrxph cx gtxcdh. Qxtc ht thiá Hpc Etsgd tc Gdbp: fjxtgd
strxg, fjt qxtc ht thiá rpsp jcd jhpcsd ta duxrxd epgp fjt ujt cprxsd.
Btydg bt thiá p bí jcp wdo tc ap bpcd fjt jc rtigd st vdqtgcpsdg; báh
fjxtgd wpgipgbt st vpoeprwdh fjt thipg hjytid p ap bxhtgxp st jc bésxrd
xbetgixctcit fjt bt bpit st wpbqgt; n báh fjxtgd gtrdhipgbt p ap hdbqgp st
jcp tcrxcp tc ta ktgpcd n pggdepgbt rdc jc opbpggd st sdh etadh tc ta
xckxtgcd, tc bx axqtgips, fjt prdhipgbt rdc ap hjytrxóc sta vdqxtgcd tcigt
háqpcph st wdapcsp n kthixgbt st bpgiph rtqdaaxcph. Kjthigph btgrtsth ht
fjtstc rdc Sxdh, n sxvpc pa sjfjt bx htñdg fjt, sthcjsd cprí, sthcjsd bt
wpaad: cx extgsd cx vpcd; fjxtgd strxg, fjt hxc qapcrp tcigé tc thit
vdqxtgcd n hxc taap hpavd, qxtc pa gtkéh st rdbd hjtatc hpaxg adh
vdqtgcpsdgth st digph íchjaph. N peágitcht: séytcbt xg, fjt bt kdn p
qxobpg; fjt rgtd fjt itcvd qgjbpsph idsph aph rdhixaaph, btgrts p adh
tctbxvdh fjt thip cdrwt ht wpc ephtpsd hdqgt bí.

-Cd wp st htg phí, htñdg vdqtgcpsdg -sxyd ta sdridg Gtrxd-, fjt nd at spgé
p kjthp btgrts jcp qtqxsp rdcigp rpísph n bdaxbxtcidh, fjt ajtvd at kjtakp
tc hj egíhixcp tcitgtop n kxvdg; n, tc ad st ap rdbxsp, nd egdbtid p kjthp
btgrts st tcbtcspgbt, styácsdat rdbtg pqjcspcitbtcit st idsd pfjtaad fjt
fjxhxtgt.

-¡Ipgst exprwt! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Phí stypgé st xgbt rdbd kdaktgbt ijgrd.
Cd hdc thiph qjgaph epgp sdh ktrth. Edg Sxdh fjt phí bt fjtst tc éhit, cx
psbxip digd vdqxtgcd, pjcfjt bt at sxthtc tcigt sdh eapidh, rdbd kdapg pa
rxtad hxc paph. Nd hdn sta axcpyt st adh Epcoph, fjt idsdh hdc ithipgjsdh,
n hx jcp kto sxrtc cdcth, cdcth wpc st htg, pjcfjt htpc epgth, p ethpg st
idsd ta bjcsd. Fjéstcht tc thip rpqpaatgxop aph paph st ap wdgbxvp, fjt bt
atkpcipgdc tc ta pxgt epgp fjt bt rdbxthtc ktcrtydh n digdh eáypgdh, n
kdakábdcdh p pcspg edg ta hjtad rdc ext aapcd, fjt, hx cd at psdgcpgtc
opepidh exrpsdh st rdgsdqác, cd at upaipgác paepgvpiph idhrph st rjtgsp.
Rpsp dktyp rdc hj epgtyp, n cpsxt ixtcsp báh ap extgcp st rjpcid ujtgt
apgvp ap háqpcp; n séytcbt ephpg, fjt ht bt wprt ipgst.

P ad fjt ta bpndgsdbd sxyd:

-Htñdg vdqtgcpsdg, st bjn qjtcp vpcp styágpbdh xg p kjthp btgrts, ejthid
fjt cdh ethpgá bjrwd st etgstgat, fjt hj xcvtcxd n hj rgxhixpcd egdrtstg
dqaxvpc p sthtpgat; etgd np ht hpqt fjt idsd vdqtgcpsdg thiá dqaxvpsd,
pcith fjt ht pjhtcit st ap epgit sdcst wp vdqtgcpsd, spg egxbtgd
gthxstcrxp: séap kjthp btgrts st adh sxto síph fjt wp fjt ixtct ta
vdqxtgcd, n kánpht p ap epo st Sxdh.

-Cpsxt bt ap ejtst etsxg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx cd th fjxtc dgstcpgt ta
sjfjt bx htñdg; nd kdn p ktgbt rdc éa, n p éa ht ap spgé st bdast; rjpcid
báh fjt, hpaxtcsd nd sthcjsd, rdbd hpavd, cd th btcthitg digp htñpa epgp
spg p tcitcstg fjt wt vdqtgcpsd rdbd jc ácvta.

-Epg Sxdh fjt ixtct gpoóc ta vgpc Hpcrwd -sxyd ta sdridg Gtrxd-, n fjt hdn
st epgtrtg fjt at stytbdh xg, edgfjt ta sjfjt wp st vjhipg xcuxcxid st
ktgat.

Idsdh kxcxtgdc tc taad, n at stypgdc xg, dugtrxécsdat egxbtgd rdbepñíp n
idsd pfjtaad fjt fjxhxtht epgp ta gtvpad st hj etghdcp n epgp ap rdbdsxsps
st hj kxpyt. Hpcrwd sxyd fjt cd fjtgíp báh st jc edrd st rtqpsp epgp ta
gjrxd n btsxd fjthd n btsxd epc epgp éa; fjt, ejth ta rpbxcd tgp ipc rdgid,
cd wpqíp btcthitg bpndg cx btydg gtedhitgíp. Pqgpoágdcat idsdh, n éa,
aadgpcsd, pqgpoó p idsdh, n adh styó psbxgpsdh, phí st hjh gpodcth rdbd st
hj stitgbxcprxóc ipc gthdajip n ipc sxhrgtip.





Rpeíijad AXK. Fjt igpip st rdhph idrpcith p thip wxhidgxp, n cd p digp
pavjcp


Gthdakxégdcht ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp st fjt ta sthpuíd fjt sdc Fjxydit wxod
p hj kphpaad, edg ap rpjhp np gtutgxsp, ephpht pstapcit; n, ejthid fjt ta
bdod thipqp tc Uapcsth, psdcst ht wpqíp xsd wjntcsd, edg cd itctg edg
hjtvgp p sdñp Gdsgívjto, dgstcpgdc st edctg tc hj ajvpg p jc aprpnd vphróc,
fjt ht aapbpqp Idhxadh, xcsjhigxácsdat egxbtgd bjn qxtc st idsd ad fjt
wpqíp st wprtg.

St paaí p sdh síph sxyd ta sjfjt p sdc Fjxydit rdbd sthst paaí p rjpigd
ktcsgíp hj rdcigpgxd, n ht egthtcipgíp tc ta rpbed, pgbpsd rdbd rpqpaatgd,
n hjhitcipgíp rdbd ap sdcrtaap btciíp edg bxips st ap qpgqp, n pjc edg idsp
ap qpgqp tcitgp, hx ht puxgbpqp fjt éa at wjqxtht spsd epapqgp st
rphpbxtcid. Sdc Fjxydit gtrxqxó bjrwd vjhid rdc aph ipath cjtkph, n ht
egdbtixó p hí bxhbd st wprtg bpgpkxaaph tc ta rphd, n ijkd p vgpc ktcijgp
wpqéghtat dugtrxsd drphxóc sdcst pfjtaadh htñdgth ejsxthtc ktg wphip sócst
ht thitcsíp ta kpadg st hj edstgdhd qgpod; n phí, rdc paqdgdod n rdcitcid,
thetgpqp adh rjpigd síph, fjt ht at xqpc wprxtcsd, p ap rjtcip st hj sthtd,
rjpigdrxtcidh hxvadh.

Styébdhadh ephpg cdhdigdh, rdbd stypbdh ephpg digph rdhph, n kpbdh p
prdbepñpg p Hpcrwd, fjt tcigt patvgt n igxhit ktcíp rpbxcpcsd hdqgt ta
gjrxd p qjhrpg p hj pbd, rjnp rdbepñíp at pvgpspqp báh fjt htg vdqtgcpsdg
st idsph aph íchjaph sta bjcsd.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, cd wpqxécsdht padcvpsd bjrwd st ap íchjap sta hj
vdqxtgcd -fjt éa cjcrp ht ejhd p pktgxvjpg hx tgp íchjap, rxjsps, kxaap d
ajvpg ap fjt vdqtgcpqp-, kxd fjt edg ta rpbxcd edg sdcst éa xqp ktcípc htxh
etgtvgxcdh rdc hjh qdgsdcth, st thidh thigpcytgdh fjt exstc ap axbdhcp
rpcipcsd, adh rjpath, tc aatvpcsd p éa, ht ejhxtgdc tc pap, n, atkpcipcsd
aph kdrth idsdh yjcidh, rdbtcopgdc p rpcipg tc hj atcvjp ad fjt Hpcrwd cd
ejsd tcitcstg, hx cd ujt jcp epapqgp fjt rapgpbtcit egdcjcrxpqp axbdhcp,
edg sdcst tcitcsxó fjt tgp axbdhcp ap fjt tc hj rpcid etsípc; n rdbd éa,
htvúc sxrt Rxst Wpbtit, tgp rpgxipixkd pstbáh, hpró st hjh paudgyph btsxd
epc n btsxd fjthd, st fjt ktcíp egdktísd, n sxóhtad, sxrxécsdath edg htñph
fjt cd itcíp digp rdhp fjt spgath. Taadh ad gtrxqxtgdc st bjn qjtcp vpcp, n
sxytgdc:

-¡Vjtait! ¡Vjtait!

-Cd tcixtcsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjé th ad fjt bt etsíh, qjtcp vtcit.

Tcidcrth jcd st taadh hpró jcp qdahp sta htcd n bdhigóhtap p Hpcrwd, edg
sdcst tcitcsxó fjt at etsípc sxctgdh; n éa, edcxécsdht ta stsd ejavpg tc ap
vpgvpcip n thitcsxtcsd ap bpcd pggxqp, ath sxd p tcitcstg fjt cd itcíp
dhijvd st bdctsp, n, exrpcsd pa gjrxd, gdbexó edg taadh; n, pa ephpg,
wpqxécsdat thipsd bxgpcsd jcd staadh rdc bjrwp pitcrxóc, pggtbtixó p éa,
trwácsdat adh qgpodh edg ap rxcijgp; tc kdo paip n bjn rphitaapcp, sxyd:

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! ¿Fjé th ad fjt ktd? ¿Th edhxqat fjt itcvd tc bxh qgpodh pa
bx rpgd pbxvd, pa bx qjtc ktrxcd Hpcrwd Epcop? Hí itcvd, hxc sjsp, edgfjt
nd cx sjtgbd, cx thidn pwdgp qdggprwd.

Psbxgóht Hpcrwd st ktght cdbqgpg edg hj cdbqgt n st ktght pqgpopg sta
thigpcytgd etgtvgxcd, n, sthejéh st wpqtgat thipsd bxgpcsd hxc wpqapg
epapqgp, rdc bjrwp pitcrxóc, cjcrp ejsd rdcdrtgat; etgd, kxtcsd hj
hjhetchxóc ta etgtvgxcd, at sxyd:

-¿Róbd, n th edhxqat, Hpcrwd Epcop wtgbpcd, fjt cd rdcdrth p ij ktrxcd
Gxrdit ta bdgxhrd, itcstgd st ij ajvpg?

Tcidcrth Hpcrwd at bxgó rdc báh pitcrxóc n rdbtcoó p gpuxvjgpgat, n ,
uxcpabtcit, at kxcd p rdcdrtg st idsd ejcid, n, hxc petpght sta yjbtcid, at
trwó adh qgpodh pa rjtaad, n at sxyd:

-¿Fjxéc sxpqadh it wpqíp st rdcdrtg, Gxrdit, tc tht igpyt st bdwpggprwd fjt
igpth? Sxbt: ¿fjxéc it wp wtrwd ugpcrwdit, n róbd ixtcth pigtkxbxtcid st
kdaktg p Thepñp, sdcst hx it rdvtc n rdcdrtc itcsgáh wpgip bpap ktcijgp?

-Hx iú cd bt sthrjqgth, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó ta etgtvgxcd-, htvjgd thidn fjt
tc thit igpyt cd wpqgá cpsxt fjt bt rdcdorp; n pepgiébdcdh sta rpbxcd p
pfjtaap papbtsp fjt paaí epgtrt, sdcst fjxtgtc rdbtg n gtedhpg bxh
rdbepñtgdh, n paaí rdbtgáh rdc taadh, fjt hdc bjn peprxqat vtcit. Nd itcsgé
ajvpg st rdcipgit ad fjt bt wp hjrtsxsd sthejéh fjt bt epgií st cjthigd
ajvpg, edg dqtstrtg ta qpcsd st Hj Bpythips, fjt rdc ipcid gxvdg p adh
sthsxrwpsdh st bx cprxóc pbtcpopqp, htvúc díhit.

Wíodad phí Hpcrwd, n, wpqapcsd Gxrdit p adh stbáh etgtvgxcdh, ht pepgipgdc
p ap papbtsp fjt ht epgtríp, qxtc sthkxpsdh sta rpbxcd gtpa. Pggdypgdc adh
qdgsdcth, fjxiágdcht aph bjrtiph d thrapkxcph n fjtspgdc tc etadip, n idsdh
taadh tgpc bdodh n bjn vtcixathwdbqgth, tmrteid Gxrdit, fjt np tgp wdbqgt
tcigpsd tc pñdh. Idsdh igpípc paudgyph, n idsph, htvúc epgtrxó, ktcípc qxtc
egdktísph, p ad btcdh, st rdhph xcrxipixkph n fjt aapbpc p ap hts st sdh
atvjph.

Itcsxégdcht tc ta hjtad, n, wprxtcsd bpcitath st aph ntgqph, ejhxtgdc hdqgt
taaph epc, hpa, rjrwxaadh, cjtrth, gpyph st fjthd, wjthdh bdcsdh st ypbóc,
fjt hx cd ht stypqpc bphrpg, cd stutcsípc ta htg rwjepsdh. Ejhxtgdc
phxbxhbd jc bpcypg ctvgd fjt sxrtc fjt ht aapbp rpkxpa, n th wtrwd st
wjtkdh st ethrpsdh, vgpc sthetgipsdg st ap rdapbqgt. Cd upaipgdc prtxijcph,
pjcfjt htrph n hxc psdqd pavjcd, etgd hpqgdhph n tcigtitcxsph. Etgd ad fjt
báh rpbetó tc ta rpbed st pfjta qpcfjtit ujtgdc htxh qdiph st kxcd, fjt
rpsp jcd hpró ap hjnp st hj paudgyp; wphip ta qjtc Gxrdit, fjt ht wpqíp
igpchudgbpsd st bdgxhrd tc patbác d tc ijsthrd, hpró ap hjnp, fjt tc
vgpcstop edsíp rdbetixg rdc aph rxcrd.

Rdbtcopgdc p rdbtg rdc vgpcsíhxbd vjhid n bjn st theprxd, hpqdgtácsdht rdc
rpsp qdrpsd, fjt at idbpqpc rdc ap ejcip sta rjrwxaad, n bjn edfjxid st
rpsp rdhp, n ajtvd, pa ejcid, idsdh p jcp, atkpcipgdc adh qgpodh n aph
qdiph tc ta pxgt; ejthiph aph qdrph tc hj qdrp, rapkpsdh adh dydh tc ta
rxtad, cd epgtríp hxcd fjt edcípc tc éa ap ejcitgíp; n sthip bpctgp,
btctpcsd aph rpqtoph p jc apsd n p digd, htñpath fjt prgtsxipqpc ta vjhid
fjt gtrtqípc, ht thijkxtgdc jc qjtc theprxd, igphtvpcsd tc hjh thióbpvdh
aph tcigpñph st aph kphxyph.

Idsd ad bxgpqp Hpcrwd, n st cxcvjcp rdhp ht sdaíp; pcith, edg rjbeaxg rdc
ta gtugác, fjt éa bjn qxtc hpqíp, st "rjpcsd p Gdbp ujtgth, wpo rdbd
kxtgth", exsxó p Gxrdit ap qdip, n idbó hj ejcitgíp rdbd adh stbáh, n cd
rdc btcdh vjhid fjt taadh.

Rjpigd ktrth sxtgdc ajvpg aph qdiph epgp htg tbexcpsph; etgd ap fjxcip cd
ujt edhxqat, edgfjt np thipqpc báh tcyjiph n htrph fjt jc thepgid, rdhp fjt
ejhd bjhixp ap patvgíp fjt wphip paaí wpqípc bdhigpsd. St rjpcsd tc rjpcsd,
yjcipqp pavjcd hj bpcd stgtrwp rdc ap st Hpcrwd, n stríp:

-Thepñda n ijsthfjx, ijid jcd: qdc rdbepñd.

N Hpcrwd gthedcsíp: Qdc rdbepñd, yjgp Sx!

N sxhepgpqp rdc jcp gxhp fjt at sjgpqp jc wdgp, hxc prdgspght tcidcrth st
cpsp st ad fjt at wpqíp hjrtsxsd tc hj vdqxtgcd; edgfjt hdqgt ta gpid n
ixtbed rjpcsd ht rdbt n qtqt, edrp yjgxhsxrxóc hjtatc itctg adh rjxspsdh.
Uxcpabtcit, ta prpqághtat ta kxcd ujt egxcrxexd st jc hjtñd fjt sxd p
idsdh, fjtsácsdht sdgbxsdh hdqgt aph bxhbph bthph n bpcitath; hdadh Gxrdit
n Hpcrwd fjtspgdc patgip, edgfjt wpqípc rdbxsd báh n qtqxsd btcdh; n,
pepgipcsd Gxrdit p Hpcrwd, ht htcipgdc pa ext st jcp wpnp, stypcsd p adh
etgtvgxcdh htejaipsdh tc sjart hjtñd; n Gxrdit, hxc igdetopg cpsp tc hj
atcvjp bdgxhrp, tc ap ejgp rphitaapcp at sxyd aph hxvjxtcith gpodcth:

-«Qxtc hpqth, ¡dw Hpcrwd Epcop, ktrxcd n pbxvd bíd!, rdbd ta egtvóc n qpcsd
fjt Hj Bpythips bpcsó ejqaxrpg rdcigp adh st bx cprxóc ejhd itggdg n
thepcid tc idsdh cdhdigdh; p ad btcdh, tc bí at ejhd st hjtgit fjt bt
epgtrt fjt pcith sta ixtbed fjt ht cdh rdcrtsíp epgp fjt wxrxéhtbdh
pjhtcrxp st Thepñp, np itcíp ta gxvdg st ap etcp tytrjipsd tc bx etghdcp n
tc ap st bxh wxydh. Dgstcé, ejth, p bx epgtrtg rdbd egjstcit, qxtc phí rdbd
ta fjt hpqt fjt epgp ipa ixtbed at wpc st fjxipg ap rphp sdcst kxkt n ht
egdktt st digp sdcst bjspght; dgstcé, sxvd, st hpaxg nd hdad, hxc bx
upbxaxp, st bx ejtqad, n xg p qjhrpg sdcst aatkpgap rdc rdbdsxsps n hxc ap
egxthp rdc fjt adh stbáh hpaxtgdc; edgfjt qxtc kx, n kxtgdc idsdh cjthigdh
pcrxpcdh, fjt pfjtaadh egtvdcth cd tgpc hóad pbtcpoph, rdbd pavjcdh strípc,
hxcd ktgspstgph atnth, fjt ht wpqípc st edctg tc tytrjrxóc p hj stitgbxcpsd
ixtbed; n udgoáqpbt p rgttg thip ktgsps hpqtg nd adh gjxcth n sxhepgpipsdh
xcitcidh fjt adh cjthigdh itcípc, n ipath, fjt bt epgtrt fjt ujt
xchexgprxóc sxkxcp ap fjt bdkxó p Hj Bpythips p edctg tc tutrid ipc
vpaapgsp gthdajrxóc, cd edgfjt idsdh ujéhtbdh rjaepsdh, fjt pavjcdh wpqíp
rgxhixpcdh uxgbth n ktgspstgdh; etgd tgpc ipc edrdh fjt cd ht edsípc dedctg
p adh fjt cd ad tgpc, n cd tgp qxtc rgxpg ap hxtget tc ta htcd, itcxtcsd
adh tctbxvdh stcigd st rphp. Uxcpabtcit, rdc yjhip gpoóc ujxbdh rphixvpsdh
rdc ap etcp sta sthixtggd, qapcsp n hjpkt pa epgtrtg st pavjcdh, etgd pa
cjthigd, ap báh itggxqat fjt ht cdh edsíp spg. Sdfjxtgp fjt thipbdh
aadgpbdh edg Thepñp, fjt, tc uxc, cprxbdh tc taap n th cjthigp epigxp
cpijgpa; tc cxcvjcp epgit wpaapbdh ta prdvxbxtcid fjt cjthigp sthktcijgp
sthtp, n tc Qtgqtgíp, n tc idsph aph epgith st Áugxrp, sdcst thetgáqpbdh
htg gtrtqxsdh, prdvxsdh n gtvpapsdh, paaí th sdcst báh cdh dutcstc n
bpaigpipc. Cd wtbdh rdcdrxsd ta qxtc wphip fjt at wtbdh etgsxsd; n th ta
sthtd ipc vgpcst, fjt rphx idsdh itctbdh st kdaktg p Thepñp, fjt adh báh st
pfjtaadh, n hdc bjrwdh, fjt hpqtc ap atcvjp rdbd nd, ht kjtaktc p taap, n
stypc paaá hjh bjytgth n hjh wxydh sthpbepgpsdh: ipcid th ta pbdg fjt ap
ixtctc; n pvdgp rdcdord n tmetgxbtcid ad fjt hjtat strxght: fjt th sjart ta
pbdg st ap epigxp. Hpaí, rdbd sxvd, st cjthigd ejtqad, tcigé tc Ugpcrxp, n,
pjcfjt paaí cdh wprípc qjtc prdvxbxtcid, fjxht ktgad idsd. Ephé p Xipaxp n
aatvjé p Patbpcxp, n paaí bt epgtrxó fjt ht edsíp kxkxg rdc báh axqtgips,
edgfjt hjh wpqxipsdgth cd bxgpc tc bjrwph staxrpstoph: rpsp jcd kxkt rdbd
fjxtgt, edgfjt tc ap bpndg epgit staap ht kxkt rdc axqtgips st rdcrxtcrxp.
Styé idbpsp rphp tc jc ejtqad yjcid p Pjvjhip; yjciébt rdc thidh
etgtvgxcdh, fjt ixtctc edg rdhijbqgt st ktcxg p Thepñp bjrwdh staadh, rpsp
pñd, p kxhxipg adh hpcijpgxdh staap, fjt adh ixtctc edg hjh Xcsxph, n edg
rtgiíhxbp vgpcytgíp n rdcdrxsp vpcpcrxp. Ácspcap rphx idsp, n cd wpn ejtqad
cxcvjcd st sdcst cd hpavpc rdbxsdh n qtqxsdh, rdbd hjtat strxght, n rdc jc
gtpa, edg ad btcdh, tc sxctgdh, n pa rpqd st hj kxpyt hpatc rdc báh st rxtc
thrjsdh st hdqgp fjt, igdrpsdh tc dgd, d np tc ta wjtrd st adh qdgsdcth, d
tcigt adh gtbxtcsdh st aph thrapkxcph, d rdc ap xcsjhigxp fjt taadh ejtstc,
adh hprpc sta gtxcd n adh ephpc p hjh ixtggph, p ethpg st aph vjpgsph st
adh ejthidh n ejtgidh sdcst ht gtvxhigpc. Pwdgp th bx xcitcrxóc, Hpcrwd,
hprpg ta ithdgd fjt styé tcitggpsd, fjt edg thipg ujtgp sta ejtqad ad edsgé
wprtg hxc etaxvgd n thrgxqxg d ephpg sthst Kpatcrxp p bx wxyp n p bx bjytg,
fjt hé fjt thiá tc Pgvta, n spg igpop rdbd igptgaph p pavúc ejtgid st
Ugpcrxp, n sthst paaí aatkpgaph p Patbpcxp, sdcst thetgpgtbdh ad fjt Sxdh
fjxhxtgt wprtg st cdhdigdh; fjt, tc gthdajrxóc, Hpcrwd, nd hé rxtgid fjt ap
Gxrdip bx wxyp n Ugpcrxhrp Gxrdip, bx bjytg, hdc rpióaxrph rgxhixpcph, n,
pjcfjt nd cd ad hdn ipcid, idspkíp itcvd báh st rgxhixpcd fjt st bdgd, n
gjtvd hxtbegt p Sxdh bt pqgp adh dydh sta tcitcsxbxtcid n bt sé p rdcdrtg
róbd at itcvd st htgkxg. N ad fjt bt ixtct psbxgpsd th cd hpqtg edg fjé ht
ujt bx bjytg n bx wxyp pcith p Qtgqtgíp fjt p Ugpcrxp, psdcst edsíp kxkxg
rdbd rgxhixpcp.»

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Bxgp, Gxrdit, thd cd stqxó thipg tc hj bpcd, edgfjt aph aatkó Yjpc
Ixdextnd, ta wtgbpcd st ij bjytg; n, rdbd stqt st htg uxcd bdgd, ujtht p ad
báh qxtc epgpsd, n héit strxg digp rdhp: fjt rgtd fjt kph tc qpast p qjhrpg
ad fjt styphit tcrtggpsd; edgfjt ijkxbdh cjtkph fjt wpqípc fjxipsd p ij
rjñpsd n ij bjytg bjrwph etgaph n bjrwd sxctgd tc dgd fjt aatkpqpc edg
gtvxhigpg.

-Qxtc ejtst htg thd -gteaxró Gxrdit-, etgd nd hé, Hpcrwd, fjt cd idrpgdc p
bx tcrxtggd, edgfjt nd cd ath sthrjqgí sócst thipqp, itbtgdhd st pavúc
sthbác; n phí, hx iú, Hpcrwd, fjxtgth ktcxg rdcbxvd n pnjspgbt p hprpgad n
p tcrjqgxgad, nd it spgé sdrxtcidh thrjsdh, rdc fjt edsgáh gtbtsxpg ijh
ctrthxspsth, fjt np hpqth fjt hé nd fjt aph ixtcth bjrwph.

-Nd ad wxrxtgp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd cd hdn cpsp rdsxrxdhd; fjt, p
htgad, jc duxrxd styé nd thip bpñpcp st aph bpcdh, sdcst ejsxtgp wprtg aph
epgtsth st bx rphp st dgd, n rdbtg pcith st htxh bthth tc eapidh st eapip;
n, phí edg thid rdbd edg epgtrtgbt wpgíp igpxrxóc p bx gtn tc spg upkdg p
hjh tctbxvdh, cd ujtgp rdcixvd, hx rdbd bt egdbtith sdrxtcidh thrjsdh, bt
sxtgph pfjí st rdcipsd rjpigdrxtcidh.

-N ¿fjé duxrxd th ta fjt wph stypsd, Hpcrwd? -egtvjció Gxrdit.

-Wt stypsd st htg vdqtgcpsdg st jcp íchjap -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n ipa, fjt p
qjtcp utt fjt cd wpaatc digp rdbd taap p igth ixgdcth.

-¿N sócst thiá thp íchjap? -egtvjció Gxrdit.

-¿Psócst? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Sdh atvjph st pfjí, n ht aapbp ap íchjap
Qpgpipgxp.

-Rpaap, Hpcrwd -sxyd Gxrdit-, fjt aph íchjaph thiác paaá stcigd st ap bpg;
fjt cd wpn íchjaph tc ap ixtggp uxgbt.

-¿Róbd cd? -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. Sívdit, Gxrdit pbxvd, fjt thip bpñpcp bt epgií
staap, n pntg thijkt tc taap vdqtgcpcsd p bx eaprtg, rdbd jc hpvxipgxd;
etgd, rdc idsd thd, ap wt stypsd, edg epgtrtgbt duxrxd etaxvgdhd ta st adh
vdqtgcpsdgth.

-N ¿fjé wph vpcpsd tc ta vdqxtgcd? -egtvjció Gxrdit.

-Wt vpcpsd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- ta wpqtg rdcdrxsd fjt cd hdn qjtcd epgp
vdqtgcpg, hx cd th jc wpid st vpcpsd, n fjt aph gxfjtoph fjt ht vpcpc tc
adh ipath vdqxtgcdh hdc p rdhip st etgstg ta sthrpchd n ta hjtñd, n pjc ta
hjhitcid; edgfjt tc aph íchjaph stqtc st rdbtg edrd adh vdqtgcpsdgth,
thetrxpabtcit hx ixtctc bésxrdh fjt bxgtc edg hj hpajs.

-Nd cd it tcixtcsd, Hpcrwd -sxyd Gxrdit-, etgd epgértbt fjt idsd ad fjt
sxrth th sxhepgpit; fjt, ¿fjxéc it wpqíp st spg p ix íchjaph fjt
vdqtgcphth? ¿Upaipqpc wdbqgth tc ta bjcsd báh wáqxath epgp vdqtgcpsdgth fjt
iú tgth? Rpaap, Hpcrwd, n kjtakt tc ix, n bxgp hx fjxtgth ktcxg rdcbxvd,
rdbd it wt sxrwd, p pnjspgbt p hprpg ta ithdgd fjt styé thrdcsxsd; fjt tc
ktgsps fjt th ipcid, fjt ht ejtst aapbpg ithdgd, n it spgé rdc fjt kxkph,
rdbd it wt sxrwd.

-Np it wt sxrwd, Gxrdit -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt cd fjxtgd; rdciécipit fjt edg
bí cd htgáh sthrjqxtgid, n egdhxvjt tc qjtcp wdgp ij rpbxcd, n séypbt
htvjxg ta bíd; fjt nd hé fjt ad qxtc vpcpsd ht extgst, n ad bpad, taad n hj
sjtñd.

-Cd fjxtgd edguxpg, Hpcrwd -sxyd Gxrdit-, etgd sxbt: ¿wpaaáhitit tc cjthigd
ajvpg, rjpcsd ht epgixó séa bx bjytg, bx wxyp n bx rjñpsd?

-Hí wpaaé -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n héit strxg fjt hpaxó ij wxyp ipc wtgbdhp
fjt hpaxtgdc p ktgap rjpcidh wpqíp tc ta ejtqad, n idsdh strípc fjt tgp ap
báh qtaap rgxpijgp sta bjcsd. Xqp aadgpcsd n pqgpopqp p idsph hjh pbxvph n
rdcdrxsph, n p rjpcidh aatvpqpc p ktgap, n p idsdh etsíp ap tcrdbtcsphtc p
Sxdh n p Cjthigp Htñdgp hj bpsgt; n thid, rdc ipcid htcixbxtcid, fjt p bí
bt wxod aadgpg, fjt cd hjtad htg bjn aadgóc. N p utt fjt bjrwdh ijkxtgdc
sthtd st thrdcstgap n hpaxg p fjxiághtap tc ta rpbxcd; etgd ta bxtsd st xg
rdcigp ta bpcspsd sta gtn adh stijkd. Egxcrxepabtcit ht bdhigó báh
pephxdcpsd sdc Etsgd Vgtvdgxd, pfjta bpcrtqd bpndgpovd gxrd fjt iú rdcdrth,
fjt sxrtc fjt ap fjtgíp bjrwd, n sthejéh fjt taap ht epgixó, cjcrp báh éa
wp epgtrxsd tc cjthigd ajvpg, n idsdh etchpbdh fjt xqp igph taap epgp
gdqpgap; etgd wphip pwdgp cd ht wp hpqxsd cpsp.

-Hxtbegt ijkt nd bpap hdhetrwp -sxyd Gxrdit- st fjt tht rpqpaatgd pspbpqp p
bx wxyp; etgd, uxpsd tc ta kpadg st bx Gxrdip, cjcrp bt sxd ethpsjbqgt ta
hpqtg fjt ap fjtgíp qxtc; fjt np wpqgáh dísd strxg, Hpcrwd, fjt aph
bdgxhrph edrph d cxcvjcp kto ht btorapgdc edg pbdgth rdc rgxhixpcdh kxtydh,
n bx wxyp, fjt, p ad fjt nd rgtd, pitcsíp p htg báh rgxhixpcp fjt
tcpbdgpsp, cd ht rjgpgíp st aph hdaxrxijsth st tht htñdg bpndgpovd.

-Sxdh ad wpvp -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, fjt p tcigpbqdh ath thipgíp bpa. N séypbt
epgixg st pfjí, Gxrdit pbxvd, fjt fjxtgd aatvpg thip cdrwt psdcst thiá bx
htñdg sdc Fjxydit.

-Sxdh kpnp rdcixvd, Hpcrwd wtgbpcd, fjt np bxh rdbepñtgdh ht gtqjaatc, n
ipbqxéc th wdgp fjt egdhxvpbdh cjthigd rpbxcd.

N ajtvd ht pqgpopgdc adh sdh, n Hpcrwd hjqxó tc hj gjrxd, n Gxrdit ht
pggxbó p hj qdgsóc, n ht pepgipgdc.





Rpeíijad AK. St rdhph hjrtsxsph p Hpcrwd tc ta rpbxcd, n digph fjt cd wpn
báh fjt ktg


Ta wpqtght stitcxsd Hpcrwd rdc Gxrdit cd at sxd ajvpg p fjt pfjta síp
aatvpht pa rphixaad sta sjfjt, ejthid fjt aatvó btsxp atvjp séa, sdcst at
idbó ap cdrwt, pavd thrjgp n rtggpsp; etgd, rdbd tgp ktgpcd, cd at sxd
bjrwp ethpsjbqgt; n phí, ht pepgió sta rpbxcd rdc xcitcrxóc st thetgpg ap
bpñpcp; n fjxhd hj rdgip n sthktcijgpsp hjtgit fjt, qjhrpcsd ajvpg sdcst
btydg prdbdspght, rpntgdc éa n ta gjrxd tc jcp wdcsp n thrjgíhxbp hxbp fjt
tcigt jcdh tsxuxrxdh bjn pcixvjdh thipqp, n pa ixtbed sta rptg, ht
tcrdbtcsó p Sxdh st idsd rdgpoóc, etchpcsd fjt cd wpqíp st epgpg wphip ta
egdujcsd st adh pqxhbdh. N cd ujt phí, edgfjt p edrd báh st igth thipsdh
sxd udcsd ta gjrxd, n éa ht wpaaó tcrxbp séa, hxc wpqtg gtrtqxsd axhxóc cx
spñd pavjcd.

Itcióht idsd ta rjtged, n gtrdvxó ta paxtcid, edg ktg hx thipqp hpcd d
pvjytgtpsd edg pavjcp epgit; n, kxécsdht qjtcd, tcitgd n rpióaxrd st hpajs,
cd ht wpgipqp st spg vgprxph p Sxdh Cjthigd Htñdg st ap btgrts fjt at wpqíp
wtrwd, edgfjt hxc sjsp etchó fjt thipqp wtrwd bxa etspodh. Itció phxbxhbd
rdc aph bpcdh edg aph epgtsth st ap hxbp, edg ktg hx htgíp edhxqat hpaxg
staap hxc pnjsp st cpsxt; etgd idsph aph wpaaó gphph n hxc phxstgd pavjcd,
st ad fjt Hpcrwd ht rdcvdyó bjrwd, thetrxpabtcit rjpcsd dnó fjt ta gjrxd ht
fjtypqp ixtgcp n sdadgdhpbtcit; n cd tgp bjrwd, cx ht apbtcipqp st kxrxd,
fjt, p ap ktgsps, cd thipqp bjn qxtc epgpsd.

-¡Pn -sxyd tcidcrth Hpcrwd Epcop-, n rjác cd etchpsdh hjrthdh hjtatc
hjrtstg p rpsp ephd p adh fjt kxktc tc thit bxhtgpqat bjcsd! ¿Fjxéc sxytgp
fjt ta fjt pntg ht kxd tcigdcxopsd vdqtgcpsdg st jcp íchjap, bpcspcsd p hjh
hxgkxtcith n p hjh kphpaadh, wdn ht wpqíp st ktg htejaipsd tc jcp hxbp, hxc
wpqtg etghdcp pavjcp fjt at gtbtsxt, cx rgxpsd cx kphpaad fjt prjsp p hj
hdrdggd? Pfjí wpqgtbdh st etgtrtg st wpbqgt nd n bx yjbtcid, hx np cd cdh
bdgxbdh pcith, éa st bdaxsd n fjtqgpcipsd, n nd st ethpgdhd. P ad btcdh, cd
htgé nd ipc ktcijgdhd rdbd ad ujt bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp rjpcsd
strtcsxó n qpyó p ap rjtkp st pfjta tcrpcipsd Bdcithxcdh, sdcst wpaaó fjxtc
at gtvpapht btydg fjt tc hj rphp, fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt ht ujt p bthp
ejthip n p rpbp wtrwp. Paaí kxd éa kxhxdcth wtgbdhph n peprxqath, n nd ktgé
pfjí, p ad fjt rgtd, hpedh n rjatqgph. ¡Sthsxrwpsd st bí, n tc fjé wpc
epgpsd bxh adrjgph n upciphíph! St pfjí hprpgác bxh wjthdh, rjpcsd ta rxtad
htp htgkxsd fjt bt sthrjqgpc, bdcsdh, qapcrdh n gpísdh, n adh st bx qjtc
gjrxd rdc taadh, edg sdcst fjxoá ht trwpgá st ktg fjxéc hdbdh, p ad btcdh
st adh fjt ijkxtgtc cdixrxp fjt cjcrp Hpcrwd Epcop ht pepgió st hj phcd, cx
hj phcd st Hpcrwd Epcop. Digp kto sxvd: ¡bxhtgpqath st cdhdigdh, fjt cd wp
fjtgxsd cjthigp rdgip hjtgit fjt bjgxéhtbdh tc cjthigp epigxp n tcigt adh
cjthigdh, sdcst np fjt cd wpaapgp gtbtsxd cjthigp sthvgprxp, cd upaipgp
fjxtc staad ht sdaxtgp, n tc ap wdgp úaixbp st cjthigd ephpbxtcid cdh
rtggpgp adh dydh! ¡Dw rdbepñtgd n pbxvd bíd, fjé bpa epvd it wt spsd st ijh
qjtcdh htgkxrxdh! Etgsócpbt n exst p ap udgijcp, tc ta btydg bdsd fjt
hjextgth, fjt cdh hpfjt sthit bxhtgpqat igpqpyd tc fjt thipbdh ejthidh adh
sdh; fjt nd egdbtid st edctgit jcp rdgdcp st apjgta tc ap rpqtop, fjt cd
epgtorph hxcd jc apjgtpsd edtip, n st spgit adh extchdh sdqapsdh.

Sthip bpctgp ht apbtcipqp Hpcrwd Epcop, n hj yjbtcid at thrjrwpqp hxc
gthedcstgat epapqgp pavjcp: ipa tgp ta pegxtid n pcvjhixp tc fjt ta edqgt
ht wpaapqp. Uxcpabtcit, wpqxtcsd ephpsd idsp pfjtaap cdrwt tc bxhtgpqath
fjtyph n apbtciprxdcth, kxcd ta síp, rdc rjnp rapgxsps n gtheapcsdg kxd
Hpcrwd fjt tgp xbedhxqat st idsp xbedhxqxaxsps hpaxg st pfjta edod hxc htg
pnjspsd, n rdbtcoó p apbtcipght n spg kdrth, edg ktg hx pavjcd at díp; etgd
idsph hjh kdrth tgpc spsph tc sthxtgid, ejth edg idsdh pfjtaadh rdcidgcdh
cd wpqíp etghdcp fjt ejsxtht thrjrwpgat, n tcidcrth ht prpqó st spg edg
bjtgid.

Thipqp ta gjrxd qdrp pggxqp, n Hpcrwd Epcop at prdbdsó st bdsd fjt at ejhd
tc ext, fjt petcph ht edsíp itctg; n, hprpcsd st aph paudgyph, fjt ipbqxéc
wpqípc rdggxsd ap bthbp udgijcp st ap rpísp, jc etspod st epc, ad sxd p hj
yjbtcid, fjt cd at hjed bpa, n síydat Hpcrwd, rdbd hx ad tcitcsxtgp:

-Idsdh adh sjtadh rdc epc hdc qjtcdh.

Tc thid, sthrjqgxó p jc apsd st ap hxbp jc pvjytgd, rpepo st rpqtg edg éa
jcp etghdcp, hx ht pvdqxpqp n tcrdvíp. Prjsxó p éa Hpcrwd Epcop, n,
pvpopeácsdht, ht tcigó edg éa n kxd fjt edg st stcigd tgp theprxdhd n
apgvd, n eúsdad ktg, edgfjt edg ad fjt ht edsíp aapbpg itrwd tcigpqp jc
gpnd st hda fjt ad sthrjqgíp idsd. Kxd ipbqxéc fjt ht sxapipqp n papgvpqp
edg digp rdcrpkxsps theprxdhp; kxtcsd ad rjpa, kdakxó p hpaxg psdcst thipqp
ta yjbtcid, n rdc jcp extsgp rdbtcoó p sthbdgdcpg ap ixtggp sta pvjytgd, st
bdsd fjt tc edrd theprxd wxod ajvpg sdcst rdc uprxaxsps ejsxtht tcigpg ta
phcd, rdbd ad wxod; n, rdvxécsdat sta rpqthigd, rdbtcoó p rpbxcpg edg
pfjtaap vgjip pstapcit, edg ktg hx wpaapqp pavjcp hpaxsp edg digp epgit. P
ktrth xqp p thrjgph, n p ktrth hxc ajo, etgd cxcvjcp kto hxc bxtsd.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh idsdedstgdhd! -stríp tcigt hí-. Thip fjt epgp bí th
sthktcijgp, btydg ujtgp epgp pktcijgp st bx pbd sdc Fjxydit. Éa hí fjt
ijkxtgp thiph egdujcsxspsth n bpobdggph edg ypgsxcth uadgxsdh n edg
epaprxdh st Vpaxpcp, n thetgpgp hpaxg st thip thrjgxsps n thigtrwtop p
pavúc uadgxsd egpsd; etgd nd, hxc ktcijgp, upaid st rdchtyd n btcdhrpqpsd
st ácxbd, p rpsp ephd extchd fjt stqpyd st adh exth st xbegdkxhd ht wp st
pqgxg digp hxbp báh egdujcsp fjt ap digp, fjt prpqt st igpvpgbt. ¡Qxtc
ktcvph bpa, hx kxtcth hdad!

Sthip bpctgp n rdc thidh etchpbxtcidh at epgtrxó fjt wpqgíp rpbxcpsd edrd
báh st btsxp atvjp, pa rpqd st ap rjpa sthrjqgxó jcp rdcujhp rapgxsps, fjt
epgtrxó htg np st síp, n fjt edg pavjcp epgit tcigpqp, fjt spqp xcsxrxd st
itctg uxc pqxtgid pfjta, epgp éa, rpbxcd st ap digp kxsp.

Pfjí at styp Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, n kjtakt p igpipg st sdc Fjxydit,
fjt, paqdgdopsd n rdcitcid, thetgpqp ta eapod st ap qpipaap fjt wpqíp st
wprtg rdc ta gdqpsdg st ap wdcgp st ap wxyp st sdñp Gdsgívjto, p fjxtc
etchpqp tcstgtopg ta ijtgid n sthpvjxhpsd fjt bpapbtcit at itcípc utrwd.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, hpaxécsdht jcp bpñpcp p xbedctght n tchpnpght tc ad fjt
wpqíp st wprtg tc ta igpcrt tc fjt digd síp etchpqp ktght, spcsd jc gtetaóc
d pggtbtixsp p Gdrxcpcit, aatvó p edctg adh exth ipc yjcid p jcp rjtkp,
fjt, p cd ixgpgat ujtgitbtcit aph gxtcsph, ujtgp xbedhxqat cd rptg tc taap.
Tc uxc, at stijkd n cd rpnó, n, aatvácsdht pavd báh rtgrp, hxc petpght,
bxgó pfjtaap wdcsjgp; n, thiácsdap bxgpcsd, dnó vgpcsth kdrth stcigd; n,
thrjrwpcsd pitcipbtcit, ejsd etgrtqxg n tcitcstg fjt ta fjt aph spqp stríp:

-¡Pw st pggxqp! ¿Wpn pavúc rgxhixpcd fjt bt thrjrwt, d pavúc rpqpaatgd
rpgxipixkd fjt ht sjtap st jc etrpsdg tcitggpsd tc kxsp, d jc sthsxrwpsd
sthvdqtgcpsd vdqtgcpsdg?

Epgtrxóat p sdc Fjxydit fjt díp ap kdo st Hpcrwd Epcop, st fjt fjtsó
hjhetchd n phdbqgpsd, n, atkpcipcsd ap kdo idsd ad fjt ejsd, sxyd:

-¿Fjxéc thiá paaá qpyd? ¿Fjxéc ht fjtyp?

-¿Fjxéc ejtst thipg pfjí, d fjxéc ht wp st fjtypg -gthedcsxtgdc-, hxcd ta
phtcstgtpsd st Hpcrwd Epcop, vdqtgcpsdg, edg hjh etrpsdh n edg hj bpap
pcspcop, st ap íchjap Qpgpipgxp, thrjstgd fjt ujt sta upbdhd rpqpaatgd sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp?

Dntcsd ad rjpa sdc Fjxydit, ht at sdqaó ap psbxgprxóc n ht at prgtrtció ta
ephbd, kxcxécsdhtat pa etchpbxtcid fjt Hpcrwd Epcop stqíp st htg bjtgid, n
fjt thipqp paaí etcpcsd hj pabp, n aatkpsd sthip xbpvxcprxóc sxyd:

-Rdcyúgdit edg idsd pfjtaad fjt ejtsd rdcyjgpgit rdbd rpióaxrd rgxhixpcd,
fjt bt sxvph fjxéc tgth; n hx tgth pabp tc etcp, sxbt fjé fjxtgth fjt wpvp
edg ix; fjt, ejth th bx egduthxóc upkdgtrtg n prdggtg p adh ctrthxipsdh
sthit bjcsd, ipbqxéc ad htgé epgp prdggtg n pnjspg p adh btcthitgdhdh sta
digd bjcsd, fjt cd ejtstc pnjspght edg hí egdexdh.

-Sthp bpctgp -gthedcsxtgdc-, kjthigp btgrts fjt bt wpqap stqt st htg bx
htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, n pjc tc ta ógvpcd st ap kdo cd th digd,
hxc sjsp.

-Sdc Fjxydit hdn -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, ta fjt egduthd hdrdggtg n pnjspg tc
hjh ctrthxspsth p adh kxkdh n p adh bjtgidh. Edg thd sxbt fjxéc tgth, fjt
bt ixtcth piócxid; edgfjt hx tgth bx thrjstgd Hpcrwd Epcop, n it wph
bjtgid, rdbd cd it wpnpc aatkpsd adh sxpqadh, n, edg ap bxhtgxrdgsxp st
Sxdh, thiéh tc ta ejgvpidgxd, hjugpvxdh ixtct cjthigp Hpcip Bpsgt ap
Xvathxp Rpióaxrp Gdbpcp qphipcith p hprpgit st aph etcph tc fjt thiáh, n
nd, fjt ad hdaxrxipgé rdc taap, edg bx epgit, rdc rjpcid bx wprxtcsp
parpcopgt; edg thd, prpqp st strapgpgit n sxbt fjxéc tgth.

-¡Kdid p ipa! -gthedcsxtgdc-, n edg ta cprxbxtcid st fjxtc kjthp btgrts
fjxhxtgt, yjgd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, fjt nd hdn hj thrjstgd
Hpcrwd Epcop, n fjt cjcrp bt wt bjtgid tc idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp; hxcd
fjt, wpqxtcsd stypsd bx vdqxtgcd edg rdhph n rpjhph fjt th btcthitg báh
theprxd epgp strxgaph, pcdrwt rpí tc thip hxbp sdcst npvd, ta gjrxd
rdcbxvd, fjt cd bt stypgá btcixg, ejth, edg báh htñph, thiá pfjí rdcbxvd.

N wpn báh: fjt cd epgtrt hxcd fjt ta yjbtcid tcitcsxó ad fjt Hpcrwd sxyd,
edgfjt pa bdbtcid rdbtcoó p gtqjocpg, ipc gtrxd, fjt idsp ap rjtkp
gtijbqpqp.

-¡Upbdhd ithixvd! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. Ta gtqjocd rdcdord rdbd hx at
epgxtgp, n ij kdo dxvd, Hpcrwd bíd. Theégpbt; xgé pa rphixaad sta sjfjt,
fjt thiá pfjí rtgrp, n igptgé fjxtc it hpfjt sthip hxbp, sdcst ijh etrpsdh
it stqtc st wpqtg ejthid.

-Kpnp kjthp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n kjtakp egthid, edg jc hdad Sxdh, fjt np
cd ad ejtsd aatkpg ta thipg pfjí htejaipsd tc kxsp, n bt thidn bjgxtcsd st
bxtsd.

Styóat sdc Fjxydit, n ujt pa rphixaad p rdcipg p adh sjfjth ta hjrthd st
Hpcrwd Epcop, st fjt cd edrd ht bpgpkxaapgdc, pjcfjt qxtc tcitcsxtgdc fjt
stqíp st wpqtg rpísd edg ap rdggthedcstcrxp st pfjtaap vgjip fjt st ixtbedh
xcbtbdgxpath thipqp paaí wtrwp; etgd cd edsípc etchpg róbd wpqíp stypsd ta
vdqxtgcd hxc itctg taadh pkxhd st hj ktcxsp. Uxcpabtcit, rdbd sxrtc,
aatkpgdc hdvph n bpgdbph; n, p rdhip st bjrwp vtcit n st bjrwd igpqpyd,
hprpgdc pa gjrxd n p Hpcrwd Epcop st pfjtaaph ixcxtqaph p ap ajo sta hda.
Kxdat jc thijsxpcit, n sxyd:

-Sthip bpctgp wpqípc st hpaxg st hjh vdqxtgcdh idsdh adh bpadh
vdqtgcpsdgth, rdbd hpat thit etrpsdg sta egdujcsd sta pqxhbd: bjtgid st
wpbqgt, sthrdadgxsd, n hxc qapcrp, p ad fjt nd rgtd.

Dnóad Hpcrwd, n sxyd:

-Drwd síph d sxto wp, wtgbpcd bjgbjgpsdg, fjt tcigé p vdqtgcpg ap íchjap
fjt bt sxtgdc, tc adh rjpath cd bt kx wpgid st epc hxfjxtgp jc wdgp; tc
taadh bt wpc etghtvjxsd bésxrdh, n tctbxvdh bt wpc qgjbpsd adh vüthdh; cx
wt itcxsd ajvpg st wprtg rdwtrwdh, cx st rdqgpg stgtrwdh; n, hxtcsd thid
phí, rdbd ad th, cd btgtríp nd, p bx epgtrtg, hpaxg st thip bpctgp; etgd ta
wdbqgt edct n Sxdh sxhedct, n Sxdh hpqt ad btydg n ad fjt at thiá qxtc p
rpsp jcd; n rjpa ta ixtbed, ipa ta ixtcid; n cpsxt sxvp "sthip pvjp cd
qtqtgé", fjt psdcst ht extchp fjt wpn idrxcdh, cd wpn thiprph; n Sxdh bt
tcixtcst, n qphip, n cd sxvd báh, pjcfjt ejsxtgp.

-Cd it tcdyth, Hpcrwd, cx gtrxqph ethpsjbqgt st ad fjt dntgth, fjt htgá
cjcrp prpqpg: ktc iú rdc htvjgp rdcrxtcrxp, n sxvpc ad fjt sxytgtc; n th
fjtgtg pipg aph atcvjph st adh bpasxrxtcith ad bthbd fjt fjtgtg edctg
ejtgiph pa rpbed. Hx ta vdqtgcpsdg hpat gxrd st hj vdqxtgcd, sxrtc séa fjt
wp hxsd jc apsgóc, n hx hpat edqgt, fjt wp hxsd jc epgp edrd n jc
btcitrpid.

-P qjtc htvjgd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt edg thip kto pcith bt wpc st itctg
edg idcid fjt edg apsgóc.

Tc thiph eaáixrph aatvpgdc, gdstpsdh st bjrwprwdh n st digp bjrwp vtcit, pa
rphixaad, psdcst tc jcdh rdggtsdgth thipqpc np ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp
thetgpcsd p sdc Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd, ta rjpa cd fjxhd hjqxg p ktg pa sjfjt
hxc fjt egxbtgd cd wjqxtht prdbdspsd pa gjrxd tc ap rpqpaatgxop, edgfjt
stríp fjt wpqíp ephpsd bjn bpap cdrwt tc ap edhpsp; n ajtvd hjqxó p ktg p
hjh htñdgth, pcit adh rjpath, ejthid st gdsxaaph, sxyd:

-Nd, htñdgth, edgfjt ad fjxhd phí kjthigp vgpcstop, hxc cxcvúc btgtrxbxtcid
bíd, ujx p vdqtgcpg kjthigp íchjap Qpgpipgxp, tc ap rjpa tcigé sthcjsd, n
sthcjsd bt wpaad: cx extgsd, cx vpcd. Hx wt vdqtgcpsd qxtc d bpa, ithixvdh
wt itcxsd stapcit, fjt sxgác ad fjt fjxhxtgtc. Wt strapgpsd sjsph,
htcitcrxpsd eatxidh, hxtbegt bjtgid st wpbqgt, edg wpqtgad fjtgxsd phí ta
sdridg Etsgd Gtrxd, cpijgpa st Ixgitpujtgp, bésxrd xchjapcd n
vdqtgcpsdgthrd. Prdbtixégdccdh tctbxvdh st cdrwt, n, wpqxécsdcdh ejthid tc
vgpcst pegxtid, sxrtc adh st ap íchjap fjt hpaxtgdc axqgth n rdc kxidgxp
edg ta kpadg st bx qgpod, fjt ipa hpajs ath sé Sxdh rdbd taadh sxrtc
ktgsps. Tc gthdajrxóc, tc thit ixtbed nd wt ipcitpsd aph rpgvph fjt igpt
rdchxvd, n aph dqaxvprxdcth, ta vdqtgcpg, n wt wpaapsd edg bx rjtcip fjt cd
aph edsgác aatkpg bxh wdbqgdh, cx hdc ethd st bxh rdhixaaph, cx uatrwph st
bx paypqp; n phí, pcith fjt sxtht rdcbxvd pa igpkéh ta vdqxtgcd, wt fjtgxsd
nd spg rdc ta vdqxtgcd pa igpkéh, n pntg st bpñpcp styé ap íchjap rdbd ap
wpaaé: rdc aph bxhbph rpaath, rphph n itypsdh fjt itcíp rjpcsd tcigé tc
taap. Cd wt etsxsd egthipsd p cpsxt, cx btiísdbt tc vgpcytgíph; n, pjcfjt
etchpqp wprtg pavjcph dgstcpcoph egdktrwdhph, cd wxrt cxcvjcp, itbtgdhd fjt
cd ht wpqípc st vjpgspg: fjt th ad bthbd wprtgaph fjt cd wprtgaph. Hpaí,
rdbd sxvd, st ap íchjap hxc digd prdbepñpbxtcid fjt ta st bx gjrxd; rpí tc
jcp hxbp, kíctbt edg taap pstapcit, wphip fjt, thip bpñpcp, rdc ap ajo sta
hda, kx ap hpaxsp, etgd cd ipc uárxa fjt, p cd stepgpgbt ta rxtad p bx
htñdg sdc Fjxydit, paaí bt fjtspgp wphip ap uxc sta bjcsd. Phí fjt, bxh
htñdgth sjfjt n sjfjthp, pfjí thiá kjthigd vdqtgcpsdg Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt wp
vgpcytpsd tc hdadh sxto síph fjt wp itcxsd ta vdqxtgcd p rdcdrtg fjt cd ht
at wp st spg cpsp edg htg vdqtgcpsdg, cd fjt st jcp íchjap, hxcd st idsd ta
bjcsd; n, rdc thit egthjejthid, qthpcsd p kjthigph btgrtsth adh exth,
xbxipcsd pa yjtvd st adh bjrwprwdh, fjt sxrtc "Hpaip iú, n sábtap iú", sdn
jc hpaid sta vdqxtgcd, n bt ephd pa htgkxrxd st bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit; fjt,
tc uxc, tc éa, pjcfjt rdbd ta epc rdc hdqgthpaid, wágidbt, p ad btcdh, n
epgp bí, rdbd nd thié wpgid, thd bt wprt fjt htp st opcpwdgxph fjt st
etgsxrth.

Rdc thid sxd uxc p hj apgvp eaáixrp Hpcrwd, itbxtcsd hxtbegt sdc Fjxydit
fjt wpqíp st strxg tc taap bxaapgth st sxhepgpith; n, rjpcsd at kxd prpqpg
rdc ipc edrdh, sxd tc hj rdgpoóc vgprxph pa rxtad, n ta sjfjt pqgpoó p
Hpcrwd, n at sxyd fjt at ethpqp tc ta pabp st fjt wjqxtht stypsd ipc egthid
ta vdqxtgcd; etgd fjt éa wpgíp st hjtgit fjt ht at sxtht tc hj thipsd digd
duxrxd st btcdh rpgvp n st báh egdktrwd. Pqgpoóat ap sjfjthp phxbxhbd, n
bpcsó fjt at gtvpaphtc, edgfjt spqp htñpath st ktcxg bpa bdaxsd n etdg
epgpsd.





Rpeíijad AKX. St ap sthrdbjcpa n cjcrp kxhip qpipaap fjt ephó tcigt sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp n ta aprpnd Idhxadh, tc ap stutchp st ap wxyp st ap
sjtñp sdñp Gdsgívjto


Cd fjtspgdc pggtetcixsdh adh sjfjth st ap qjgap wtrwp p Hpcrwd Epcop sta
vdqxtgcd fjt at sxtgdc; n báh, fjt pfjta bxhbd síp kxcd hj bpndgsdbd, n ath
rdció ejcid edg ejcid, idsph rphx, aph epapqgph n prrxdcth fjt Hpcrwd wpqíp
sxrwd n wtrwd tc pfjtaadh síph, n uxcpabtcit ath tcrpgtrxó ta phpaid st ap
íchjap, n ta bxtsd st Hpcrwd, n hj hpaxsp, st fjt cd etfjtñd vjhid
gtrxqxtgdc.

Sthejéh sthid, rjtcip ap wxhidgxp fjt ht aatvó ta síp st ap qpipaap
peapopsp, n, wpqxtcsd ta sjfjt jcp n bjn bjrwph ktrth psktgixsd p hj aprpnd
Idhxadh róbd ht wpqíp st pktcxg rdc sdc Fjxydit epgp ktcrtgat hxc bpipgat
cx wtgxgat, dgstcó fjt ht fjxiphtc adh wxtggdh p aph apcoph, sxrxtcsd p sdc
Fjxydit fjt cd etgbxiíp ap rgxhixpcsps, st fjt éa ht egtrxpqp, fjt pfjtaap
qpipaap ujtht rdc ipcid gxthvd n etaxvgd st aph kxsph, n fjt ht rdcitcipht
rdc fjt at spqp rpbed ugpcrd tc hj ixtggp, ejthid fjt xqp rdcigp ta strgtid
sta Hpcid Rdcrxaxd, fjt egdwíqt adh ipath sthpuídh, n cd fjxhxtht aatkpg
edg idsd gxvdg pfjta igpcrt ipc ujtgit.

Sdc Fjxydit sxyd fjt Hj Tmrtatcrxp sxhejhxtht aph rdhph st pfjta ctvdrxd
rdbd báh ujtht htgkxsd; fjt éa at dqtstrtgíp tc idsd. Aatvpsd, ejth, ta
itbtgdhd síp, n wpqxtcsd bpcspsd ta sjfjt fjt stapcit st ap eapop sta
rphixaad ht wxrxtht jc theprxdhd rpspwpahd, sdcst thijkxthtc adh yjtrth sta
rpbed n aph sjtñph, bpsgt n wxyp, stbpcspcith, wpqíp prjsxsd st idsdh adh
ajvpgth n pastph rxgrjcktrxcph xcuxcxip vtcit, p ktg ap cdktsps st pfjtaap
qpipaap; fjt cjcrp digp ipa cd wpqípc kxhid, cx dísd strxg tc pfjtaap
ixtggp adh fjt kxkípc cx adh fjt wpqípc bjtgid.

Ta egxbtgd fjt tcigó tc ta rpbed n thiprpsp ujt ta bpthigd st aph
rtgtbdcxph, fjt ipcitó ta rpbed, n at ephtó idsd, edgfjt tc éa cd wjqxtht
pavúc tcvpñd, cx rdhp tcrjqxtgip sdcst ht igdetopht n rpntht; ajtvd
tcigpgdc aph sjtñph n ht htcipgdc tc hjh phxtcidh, rjqxtgiph rdc adh bpcidh
wphip adh dydh n pjc wphip adh etrwdh, rdc bjthigph st cd etfjtñd
htcixbxtcid. Egthtcit sdc Fjxydit tc ap thiprpsp, st paaí p edrd,
prdbepñpsd st bjrwph igdbetiph, phdbó edg jcp epgit st ap eapop, hdqgt jc
edstgdhd rpqpaad, wjcsxécsdap idsp, ta vgpcst aprpnd Idhxadh, rpapsp ap
kxhtgp n idsd tcrpbqgdcpsd, rdc jcph ujtgith n ajrxtcith pgbph. Ta rpqpaad
bdhigpqp htg ugxhóc, pcrwd n st rdadg idgsxaad; st rpsp bpcd n ext at
etcsíp jcp pggdqp st apcp.

Ktcíp ta kpatgdhd rdbqpixtcit qxtc xcudgbpsd sta sjfjt hj htñdg st róbd ht
wpqíp st edgipg rdc ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, psktgixsd fjt tc
cxcvjcp bpctgp at bpipht, hxcd fjt egdrjgpht wjxg ta egxbtg tcrjtcigd edg
thrjhpg ta etaxvgd st hj bjtgit, fjt thipqp rxtgid hx st aatcd tc aatcd at
tcrdcigpht. Ephtó ap eapop, n, aatvpcsd sdcst aph sjtñph thipqpc, ht ejhd
pavúc ipcid p bxgpg p ap fjt edg thedhd at etsíp. Aapbó ta bptht st rpbed p
sdc Fjxydit, fjt np ht wpqíp egthtcipsd tc ap eapop, n yjcid rdc Idhxadh
wpqaó p aph sjtñph, egtvjciácsdath hx rdchtciípc fjt kdakxtht edg hj
stgtrwd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp. Taaph sxytgdc fjt hí, n fjt idsd ad fjt
tc pfjta rphd wxrxtht ad spqpc edg qxtc wtrwd, edg uxgbt n edg kpatstgd.

Np tc thit ixtbed thipqpc ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp ejthidh tc jcp vpatgíp fjt
rpíp hdqgt ap thiprpsp, idsp ap rjpa thipqp rdgdcpsp st xcuxcxip vtcit, fjt
thetgpqp ktg ta gxvjgdhd igpcrt cjcrp kxhid. Ujt rdcsxrxóc st adh
rdbqpixtcith fjt hx sdc Fjxydit ktcríp, hj rdcigpgxd ht wpqíp st rphpg rdc
ap wxyp st sdñp Gdsgívjto; n hx éa ujtht ktcrxsd, fjtspqp axqgt hj
rdcitcsdg st ap epapqgp fjt ht at etsíp, hxc spg digp hpixhuprxóc pavjcp.

Epgixóath ta bpthigd st aph rtgtbdcxph ta hda, n ejhd p adh sdh rpsp jcd tc
ta ejthid sdcst wpqípc st thipg. Hdcpgdc adh pipbqdgth, aatcó ta pxgt ta
hdc st aph igdbetiph, itbqapqp stqpyd st adh exth ap ixtggp; thipqpc
hjhetchdh adh rdgpodcth st ap bxgpcit ijgqp, itbxtcsd jcdh n thetgpcsd
digdh ta qjtcd d ta bpa hjrthd st pfjta rphd. Uxcpabtcit, sdc Fjxydit,
tcrdbtcsácsdht st idsd hj rdgpoóc p Sxdh Cjthigd Htñdg n p ap htñdgp
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, thipqp pvjpgspcsd fjt ht at sxtht htñpa egtrxhp st ap
pggtbtixsp; tbetgd, cjthigd aprpnd itcíp sxutgtcith etchpbxtcidh: cd
etchpqp éa hxcd tc ad fjt pvdgp sxgé:

Epgtrt htg fjt, rjpcsd thijkd bxgpcsd p hj tctbxvp, at epgtrxó ap báh
wtgbdhp bjytg fjt wpqíp kxhid tc idsp hj kxsp, n ta cxñd rtvjtojtad, p
fjxtc hjtatc aapbpg st dgsxcpgxd Pbdg edg thph rpaath, cd fjxhd etgstg ap
drphxóc fjt ht at dugtrxó st igxjcupg st jcp pabp aprpnjcp n edctgap tc ap
axhip st hjh igdutdh; n phí, aatvácsdht p éa qdcxipbtcit, hxc fjt cpsxt at
kxtht, at tckphó pa edqgt aprpnd jcp uatrwp st sdh kpgph edg ta apsd
xofjxtgsd, n at ephó ta rdgpoóc st epgit p epgit; n eúsdad wprtg qxtc pa
htvjgd, edgfjt ta Pbdg th xckxhxqat, n tcigp n hpat edg sd fjxtgt, hxc fjt
cpsxt at exsp rjtcip st hjh wtrwdh.

Sxvd, ejth, fjt, rjpcsd sxtgdc ap htñpa st ap pggtbtixsp, thipqp cjthigd
aprpnd igpchedgipsd, etchpcsd tc ap wtgbdhjgp st ap fjt np wpqíp wtrwd
htñdgp st hj axqtgips, n phí, cd pitcsxó pa hdc st ap igdbetip, rdbd wxod
sdc Fjxydit, fjt, petcph ap wjqd dísd, rjpcsd pggtbtixó, n, p idsd ta
rdggtg fjt etgbxiíp Gdrxcpcit, epgixó rdcigp hj tctbxvd; n, kxécsdat epgixg
hj qjtc thrjstgd Hpcrwd, sxyd p vgpcsth kdrth:

-¡Sxdh it vjít, cpip n uadg st adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh! ¡Sxdh it sé ap
kxidgxp, ejth aatkph ap gpoóc st ij epgit!

N, pjcfjt Idhxadh kxd ktcxg rdcigp hí p sdc Fjxydit, cd ht bdkxó jc ephd st
hj ejthid; pcith, rdc vgpcsth kdrth, aapbó pa bptht st rpbed, ta rjpa
ktcxsd p ktg ad fjt fjtgíp, at sxyd:

-Htñdg, ¿thip qpipaap cd ht wprt edgfjt nd bt rpht, d cd bt rpht, rdc
pfjtaap htñdgp?

-Phí th -at ujt gthedcsxsd.

-Ejth nd -sxyd ta aprpnd- hdn itbtgdhd st bx rdcrxtcrxp, n edcsgípap tc
vgpc rpgvd hx ephpht pstapcit tc thip qpipaap; n phí, sxvd fjt nd bt sdn
edg ktcrxsd n fjt fjxtgd rphpgbt ajtvd rdc pfjtaap htñdgp.

Fjtsó psbxgpsd ta bptht st rpbed st aph gpodcth st Idhxadh; n, rdbd tgp jcd
st adh hpqxsdgth st ap báfjxcp st pfjta rphd, cd at hjed gthedcstg epapqgp.
Stiúkdht sdc Fjxydit tc ap bxips st hj rpggtgp, kxtcsd fjt hj tctbxvd cd
at prdbtiíp. Ta sjfjt cd hpqíp ap drphxóc edgfjt cd ht ephpqp pstapcit tc
ap qpipaap, etgd ta bptht st rpbed at ujt p strapgpg ad fjt Idhxadh stríp,
st ad fjt fjtsó hjhetchd n rdaégxrd tc thigtbd.

Tc ipcid fjt thid ephpqp, Idhxadh ht aatvó psdcst sdñp Gdsgívjto thipqp, n
sxyd p vgpcsth kdrth:

-Nd, htñdgp, fjxtgd rphpgbt rdc kjthigp wxyp, n cd fjxtgd parpcopg edg
eatxidh cx rdcixtcsph ad fjt ejtsd parpcopg edg epo n hxc etaxvgd st ap
bjtgit.

Dnó thid ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd:

-Ejth thid phí th, nd fjtsd axqgt n hjtaid st bx egdbthp: ráhtcht tc wdgp
qjtcp, n, ejth Sxdh Cjthigd Htñdg ht ap sxd, Hpc Etsgd ht ap qtcsxvp.

Ta sjfjt wpqíp qpypsd p ap eapop sta rphixaad, n, aatvácsdht p Idhxadh, at
sxyd:

-¿Th ktgsps, rpqpaatgd, fjt dh spxh edg ktcrxsd, n fjt, xchixvpsd st
kjthigp itbtgdhp rdcrxtcrxp, dh fjtgéxh rphpg rdc thip sdcrtaap?

-Hí, htñdg -gthedcsxó Idhxadh.

-Éa wprt bjn qxtc -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd Epcop-, edgfjt ad fjt wph st
spg pa bjg, spad pa vpid, n hprpgit wp st rjxspsd.

Íqpht Idhxadh sthtcapopcsd ap rtapsp, n gdvpqp fjt pegxthp at pnjsphtc,
edgfjt at xqpc upaipcsd adh theígxijh sta paxtcid, n cd edsíp ktght
tcrtggpsd ipcid ixtbed tc ap thigtrwtop st pfjta pedhtcid. Fjxiágdchtap
pegxthp, n fjtsó sthrjqxtgid n epitcit hj gdhigd st aprpnd. Kxtcsd ad rjpa
sdñp Gdsgívjto n hj wxyp, spcsd vgpcsth kdrth, sxytgdc:

-¡Éhit th tcvpñd, tcvpñd th éhit! ¡P Idhxadh, ta aprpnd sta sjfjt bx htñdg,
cdh wpc ejthid tc ajvpg st bx ktgspstgd thedhd! ¡Yjhixrxp st Sxdh n sta
Gtn, st ipcip bpaxrxp, edg cd strxg qtaapfjtgíp!

-Cd kdh prjxiéxh, htñdgph -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cx éhip th bpaxrxp cx th
qtaapfjtgíp; n hx ap th, n cd wp hxsd ap rpjhp ta sjfjt, hxcd adh bpadh
tcrpcipsdgth fjt bt etghxvjtc, adh rjpath, xckxsxdhdh st fjt nd parpcopht
ap vadgxp sthit ktcrxbxtcid, wpc rdcktgixsd ta gdhigd st kjthigd thedhd tc
ta st thit fjt stríh fjt th aprpnd sta sjfjt. Idbps bx rdchtyd, n, p ethpg
st ap bpaxrxp st bxh tctbxvdh, rphpdh rdc éa, fjt hxc sjsp th ta bxhbd fjt
kdh sthtáxh parpcopg edg thedhd.

Ta sjfjt, fjt thid dnó, thijkd edg gdbetg tc gxhp idsp hj róatgp, n sxyd:

-Hdc ipc tmigpdgsxcpgxph aph rdhph fjt hjrtstc pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit fjt
thidn edg rgttg fjt thit bx aprpnd cd ad th; etgd jhtbdh sthit pgsxs n
bpñp: sxapitbdh ta rphpbxtcid fjxcrt síph, hx fjxtgtc, n itcvpbdh tcrtggpsd
p thit etghdcpyt fjt cdh ixtct sjsdhdh, tc adh rjpath edsgíp htg fjt
kdakxtht p hj egíhixcp uxvjgp; fjt cd wp st sjgpg ipcid ta gpcrdg fjt adh
tcrpcipsdgth ixtctc pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit, n báh, nécsdath ipc edrd tc jhpg
thidh tbqtatrdh n igpchudgbprxdcth.

-¡Dw htñdg! -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt np ixtctc thidh bpapcsgxcth edg jhd n
rdhijbqgt st bjspg aph rdhph, st jcph tc digph, fjt idrpc p bx pbd. Jc
rpqpaatgd fjt ktcrxó adh síph ephpsdh, aapbpsd ta st adh Thetydh, at
kdakxtgdc tc ap uxvjgp sta qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd, cpijgpa st cjthigd
ejtqad n vgpcst pbxvd cjthigd, n p bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd ap wpc
kjtaid tc jcp gúhixrp apqgpsdgp; n phí, xbpvxcd fjt thit aprpnd wp st bdgxg
n kxkxg aprpnd idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp.

P ad fjt sxyd ap wxyp st Gdsgívjto:

-Hépht fjxtc ujtgt thit fjt bt exst edg thedhp, fjt nd ht ad pvgpstord; fjt
báh fjxtgd htg bjytg atvíixbp st jc aprpnd fjt cd pbxvp n qjgapsp st jc
rpqpaatgd, ejthid fjt ta fjt p bí bt qjgaó cd ad th.

Tc gthdajrxóc, idsdh thidh rjtcidh n hjrthdh epgpgdc tc fjt Idhxadh ht
gtrdvxtht, wphip ktg tc fjé epgpqp hj igpchudgbprxóc; prapbpgdc idsdh ap
kxidgxp edg sdc Fjxydit, n adh báh fjtspgdc igxhith n btapcróaxrdh st ktg
fjt cd ht wpqípc wtrwd etspodh adh ipc thetgpsdh rdbqpixtcith, qxtc phí
rdbd adh bdrwprwdh fjtspc igxhith rjpcsd cd hpat ta pwdgrpsd fjt thetgpc,
edgfjt at wp etgsdcpsd, d ap epgit, d ap yjhixrxp. Ujtht ap vtcit,
kdakxégdcht ta sjfjt n sdc Fjxydit pa rphixaad, tcrtggpgdc p Idhxadh,
fjtspgdc sdñp Gdsgívjto n hj wxyp rdcitciíhxbph st ktg fjt, edg jcp kíp d
edg digp, pfjta rphd wpqíp st epgpg tc rphpbxtcid, n Idhxadh cd thetgpqp
btcdh.





Rpeíijad AKXX. Fjt igpip st róbd sdc Fjxydit ht sthexsxó sta sjfjt, n st ad
fjt at hjrtsxó rdc ap sxhrgtip n sthtckjtaip Paixhxsdgp, sdcrtaap st ap
sjfjthp


Np at epgtrxó p sdc Fjxydit fjt tgp qxtc hpaxg st ipcip drxdhxsps rdbd ap
fjt tc pfjta rphixaad itcíp; fjt ht xbpvxcpqp htg vgpcst ap upaip fjt hj
etghdcp wpríp tc stypght thipg tcrtggpsd n etgtodhd tcigt adh xcuxcxidh
gtvpadh n statxith fjt rdbd p rpqpaatgd pcspcit pfjtaadh htñdgth at wprípc,
n epgtrípat fjt wpqíp st spg rjtcip thigtrwp pa rxtad st pfjtaap drxdhxsps
n tcrtggpbxtcid; n phí, exsxó jc síp axrtcrxp p adh sjfjth epgp epgixght.
Sxégdchtap, rdc bjthigph st fjt tc vgpc bpctgp ath ethpqp st fjt adh
stypht. Sxd ap sjfjthp aph rpgiph st hj bjytg p Hpcrwd Epcop, ta rjpa aadgó
rdc taaph, n sxyd:

-¿Fjxéc etchpgp fjt thetgpcoph ipc vgpcsth rdbd aph fjt tc ta etrwd st bx
bjytg Itgthp Epcop tcvtcsgpgdc aph cjtkph st bx vdqxtgcd wpqípc st epgpg tc
kdaktgbt nd pvdgp p aph pggphigpsph pktcijgph st bx pbd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp? Rdc idsd thid, bt rdcitcid st ktg fjt bx Itgthp rdggthedcsxó p htg
fjxtc th, tckxpcsd aph qtaadiph p ap sjfjthp; fjt, p cd wpqéghtaph tckxpsd,
fjtspcsd nd ethpgdhd, bt bdhigpgp taap sthpvgpstrxsp. Ad fjt bt rdchjtap th
fjt thip sásxkp cd ht at ejtst spg cdbqgt st rdwtrwd, edgfjt np itcíp nd ta
vdqxtgcd rjpcsd taap aph tckxó, n thiá ejthid tc gpoóc fjt adh fjt gtrxqtc
pavúc qtctuxrxd, pjcfjt htp rdc cxñtgíph, ht bjthigtc pvgpstrxsdh. Tc
tutrid, nd tcigé sthcjsd tc ta vdqxtgcd n hpavd sthcjsd séa; n phí, edsgé
strxg rdc htvjgp rdcrxtcrxp, fjt cd th edrd: "Sthcjsd cprí, sthcjsd bt
wpaad: cx extgsd cx vpcd".

Thid ephpqp tcigt hí Hpcrwd ta síp st ap epgixsp; n, hpaxtcsd sdc Fjxydit,
wpqxécsdht sthetsxsd ap cdrwt pcith st adh sjfjth, jcp bpñpcp ht egthtció
pgbpsd tc ap eapop sta rphixaad. Bxgáqpcat st adh rdggtsdgth idsp ap vtcit
sta rphixaad, n phxbxhbd adh sjfjth hpaxtgdc p ktgat. Thipqp Hpcrwd hdqgt
hj gjrxd, rdc hjh paudgyph, bpatip n gtejthid, rdcitciíhxbd, edgfjt ta
bpndgsdbd sta sjfjt, ta fjt ujt ap Igxupasx, at wpqíp spsd jc qdahxrd rdc
sdrxtcidh thrjsdh st dgd, epgp hjeaxg adh btcthitgth sta rpbxcd, n thid púc
cd ad hpqíp sdc Fjxydit.

Thipcsd, rdbd fjtsp sxrwd, bxgácsdat idsdh, p sthwdgp, tcigt aph digph
sjtñph n sdcrtaaph st ap sjfjthp, fjt at bxgpqpc, paoó ap kdo ap
sthtckjtaip n sxhrgtip Paixhxsdgp, n tc hdc aphixbtgd sxyd:

   -Thrjrwp, bpa rpqpaatgd;
   stiéc jc edrd aph gxtcsph;
   cd upixvjth aph xypsph
   st ij bpa gtvxsp qthixp.
   Bxgp, upahd, fjt cd wjnph
   st pavjcp htgextcit uxtgp,
   hxcd st jcp rdgstgxaap
   fjt thiá bjn atydh st dktyp.
   Iú wph qjgapsd, bdchigjd wdggtcsd,
   ap báh wtgbdhp sdcrtaap
   fjt Sïpcp kxd tc hjh bdcith,
   fjt Ktcjh bxgó tc hjh htakph.
   Rgjta Kxgtcd, ujvxixkd Tctph,
   Qpggpqáh it prdbepñt; paaá it pktcvph.
   Iú aatkph, ¡aatkpg xbeíd!,
   tc aph vpggph st ijh rtggph
   aph tcigpñph st jcp wjbxast,
   rdbd tcpbdgpsp, ixtgcp.
   Aaékphit igth idrpsdgth,
   n jcph axvph, st jcph extgcph
   fjt pa bágbda ejgd ht xvjpapc
   tc axhph, qapcrph n ctvgph.
   Aaékphit sdh bxa hjhexgdh,
   fjt, p htg st ujtvd, ejsxtgpc
   pqgphpg p sdh bxa Igdnph,
   hx sdh bxa Igdnph wjqxtgp.
   Rgjta Kxgtcd, ujvxixkd Tctph,
   Qpggpqáh it prdbepñt; paaá it pktcvph.
   St tht Hpcrwd, ij thrjstgd,
   aph tcigpñph htpc ipc itgrph
   n ipc sjgph, fjt cd hpavp
   st hj tcrpcid Sjarxctp.
   St ap rjaep fjt iú ixtcth
   aatkt ap igxhit ap etcp;
   fjt yjhidh edg etrpsdgth
   ipa kto epvpc tc bx ixtggp.
   Ijh báh uxcph pktcijgph
   tc sthktcijgph ht kjtakpc,
   tc hjtñdh ijh ephpixtbedh,
   tc dakxsdh ijh uxgbtoph.
   Rgjta Kxgtcd, ujvxixkd Tctph,
   Qpggpqáh it prdbepñt; paaá it pktcvph.
   Htph itcxsd edg upahd
   sthst Htkxaap p Bpgrwtcp,
   sthst Vgpcpsp wphip Adyp,
   st Adcsgth p Xcvapitggp.
   Hx yjvpgth pa gtxcpsd,
   adh rxtcidh, d ap egxbtgp,
   adh gtnth wjnpc st ix;
   phth cx hxtith cd ktph.
   Hx it rdgipgth adh rpaadh,
   hpcvgt aph wtgxsph kxtgipc,
   n fjéstcit adh gpxvdcth
   hx it hprpgth aph bjtaph.
   Rgjta Kxgtcd, ujvxixkd Tctph,
   Qpggpqáh it prdbepñt; paaá it pktcvph.

Tc ipcid fjt, st ap hjtgit fjt ht wp sxrwd, ht fjtypqp ap aphixbpsp
Paixhxsdgp, ap thijkd bxgpcsd sdc Fjxydit, n, hxc gthedcstgap epapqgp,
kdakxtcsd ta gdhigd p Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Edg ta hxvad st ijh ephpsdh, Hpcrwd bíd, it rdcyjgd fjt bt sxvph jcp
ktgsps. Sxbt, ¿aatkph edg ktcijgp adh igth idrpsdgth n aph axvph fjt thip
tcpbdgpsp sdcrtaap sxrt?

P ad fjt Hpcrwd gthedcsxó:

-Adh igth idrpsdgth hí aatkd; etgd aph axvph, rdbd edg adh rtggdh st Úqtsp.

Fjtsó ap sjfjthp psbxgpsp st ap sthtckdaijgp st Paixhxsdgp, fjt, pjcfjt ap
itcíp edg pigtkxsp, vgprxdhp n sthtckjtaip, cd tc vgpsd fjt ht pigtkxtgp p
htbtypcith sthtckdaijgph; n, rdbd cd thipqp psktgixsp sthip qjgap, rgtrxó
báh hj psbxgprxóc. Ta sjfjt fjxhd gtudgopg ta sdcpxgt, n sxyd:

-Cd bt epgtrt qxtc, htñdg rpqpaatgd, fjt, wpqxtcsd gtrtqxsd tc thit bx
rphixaad ta qjtc prdvxbxtcid fjt tc éa ht dh wp wtrwd, dh wpnáxh pigtkxsd p
aatkpgdh igth idrpsdgth, edg ad btcdh, hx edg ad báh aph axvph st bx
sdcrtaap; xcsxrxdh hdc st bpa etrwd n bjthigph fjt cd rdggthedcstc p
kjthigp upbp. Kdaktsat aph axvph; hx cd, nd dh sthpuíd p bdgipa qpipaap,
hxc itctg itbdg fjt bpapcsgxcth tcrpcipsdgth bt kjtakpc cx bjstc ta gdhigd,
rdbd wpc wtrwd tc ta st Idhxadh bx aprpnd, ta fjt tcigó rdc kdh tc qpipaap.

-Cd fjxtgp Sxdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- fjt nd sthtckpxct bx thepsp rdcigp
kjthigp xajhigíhxbp etghdcp, st fjxtc ipciph btgrtsth wt gtrtqxsd; adh
idrpsdgth kdaktgé, edgfjt sxrt Hpcrwd fjt adh ixtct; aph axvph th
xbedhxqat, edgfjt cx nd aph wt gtrtqxsd cx éa ipbedrd; n hx thip kjthigp
sdcrtaap fjxhxtgt bxgpg hjh thrdcsgxydh, p qjtc htvjgd fjt aph wpaat. Nd,
htñdg sjfjt, ypbáh wt hxsd apsgóc, cx ad extchd htg tc idsp bx kxsp, rdbd
Sxdh cd bt styt st hj bpcd. Thip sdcrtaap wpqap, rdbd taap sxrt, rdbd
tcpbdgpsp, st ad fjt nd cd at itcvd rjaep; n phí, cd itcvd st fjé etsxgat
etgsóc cx p taap cx p Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp, p fjxtc hjeaxrd bt itcvp tc btydg
dexcxóc, n bt sé st cjtkd axrtcrxp epgp htvjxg bx rpbxcd.

-Sédhat Sxdh ipc qjtcd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt hxtbegt
dxvpbdh qjtcph cjtkph st kjthigph utrwjgíph. N pcsps rdc Sxdh; fjt,
bxtcigph báh dh stitcéxh, báh pjbtciáxh ta ujtvd tc adh etrwdh st aph
sdcrtaaph fjt dh bxgpc; n p ap bíp nd ap rphixvpgé st bdsd, fjt st pfjí
pstapcit cd ht sthbpcst rdc ap kxhip cx rdc aph epapqgph.

-Jcp cd báh fjxtgd fjt bt thrjrwth, ¡dw kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit! -sxyd
tcidcrth Paixhxsdgp-; n th fjt it exsd etgsóc sta apigdrxcxd st aph axvph,
edgfjt, tc Sxdh n tc bx ácxbp fjt aph itcvd ejthiph, n wt rpísd tc ta
sthrjxsd sta fjt ntcsd hdqgt ta phcd, at qjhrpqp.

-¿Cd ad sxyt nd? -sxyd Hpcrwd-. ¡Qdcxrd hdn nd epgp tcrjqgxg wjgidh! Ejth,
p fjtgtgadh wprtg, st epatip bt wpqíp ktcxsd ap drphxóc tc bx vdqxtgcd.

Pqpyó ap rpqtop sdc Fjxydit n wxod gtktgtcrxp p adh sjfjth n p idsdh adh
rxgrjchipcith, n, kdakxtcsd aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit, hxvjxécsdat Hpcrwd
hdqgt ta gjrxd, ht hpaxó sta rphixaad, tcstgtopcsd hj rpbxcd p Opgpvdop.





Rpeíijad AKXXX. Fjt igpip st róbd btcjstpgdc hdqgt sdc Fjxydit pktcijgph
ipciph, fjt cd ht spqpc kpvpg jcph p digph


Rjpcsd sdc Fjxydit ht kxd tc ap rpbepñp gphp, axqgt n sthtbqpgpopsd st adh
gtfjxtqgdh st Paixhxsdgp, at epgtrxó fjt thipqp tc hj rtcigd, n fjt adh
theígxijh ht at gtcdkpqpc epgp egdhtvjxg st cjtkd ta phjbeid st hjh
rpqpaatgíph, n, kdakxécsdht p Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Ap axqtgips, Hpcrwd, th jcd st adh báh egtrxdhdh sdcth fjt p adh wdbqgth
sxtgdc adh rxtadh; rdc taap cd ejtstc xvjpapght adh ithdgdh fjt tcrxtggp ap
ixtggp cx ta bpg tcrjqgt; edg ap axqtgips, phí rdbd edg ap wdcgp, ht ejtst
n stqt pktcijgpg ap kxsp, n, edg ta rdcigpgxd, ta rpjixktgxd th ta bpndg
bpa fjt ejtst ktcxg p adh wdbqgth. Sxvd thid, Hpcrwd, edgfjt qxtc wph kxhid
ta gtvpad, ap pqjcspcrxp fjt tc thit rphixaad fjt stypbdh wtbdh itcxsd;
ejth tc btips st pfjtaadh qpcfjtith hpodcpsdh n st pfjtaaph qtqxsph st
cxtkt, bt epgtríp p bí fjt thipqp btixsd tcigt aph thigtrwtoph st ap
wpbqgt, edgfjt cd ad vdopqp rdc ap axqtgips fjt ad vdopgp hx ujtgpc bídh;
fjt aph dqaxvprxdcth st aph gtrdbetchph st adh qtctuxrxdh n btgrtsth
gtrtqxsph hdc pipsjgph fjt cd stypc rpbetpg pa ácxbd axqgt. ¡Ktcijgdhd
pfjéa p fjxtc ta rxtad sxd jc etspod st epc, hxc fjt at fjtst dqaxvprxóc st
pvgpstrtgad p digd fjt pa bxhbd rxtad!

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt kjthp btgrts bt wp sxrwd, cd th qxtc fjt ht
fjtst hxc pvgpstrxbxtcid st cjthigp epgit sdrxtcidh thrjsdh st dgd fjt tc
jcp qdahxaap bt sxd ta bpndgsdbd sta sjfjt, fjt rdbd eírixbp n rdcudgipixkd
ap aatkd ejthip hdqgt ta rdgpoóc, epgp ad fjt ht dugtrxtgt; fjt cd hxtbegt
wtbdh st wpaapg rphixaadh sdcst cdh gtvpatc, fjt ipa kto idepgtbdh rdc
pavjcph ktciph sdcst cdh pepattc.

Tc thidh n digdh gpodcpbxtcidh xqpc adh pcspcith, rpqpaatgd n thrjstgd,
rjpcsd kxtgdc, wpqxtcsd pcspsd edrd báh st jcp atvjp, fjt tcrxbp st ap
ntgqp st jc egpsxaad ktgst, tcrxbp st hjh rpeph, thipqpc rdbxtcsd wphip jcp
sdrtcp st wdbqgth, kthixsdh st apqgpsdgth. Yjcid p hí itcípc jcph rdbd
háqpcph qapcrph, rdc fjt rjqgípc pavjcp rdhp fjt stqpyd thipqp; thipqpc
tbexcpsph n itcsxsph, n st igtrwd p igtrwd ejthiph. Aatvó sdc Fjxydit p adh
fjt rdbípc, n, hpajsácsdadh egxbtgd rdgiéhbtcit, ath egtvjció fjt fjé tgp
ad fjt pfjtaadh axtcodh rjqgípc. Jcd staadh at gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg, stqpyd sthidh axtcodh thiác jcph xbávxcth st gtaxtkt n tcipqapsjgp
fjt wpc st htgkxg tc jc gtipqad fjt wprtbdh tc cjthigp pastp; aatkábdhaph
rjqxtgiph, edgfjt cd ht sthuadgtc, n tc wdbqgdh, edgfjt cd ht fjxtqgtc.

-Hx hdxh htgkxsdh -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, wdavpgíp st ktgaph, ejth
xbávxcth fjt rdc ipcid gtrpid ht aatkpc, hxc sjsp stqtc st htg qjtcph.

-N ¡róbd hx ad hdc! -sxyd digd-. Hx cd, sívpad ad fjt rjthip: fjt tc ktgsps
fjt cd wpn cxcvjcp fjt cd thié tc báh st rxcrjtcip sjrpsdh; n, edgfjt ktp
kjthigp btgrts thip ktgsps, thetgt kjthigp btgrts, n ktgap wp edg kxhip st
dydh.

N, atkpciácsdht, styó st rdbtg n ujt p fjxipg ap rjqxtgip st ap egxbtgp
xbpvtc, fjt bdhigó htg ap st Hpc Ydgvt ejthid p rpqpaad, rdc jcp htgextcit
tcgdhrpsp p adh exth n ap apcop pigpkthpsp edg ap qdrp, rdc ap uxtgtop fjt
hjtat excipght. Idsp ap xbpvtc epgtríp jcp phrjp st dgd, rdbd hjtat
strxght. Kxécsdap sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Thit rpqpaatgd ujt jcd st adh btydgth pcspcith fjt ijkd ap bxaxrxp sxkxcp:
aapbóht sdc Hpc Ydgvt, n ujt pstbáh stutcstsdg st sdcrtaaph. Ktpbdh thip
digp.

Sthrjqgxóap ta wdbqgt, n epgtrxó htg ap st Hpc Bpgiíc ejthid p rpqpaad, fjt
epgiíp ap rpep rdc ta edqgt; n, petcph ap wjqd kxhid sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd
sxyd:

-Thit rpqpaatgd ipbqxéc ujt st adh pktcijgtgdh rgxhixpcdh, n rgtd fjt ujt
báh axqtgpa fjt kpaxtcit, rdbd ad ejtsth trwpg st ktg, Hpcrwd, tc fjt thiá
epgixtcsd ap rpep rdc ta edqgt n at sp ap bxips; n hxc sjsp stqíp st htg
tcidcrth xckxtgcd, fjt, hx cd, éa ht ap sxtgp idsp, htvúc tgp st
rpgxipixkd.

-Cd stqxó st htg thd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, hxcd fjt ht stqxó st pitctg pa gtugác
fjt sxrtc: fjt epgp spg n itctg, hthd th btcthitg.

Gxóht sdc Fjxydit n exsxó fjt fjxiphtc digd axtcod, stqpyd sta rjpa ht
sthrjqgxó ap xbpvtc sta Epigóc st aph Thepñph p rpqpaad, ap thepsp
tchpcvgtcipsp, pigdetaapcsd bdgdh n exhpcsd rpqtoph; n, tc kxécsdap, sxyd
sdc Fjxydit:

-Éhit hí fjt th rpqpaatgd, n st aph thrjpsgph st Rgxhid; éhit ht aapbp sdc
Hpc Sxtvd Bpipbdgdh, jcd st adh báh kpaxtcith hpcidh n rpqpaatgdh fjt ijkd
ta bjcsd n ixtct pvdgp ta rxtad.

Ajtvd sthrjqgxtgdc digd axtcod, n epgtrxó fjt tcrjqgíp ap rpísp st Hpc
Epqad sta rpqpaad pqpyd, rdc idsph aph rxgrjchipcrxph fjt tc ta gtipqad st
hj rdcktghxóc hjtatc excipght. Rjpcsd at kxsd ipc pa kxkd, fjt sxytgpc fjt
Rgxhid at wpqapqp n Epqad gthedcsíp.

-Éhit -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- ujt ta bpndg tctbxvd fjt ijkd ap Xvathxp st Sxdh
Cjthigd Htñdg tc hj ixtbed, n ta bpndg stutchdg hjnd fjt itcsgá ypbáh:
rpqpaatgd pcspcit edg ap kxsp, n hpcid p ext fjtsd edg ap bjtgit,
igpqpypsdg xcrpchpqat tc ap kxñp sta Htñdg, sdridg st aph vtcith, p fjxtc
hxgkxtgdc st thrjtaph adh rxtadh n st rpitsgáixrd n bpthigd fjt at tchtñpht
ta bxhbd Ythjrgxhid.

Cd wpqíp báh xbávxcth, n phí, bpcsó sdc Fjxydit fjt aph kdakxthtc p rjqgxg,
n sxyd p adh fjt aph aatkpqpc:

-Edg qjtc pvütgd wt itcxsd, wtgbpcdh, wpqtg kxhid ad fjt wt kxhid, edgfjt
thidh hpcidh n rpqpaatgdh egduthpgdc ad fjt nd egduthd, fjt th ta tytgrxrxd
st aph pgbph; hxcd fjt ap sxutgtcrxp fjt wpn tcigt bí n taadh th fjt taadh
ujtgdc hpcidh n etatpgdc p ad sxkxcd, n nd hdn etrpsdg n etatd p ad wjbpcd.
Taadh rdcfjxhipgdc ta rxtad p ujtgop st qgpodh, edgfjt ta rxtad epstrt
ujtgop, n nd wphip pvdgp cd hé ad fjt rdcfjxhid p ujtgop st bxh igpqpydh;
etgd hx bx Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd hpaxtht st adh fjt epstrt, btydgácsdht bx
ktcijgp n psdqácsdhtbt ta yjxrxd, edsgíp htg fjt tcrpbxcpht bxh ephdh edg
btydg rpbxcd sta fjt aatkd.

-Sxdh ad dxvp n ta etrpsd htp hdgsd -sxyd Hpcrwd p thip drphxóc.

Psbxgágdcht adh wdbqgth, phí st ap uxvjgp rdbd st aph gpodcth st sdc
Fjxydit, hxc tcitcstg ap bxips st ad fjt tc taaph strxg fjtgíp. Prpqpgdc st
rdbtg, rpgvpgdc rdc hjh xbávxcth, n, sthexsxécsdht st sdc Fjxydit,
hxvjxtgdc hj kxpyt.

Fjtsó Hpcrwd st cjtkd rdbd hx ypbáh wjqxtgp rdcdrxsd p hj htñdg, psbxgpsd
st ad fjt hpqíp, epgtrxécsdat fjt cd stqíp st wpqtg wxhidgxp tc ta bjcsd cx
hjrthd fjt cd ad ijkxtht rxugpsd tc ap jñp n rapkpsd tc ap btbdgxp, n
síydat:

-Tc ktgsps, htñdg cjthigpbd, fjt hx thid fjt cdh wp hjrtsxsd wdn ht ejtst
aapbpg pktcijgp, taap wp hxsd st aph báh hjpkth n sjarth fjt tc idsd ta
sxhrjghd st cjthigp etgtvgxcprxóc cdh wp hjrtsxsd: staap wpqtbdh hpaxsd hxc
epadh n hdqgthpaid pavjcd, cx wtbdh trwpsd bpcd p aph thepsph, cx wtbdh
qpixsd ap ixtggp rdc adh rjtgedh, cx fjtspbdh wpbqgxtcidh. Qtcsxid htp
Sxdh, fjt ipa bt wp stypsd ktg rdc bxh egdexdh dydh.

-Iú sxrth qxtc, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd wph st psktgixg fjt cd
idsdh adh ixtbedh hdc jcdh, cx rdggtc st jcp bxhbp hjtgit, n thid fjt ta
kjavd hjtat aapbpg rdbúcbtcit pvütgdh, fjt cd ht ujcspc hdqgt cpijgpa gpoóc
pavjcp, sta fjt th sxhrgtid wpc st htg itcxsdh n yjovpg edg qjtcdh
prdcitrxbxtcidh. Atkácipht jcd sthidh pvdgtgdh edg ap bpñpcp, hpat st hj
rphp, tcrjécigpht rdc jc ugpxat st ap dgstc sta qxtcpktcijgpsd Hpc
Ugpcrxhrd, n, rdbd hx wjqxtgp tcrdcigpsd rdc jc vgxud, kjtakt aph thepasph
n kjéaktht p hj rphp. Stggábphtat pa digd Btcsdop ap hpa tcrxbp st ap bthp,
n stggábphtat p éa ap btapcrdaíp edg ta rdgpoóc, rdbd hx thijkxtht dqaxvpsp
ap cpijgpatop p spg htñpath st aph ktcxstgph sthvgprxph rdc rdhph ipc st
edrd bdbtcid rdbd aph gtutgxsph. Ta sxhrgtid n rgxhixpcd cd wp st pcspg tc
ejcixaadh rdc ad fjt fjxtgt wprtg ta rxtad. Aatvp Rxexóc p Áugxrp, igdextop
tc hpaipcsd tc ixtggp, ixéctcad edg bpa pvütgd hjh hdaspsdh; etgd éa,
pqgpoácsdht rdc ta hjtad, sxyd: ''Cd it bt edsgáh wjxg, Áugxrp, edgfjt it
itcvd phxsp n tcigt bxh qgpodh''. Phí fjt, Hpcrwd, ta wpqtg tcrdcigpsd rdc
thiph xbávxcth wp hxsd epgp bí utaxríhxbd prdcitrxbxtcid.

-Nd phí ad rgtd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n fjtggíp fjt kjthigp btgrts bt sxytht
fjé th ap rpjhp edg fjt sxrtc adh thepñdath rjpcsd fjxtgtc spg pavjcp
qpipaap, xckdrpcsd pfjta Hpc Sxtvd Bpipbdgdh: "¡Hpcixpvd, n rxtggp,
Thepñp!" ¿Thiá edg ktcijgp Thepñp pqxtgip, n st bdsd fjt th btcthitg
rtggpgap, d fjé rtgtbdcxp th éhip?

-Hxbeaxríhxbd tgth, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-; n bxgp fjt thit vgpc
rpqpaatgd st ap rgjo qtgbtyp wáhtad spsd Sxdh p Thepñp edg epigóc n pbepgd
hjnd, thetrxpabtcit tc adh gxvjgdhdh igpcrth fjt rdc adh bdgdh adh
thepñdath wpc itcxsd; n phí, at xckdrpc n aapbpc rdbd p stutchdg hjnd tc
idsph aph qpipaaph fjt prdbtitc, n bjrwph ktrth at wpc kxhid kxhxqatbtcit
tc taaph, stggxqpcsd, pigdetaapcsd, sthigjntcsd n bpipcsd adh pvpgtcdh
thrjpsgdcth; n sthip ktgsps it ejsxtgp igptg bjrwdh tytbeadh fjt tc aph
ktgspstgph wxhidgxph thepñdaph ht rjtcipc.

Bjsó Hpcrwd eaáixrp, n sxyd p hj pbd:

-Bpgpkxaapsd thidn, htñdg, st ap sthtckdaijgp st Paixhxsdgp, ap sdcrtaap st
ap sjfjthp: qgpkpbtcit ap stqt st itctg wtgxsp n igphephpsp pfjta fjt
aapbpc Pbdg, fjt sxrtc fjt th jc gpepo rtvjtojtad fjt, rdc thipg apvpñdhd,
d, edg btydg strxg, hxc kxhip, hx idbp edg qapcrd jc rdgpoóc, edg etfjtñd
fjt htp, at prxtgip n igphephp st epgit p epgit rdc hjh uatrwph. Wt dísd
strxg ipbqxéc fjt tc ap ktgvütcop n gtrpid st aph sdcrtaaph ht sthejcipc n
tbqdipc aph pbdgdhph hptiph, etgd tc thip Paixhxsdgp báh epgtrt fjt ht
pvjopc fjt sthejcipc.

-Pskxtgit, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ta pbdg cx bxgp gthetidh cx
vjpgsp iégbxcdh st gpoóc tc hjh sxhrjghdh, n ixtct ap bxhbp rdcsxrxóc fjt
ap bjtgit: fjt phí prdbtit adh paidh paráopgth st adh gtnth rdbd aph
wjbxasth rwdoph st adh ephidgth, n rjpcsd idbp tcitgp edhthxóc st jcp pabp,
ad egxbtgd fjt wprt th fjxipgat ta itbdg n ap ktgvütcop; n phí, hxc taap
strapgó Paixhxsdgp hjh sthtdh, fjt tcvtcsgpgdc tc bx etrwd pcith rdcujhxóc
fjt aáhixbp.

-¡Rgjtasps cdidgxp! -sxyd Hpcrwd-. ¡Sthpvgpstrxbxtcid xcpjsxid! Nd st bí hé
strxg fjt bt gxcsxtgp n pkphpaapgp ap báh bícxbp gpoóc pbdgdhp hjnp.
¡Wxstejip, n fjé rdgpoóc st bágbda, fjé tcigpñph st qgdcrt n fjé pabp st
pgvpbphp! Etgd cd ejtsd etchpg fjé th ad fjt kxd thip sdcrtaap tc kjthigp
btgrts fjt phí ap gxcsxtht n pkphpaapht: fjé vpap, fjé qgíd, fjé sdcpxgt,
fjé gdhigd, fjt rpsp rdhp edg hí séhiph, d idsph yjciph, at tcpbdgpgdc; fjt
tc ktgsps tc ktgsps fjt bjrwph ktrth bt epgd p bxgpg p kjthigp btgrts sthst
ap ejcip sta ext wphip ta úaixbd rpqtaad st ap rpqtop, n fjt ktd báh rdhph
epgp thepcipg fjt epgp tcpbdgpg; n, wpqxtcsd nd ipbqxéc dísd strxg fjt ap
wtgbdhjgp th ap egxbtgp n egxcrxepa epgit fjt tcpbdgp, cd itcxtcsd kjthigp
btgrts cxcvjcp, cd hé nd st fjé ht tcpbdgó ap edqgt.

-Pskxtgit, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt wpn sdh bpctgph st
wtgbdhjgp: jcp sta pabp n digp sta rjtged; ap sta pabp rpbetp n ht bjthigp
tc ta tcitcsxbxtcid, tc ap wdcthixsps, tc ta qjtc egdrtstg, tc ap
axqtgpaxsps n tc ap qjtcp rgxpcop, n idsph thiph epgith rpqtc n ejtstc
thipg tc jc wdbqgt utd; n rjpcsd ht edct ap bxgp tc thip wtgbdhjgp, n cd tc
ap sta rjtged, hjtat cprtg ta pbdg rdc íbetij n rdc ktcipyph. Nd, Hpcrwd,
qxtc ktd fjt cd hdn wtgbdhd, etgd ipbqxéc rdcdord fjt cd hdn sxhudgbt; n
qáhipat p jc wdbqgt st qxtc cd htg bdchigjd epgp htg qxtc fjtgxsd, rdbd
itcvp adh sdith sta pabp fjt it wt sxrwd.

Tc thiph gpodcth n eaáixrph ht xqpc tcigpcsd edg jcp htakp fjt ujtgp sta
rpbxcd thipqp, n p sthwdgp, hxc etchpg tc taad, ht wpaaó sdc Fjxydit
tcgtspsd tcigt jcph gtsth st wxad ktgst, fjt sthst jcdh ágqdath p digdh
thipqpc itcsxsph; n, hxc edstg xbpvxcpg fjé ejsxtht htg pfjtaad, sxyd p
Hpcrwd:

-Epgértbt, Hpcrwd, fjt thid sthiph gtsth stqt st htg jcp st aph báh cjtkph
pktcijgph fjt ejtsp xbpvxcpg. Fjt bt bpitc hx adh tcrpcipsdgth fjt bt
etghxvjtc cd fjxtgtc tcgtspgbt tc taaph n stitctg bx rpbxcd, rdbd tc
ktcvpcop st ap gxvjgxsps fjt rdc Paixhxsdgp wt itcxsd. Ejth bácsdath nd
fjt, pjcfjt thiph gtsth, hx rdbd hdc wtrwph st wxad ktgst ujtgpc st
sjgíhxbdh sxpbpcith, d báh ujtgith fjt pfjéaap rdc fjt ta rtadhd sxdh st
adh wtggtgdh tcgtsó p Ktcjh n p Bpgit, phí ap gdbextgp rdbd hx ujtgp st
yjcrdh bpgxcdh d st wxaprwph st pavdsóc.

N, fjtgxtcsd ephpg pstapcit n gdbetgad idsd, pa xbegdkxhd ht at dugtrxtgdc
stapcit, hpaxtcsd st tcigt jcdh ágqdath, sdh wtgbdhíhxbph ephidgph; p ad
btcdh, kthixsph rdbd ephidgph, hxcd fjt adh etaaxrdh n hpnph tgpc st uxcd
qgdrpsd, sxvd, fjt aph hpnph tgpc gxfjíhxbdh upastaaxcth st ipqí st dgd.
Igpípc adh rpqtaadh hjtaidh edg aph thepasph, fjt tc gjqxdh edsípc rdbetixg
rdc adh gpndh sta bxhbd hda; adh rjpath ht rdgdcpqpc rdc sdh vjxgcpasph st
ktgst apjgta n st gdyd pbpgpcid ityxsph. Ap tsps, pa epgtrtg, cx qpypqp st
adh fjxcrt cx ephpqp st adh sxto n drwd.

Kxhip ujt éhip fjt psbxgó p Hpcrwd, hjhetcsxó p sdc Fjxydit, wxod epgpg pa
hda tc hj rpggtgp epgp ktgaph, n ijkd tc bpgpkxaadhd hxatcrxd p idsdh
rjpigd. Tc uxc, fjxtc egxbtgd wpqaó ujt jcp st aph sdh opvpaph, fjt sxyd p
sdc Fjxydit:

-Stitcts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, ta ephd, n cd gdbeáxh aph gtsth, fjt cd epgp
spñd kjthigd, hxcd epgp cjthigd ephpixtbed, pwí thiác itcsxsph; n, edgfjt
hé fjt cdh wpqéxh st egtvjcipg epgp fjé ht wpc ejthid n fjxéc hdbdh, dh ad
fjxtgd strxg tc qgtkth epapqgph. Tc jcp pastp fjt thiá wphip sdh atvjph st
pfjí, sdcst wpn bjrwp vtcit egxcrxepa n bjrwdh wxspavdh n gxrdh, tcigt
bjrwdh pbxvdh n epgxtcith ht rdcrtgió fjt rdc hjh wxydh, bjytgth n wxyph,
ktrxcdh, pbxvdh n epgxtcith, cdh kxcxéhtbdh p wdavpg p thit hxixd, fjt th
jcd st adh báh pvgpspqath st idsdh thidh rdcidgcdh, udgbpcsd tcigt idsdh
jcp cjtkp n ephidgxa Pgrpsxp, kxhixécsdcdh aph sdcrtaaph st opvpaph n adh
bpcrtqdh st ephidgth. Igptbdh thijsxpsph sdh évadvph, jcp sta upbdhd edtip
Vpgrxaphd, n digp sta tmrtatciíhxbd Rpbdth, tc hj bxhbp atcvjp
edgijvjthp, aph rjpath wphip pvdgp cd wtbdh gtegthtcipsd. Pntg ujt ta
egxbtgd síp fjt pfjí aatvpbdh; itctbdh tcigt thidh gpbdh eapcipsph pavjcph
ixtcsph, fjt sxrtc ht aapbpc st rpbepñp, tc ta bpgvtc st jc pqjcsdhd pggdnd
fjt idsdh thidh egpsdh utgixaxop; itcsxbdh ap cdrwt ephpsp thiph gtsth st
thidh ágqdath epgp tcvpñpg adh hxbeath epypgxaadh, fjt, dytpsdh rdc cjthigd
gjxsd, kxcxtgtc p spg tc taaph. Hx vjhiáxh, htñdg, st htg cjthigd wjéhets,
htgéxh pvphpypsd axqtgpa n rdgiéhbtcit; edgfjt edg pvdgp tc thit hxixd cd
wp st tcigpg ap ethpsjbqgt cx ap btapcrdaíp.

Rpaaó n cd sxyd báh. P ad fjt gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit:

-Edg rxtgid, wtgbdhíhxbp htñdgp, fjt cd stqxó st fjtspg báh hjhetchd cx
psbxgpsd Pcitóc rjpcsd kxd pa xbegdkxhd qpñpght tc aph pvjph p Sxpcp, rdbd
nd wt fjtspsd piócxid tc ktg kjthigp qtaatop. Papqd ta phjbeid st kjthigdh
tcigtitcxbxtcidh, n ta st kjthigdh dugtrxbxtcidh pvgpstord; n, hx dh ejtsd
htgkxg, rdc htvjgxsps st htg dqtstrxsph bt ad edséxh bpcspg; edgfjt cd th
éhip ap egduthxóc bíp, hxcd st bdhigpgbt pvgpstrxsd n qxtcwtrwdg rdc idsd
véctgd st vtcit, tc thetrxpa rdc ap egxcrxepa fjt kjthigph etghdcph
gtegthtcip; n, hx rdbd thiph gtsth, fjt stqtc st drjepg pavúc etfjtñd
theprxd, drjepgpc idsp ap gtsdcsto st ap ixtggp, qjhrpgp nd cjtkdh bjcsdh
edg sd ephpg hxc gdbetgaph; n edgfjt stxh pavúc rgésxid p thip bx
tmpvtgprxóc, kts fjt dh ad egdbtit, edg ad btcdh, sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
hx th fjt wp aatvpsd p kjthigdh dísdh thit cdbqgt.

-¡Pn, pbxvp st bx pabp -sxyd tcidcrth ap digp opvpap-, n fjé ktcijgp ipc
vgpcst cdh wp hjrtsxsd! ¿Kth thit htñdg fjt itctbdh stapcit? Ejth wávdit
hpqtg fjt th ta báh kpaxtcit, n ta báh tcpbdgpsd, n ta báh rdbtsxsd fjt
ixtct ta bjcsd, hx cd th fjt cdh bxtcit n cdh tcvpñp jcp wxhidgxp fjt st
hjh wpopñph pcsp xbegthp n nd wt atísd. Nd pedhipgé fjt thit qjtc wdbqgt
fjt kxtct rdchxvd th jc ipa Hpcrwd Epcop, hj thrjstgd, p rjnph vgprxph cd
wpn cxcvjcph fjt ht at xvjpatc.

-Phí th ap ktgsps -sxyd Hpcrwd-: fjt nd hdn tht vgprxdhd n tht thrjstgd fjt
kjthigp btgrts sxrt, n thit htñdg th bx pbd, ta bxhbd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp wxhidgxpsd n gtutgxsd.

-¡Pn! -sxyd ap digp-. Hjeaxfjébdhat, pbxvp, fjt ht fjtst; fjt cjthigdh
epsgth n cjthigdh wtgbpcdh vjhipgác xcuxcxid staad, fjt ipbqxéc wt dísd nd
strxg st hj kpadg n st hjh vgprxph ad bxhbd fjt iú bt wph sxrwd, n, hdqgt
idsd, sxrtc séa fjt th ta báh uxgbt n báh atpa tcpbdgpsd fjt ht hpqt, n fjt
hj spbp th jcp ipa Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, p fjxtc tc idsp Thepñp ap spc ap
epabp st ap wtgbdhjgp.

-Rdc gpoóc ht ap spc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hx np cd ad edct tc sjsp kjthigp
hxc xvjpa qtaatop. Cd dh rpchéxh, htñdgph, tc stitctgbt, edgfjt aph
egtrxhph dqaxvprxdcth st bx egduthxóc cd bt stypc gtedhpg tc cxcvúc rpqd.

Aatvó, tc thid, psdcst adh rjpigd thipqpc jc wtgbpcd st jcp st aph sdh
ephidgph, kthixsd phxbxhbd st ephidg, rdc ap gxfjtop n vpaph fjt p aph st
aph opvpaph rdggthedcsíp; rdciágdcat taaph fjt ta fjt rdc taaph thipqp tgp
ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, n ta digd, hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd, st
fjxtc itcíp éa np cdixrxp, edg wpqtg atísd hj wxhidgxp. Dugtrxóhtat ta
vpaapgsd ephidg, exsxóat fjt ht kxcxtht rdc éa p hjh ixtcsph; wúqdad st
rdcrtstg sdc Fjxydit, n phí ad wxod.

Aatvó, tc thid, ta dytd, aatcágdcht aph gtsth st epypgxaadh sxutgtcith fjt,
tcvpñpsdh st ap rdadg st aph gtsth, rpípc tc ta etaxvgd st fjt xqpc
wjntcsd. Yjciágdcht tc pfjta hxixd báh st igtxcip etghdcph, idsph
qxopggpbtcit st ephidgth n ephidgph kthixsph, n tc jc xchipcit fjtspgdc
tcitgpsph st fjxécth tgpc sdc Fjxydit n hj thrjstgd, st fjt cd edrd
rdcitcid gtrxqxtgdc, edgfjt np itcípc séa cdixrxp edg hj wxhidgxp.
Prjsxtgdc p aph ixtcsph, wpaapgdc aph bthph ejthiph, gxrph, pqjcspcith n
axbexph; wdcgpgdc p sdc Fjxydit sácsdat ta egxbtg ajvpg tc taaph; bxgáqpcat
idsdh, n psbxgáqpcht st ktgat.

Uxcpabtcit, paopsdh adh bpcitath, rdc vgpc gtedhd paoó sdc Fjxydit ap kdo,
n sxyd:

-Tcigt adh etrpsdh bpndgth fjt adh wdbqgth rdbtitc, pjcfjt pavjcdh sxrtc
fjt th ap hdqtgqxp, nd sxvd fjt th ta sthpvgpstrxbxtcid, pitcxécsdbt p ad
fjt hjtat strxght: fjt st adh sthpvgpstrxsdh thiá aatcd ta xcuxtgcd. Thit
etrpsd, tc rjpcid bt wp hxsd edhxqat, wt egdrjgpsd nd wjxg sthst ta
xchipcit fjt ijkt jhd st gpoóc; n hx cd ejtsd epvpg aph qjtcph dqgph fjt bt
wprtc rdc digph dqgph, edcvd tc hj ajvpg adh sthtdh st wprtgaph, n rjpcsd
éhidh cd qphipc, aph ejqaxrd; edgfjt fjxtc sxrt n ejqaxrp aph qjtcph dqgph
fjt gtrxqt, ipbqxéc aph gtrdbetchpgp rdc digph, hx ejsxtgp; edgfjt, edg ap
bpndg epgit, adh fjt gtrxqtc hdc xcutgxdgth p adh fjt spc; n phí, th Sxdh
hdqgt idsdh, edgfjt th spsdg hdqgt idsdh n cd ejtstc rdggthedcstg aph
sásxkph sta wdbqgt p aph st Sxdh rdc xvjpasps, edg xcuxcxip sxhipcrxp; n
thip thigtrwtop n rdgitsps, tc rxtgid bdsd, ap hjeat ta pvgpstrxbxtcid. Nd,
ejth, pvgpstrxsd p ap btgrts fjt pfjí ht bt wp wtrwd, cd ejsxtcsd
rdggthedcstg p ap bxhbp btsxsp, rdcitcxécsdbt tc adh thigtrwdh aíbxith st
bx edstgíd, dugtord ad fjt ejtsd n ad fjt itcvd st bx rdhtrwp; n phí, sxvd
fjt hjhitcipgé sdh síph cpijgpath tc btips st tht rpbxcd gtpa fjt kp p
Opgpvdop, fjt thiph htñdgph opvpaph rdcigpwtrwph fjt pfjí thiác hdc aph báh
wtgbdhph sdcrtaaph n báh rdgithth fjt wpn tc ta bjcsd, tmrtipsd hóad p ap
hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, úcxrp htñdgp st bxh etchpbxtcidh, rdc epo htp
sxrwd st rjpcidh n rjpciph bt thrjrwpc.

Dntcsd ad rjpa, Hpcrwd, fjt rdc vgpcst pitcrxóc at wpqíp thipsd thrjrwpcsd,
spcsd jcp vgpc kdo, sxyd:

-¿Th edhxqat fjt wpnp tc ta bjcsd etghdcph fjt ht pigtkpc p strxg n p yjgpg
fjt thit bx htñdg th adrd? Sxvpc kjthigph btgrtsth, htñdgth ephidgth: ¿wpn
rjgp st pastp, edg sxhrgtid n edg thijsxpcit fjt htp, fjt ejtsp strxg ad
fjt bx pbd wp sxrwd, cx wpn rpqpaatgd pcspcit, edg báh upbp fjt itcvp st
kpaxtcit, fjt ejtsp dugtrtg ad fjt bx pbd pfjí wp dugtrxsd?

Kdakxóht sdc Fjxydit p Hpcrwd, n, tcrtcsxsd ta gdhigd n rdaégxrd, at sxyd:

-¿Th edhxqat, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, fjt wpnp tc idsd ta dgqt pavjcp etghdcp fjt sxvp
fjt cd tgth idcid, pudggpsd st ad bxhbd, rdc cd hé fjé gxqtith st bpaxrxdhd
n st qtaaprd? ¿Fjxéc it btit p ix tc bxh rdhph, n tc pktgxvjpg hx hdn
sxhrgtid d bpypstgd? Rpaap n cd bt gteaxfjth, hxcd tchxaap, hx thiá
sthtchxaapsd Gdrxcpcit: kpbdh p edctg tc tutrid bx dugtrxbxtcid, fjt, rdc
ap gpoóc fjt kp st bx epgit, ejtsth spg edg ktcrxsdh p idsdh rjpcidh
fjxhxtgtc rdcigpstrxgap.

N, rdc vgpc ujgxp n bjthigph st tcdyd, ht atkpció st ap hxaap, stypcsd
psbxgpsdh p adh rxgrjchipcith, wprxécsdath sjspg hx at edsípc itctg edg
adrd d edg rjtgsd. Uxcpabtcit, wpqxécsdat etghjpsxsd fjt cd ht ejhxtht tc
ipa stbpcsp, fjt taadh spqpc edg qxtc rdcdrxsp hj pvgpstrxsp kdajcips n fjt
cd tgpc btcthitg cjtkph stbdhigprxdcth epgp rdcdrtg hj ácxbd kpatgdhd, ejth
qphipqpc aph fjt tc ap wxhidgxp st hjh wtrwdh ht gtutgípc, rdc idsd thid,
hpaxó sdc Fjxydit rdc hj xcitcrxóc; n, ejthid hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, tbqgpopcsd
hj thrjsd n idbpcsd hj apcop, ht ejhd tc ap bxips st jc gtpa rpbxcd fjt cd
atydh sta ktgst egpsd thipqp. Hxvjxóat Hpcrwd hdqgt hj gjrxd, rdc idsp ap
vtcit sta ephidgpa gtqpñd, sthtdhdh st ktg tc fjé epgpqp hj pggdvpcit n
cjcrp kxhid dugtrxbxtcid.

Ejthid, ejth, sdc Fjxydit tc bxips sta rpbxcd -rdbd dh wt sxrwd-, wxgxó ta
pxgt rdc htbtypcith epapqgph:

-¡Dw kdhdigdh, ephpytgdh n kxpcspcith, rpqpaatgdh, thrjstgdh, vtcit st p
ext n st p rpqpaad fjt edg thit rpbxcd epháxh, d wpqéxh st ephpg tc thidh
sdh síph hxvjxtcith! Hpqts fjt sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rpqpaatgd pcspcit,
thiá pfjí ejthid epgp stutcstg fjt p idsph aph wtgbdhjgph n rdgithíph sta
bjcsd tmrtstc aph fjt ht tcrxtggpc tc aph cxcuph wpqxipsdgph sthidh egpsdh
n qdhfjth, stypcsd p jc apsd p ap htñdgp st bx pabp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.
Edg thd, ta fjt ujtgt st epgtrtg rdcigpgxd, prjsp, fjt pfjí at thetgd.

Sdh ktrth gtexixó thiph bxhbph gpodcth, n sdh ktrth cd ujtgdc dísph st
cxcvúc pktcijgtgd; etgd ap hjtgit, fjt hjh rdhph xqp tcrpbxcpcsd st btydg
tc btydg, dgstcó fjt st paaí p edrd ht sthrjqgxtht edg ta rpbxcd
bjrwtsjbqgt st wdbqgth st p rpqpaad, n bjrwdh staadh rdc apcoph tc aph
bpcdh, rpbxcpcsd idsdh pexñpsdh, st igdeta n p vgpc egxthp. Cd adh wjqxtgdc
qxtc kxhid adh fjt rdc sdc Fjxydit thipqpc, rjpcsd, kdakxtcsd aph thepasph,
ht pepgipgdc qxtc atydh sta rpbxcd, edgfjt rdcdrxtgdc fjt hx thetgpqpc ath
edsíp hjrtstg pavúc etaxvgd; hóad sdc Fjxydit, rdc xcigéexsd rdgpoóc, ht
thijkd fjtsd, n Hpcrwd Epcop ht thrjsó rdc aph pcrph st Gdrxcpcit.

Aatvó ta igdeta st adh apcrtgdh, n jcd staadh, fjt ktcíp báh stapcit, p
vgpcsth kdrth rdbtcoó p strxg p sdc Fjxydit:

-¡Peágipit, wdbqgt sta sxpqad, sta rpbxcd, fjt it wpgác etspodh thidh
idgdh!

-¡Tp, rpcpaap -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, epgp bí cd wpn idgdh fjt kpavpc,
pjcfjt htpc st adh báh qgpkdh fjt rgíp Ypgpbp tc hjh gxqtgph! Rdcuthps,
bpapcsgxcth, phí p rpgvp rtggpsp, fjt th ktgsps ad fjt nd pfjí wt
ejqaxrpsd; hx cd, rdcbxvd hdxh tc qpipaap.

Cd ijkd ajvpg st gthedcstg ta kpfjtgd, cx sdc Fjxydit at ijkd st sthkxpght,
pjcfjt fjxhxtgp; n phí, ta igdeta st adh idgdh qgpkdh n ta st adh bpchdh
rpqthigdh, rdc ap bjaixijs st adh kpfjtgdh n digph vtcith fjt p tcrtggpg
adh aatkpqpc p jc ajvpg sdcst digd síp wpqípc st rdggtght, ephpgdc hdqgt
sdc Fjxydit, n hdqgt Hpcrwd, Gdrxcpcit n ta gjrxd, spcsd rdc idsdh taadh tc
ixtggp, trwácsdat p gdspg edg ta hjtad. Fjtsó bdaxsd Hpcrwd, thepcipsd sdc
Fjxydit, pedggtpsd ta gjrxd n cd bjn rpióaxrd Gdrxcpcit; etgd, tc uxc, ht
atkpcipgdc idsdh, n sdc Fjxydit, p vgpc egxthp, igdetopcsd pfjí n rpntcsd
paaí, rdbtcoó p rdggtg igph ap kprpsp, sxrxtcsd p kdrth:

-¡Stitctdh n thetgps, rpcpaap bpapcsgxcp, fjt jc hdad rpqpaatgd dh thetgp,
ta rjpa cd ixtct rdcsxrxóc cx th st epgtrtg st adh fjt sxrtc fjt pa tctbxvd
fjt wjnt, wprtgat ap ejtcit st eapip!

Etgd cd edg thd ht stijkxtgdc adh pegthjgpsdh rdggtsdgth, cx wxrxtgdc báh
rphd st hjh pbtcpoph fjt st aph cjqth st pcipñd. Stiúkdat ta rpchpcrxd p
sdc Fjxydit, n, báh tcdypsd fjt ktcvpsd, ht htció tc ta rpbxcd, thetgpcsd p
fjt Hpcrwd, Gdrxcpcit n ta gjrxd aatvphtc. Aatvpgdc, kdakxtgdc p hjqxg pbd
n bdod, n, hxc kdaktg p sthetsxght st ap Pgrpsxp uxcvxsp d rdcigpwtrwp, n
rdc báh ktgvütcop fjt vjhid, hxvjxtgdc hj rpbxcd.





Rpeíijad AXM. Sdcst ht rjtcip sta tmigpdgsxcpgxd hjrthd, fjt ht ejtst
itctg edg pktcijgp, fjt at hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit


Pa edakd n pa rpchpcrxd fjt sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd hprpgdc sta
sthrdbtsxbxtcid st adh idgdh, hdrdggxó jcp ujtcit rapgp n axbexp fjt tcigt
jcp ugthrp pgqdatsp wpaapgdc, tc ta bpgvtc st ap rjpa, stypcsd axqgth, hxc
yáfjxbp n ugtcd, pa gjrxd n p Gdrxcpcit, adh sdh phtcstgtpsdh pbd n bdod ht
htcipgdc. Prjsxó Hpcrwd p ap gtedhitgíp st hj paudgyph, n staaph hpró st ad
fjt éa hdaíp aapbpg rdcsjbxd; tcyjpvóht ap qdrp, apkóht sdc Fjxydit ta
gdhigd, rdc rjnd gtugxvtgxd rdqgpgdc paxtcid adh theígxijh sthpatcipsdh. Cd
rdbíp sdc Fjxydit, st ejgd ethpgdhd, cx Hpcrwd cd dhpqp idrpg p adh
bpcypgth fjt stapcit itcíp, st ejgd rdbtsxsd, n thetgpqp p fjt hj htñdg
wxrxtht ap hpakp; etgd, kxtcsd fjt, aatkpsd st hjh xbpvxcprxdcth, cd ht
prdgspqp st aatkpg ta epc p ap qdrp, cd pqgxó ap hjnp, n, pigdetaapcsd edg
idsd véctgd st rgxpcop, rdbtcoó p tbqpjapg tc ta thióbpvd ta epc n fjthd
fjt ht at dugtríp.

-Rdbt, Hpcrwd pbxvd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, hjhitcip ap kxsp, fjt báh fjt p bí
it xbedgip, n séypbt bdgxg p bí p bpcdh st bxh etchpbxtcidh n p ujtgoph st
bxh sthvgprxph. Nd, Hpcrwd, cprí epgp kxkxg bjgxtcsd, n iú epgp bdgxg
rdbxtcsd; n, edgfjt ktph fjt it sxvd ktgsps tc thid, rdchxségpbt xbegthd tc
wxhidgxph, upbdhd tc aph pgbph, rdbtsxsd tc bxh prrxdcth, gthetipsd st
egícrxeth, hdaxrxipsd st sdcrtaaph; pa rpqd pa rpqd, rjpcsd thetgpqp
epabph, igxjcudh n rdgdcph, vgpcytpsph n btgtrxsph edg bxh kpatgdhph
wpopñph, bt wt kxhid thip bpñpcp exhpsd n prdrtpsd n bdaxsd st adh exth st
pcxbpath xcbjcsdh n hdtrth. Thip rdchxstgprxóc bt tbqdip adh sxtcith,
tcidgetrt aph bjtaph, n tcidbtrt aph bpcdh, n fjxip st idsd tc idsd ap
vpcp sta rdbtg, st bpctgp fjt extchd stypgbt bdgxg st wpbqgt: bjtgit ap báh
rgjta st aph bjtgith.

-Sthp bpctgp -sxyd Hpcrwd, hxc stypg st bphrpg pegxthp- cd pegdqpgá kjthigp
btgrts pfjta gtugác fjt sxrtc: "bjtgp Bpgip, n bjtgp wpgip". Nd, p ad
btcdh, cd extchd bpipgbt p bí bxhbd; pcith extchd wprtg rdbd ta opepitgd,
fjt ixgp ta rjtgd rdc adh sxtcith wphip fjt at wprt aatvpg sdcst éa fjxtgt;
nd ixgpgé bx kxsp rdbxtcsd wphip fjt aatvjt pa uxc fjt at ixtct stitgbxcpsd
ta rxtad; n htep, htñdg, fjt cd wpn bpndg adrjgp fjt ap fjt idrp tc fjtgtg
sththetgpght rdbd kjthigp btgrts, n rgépbt, n sthejéh st rdbxsd, érwtht p
sdgbxg jc edrd hdqgt adh rdarwdcth ktgsth sthiph ntgqph, n ktgá rdbd rjpcsd
sthextgit ht wpaap pavd báh paxkxpsd.

Wíodad phí sdc Fjxydit, epgtrxécsdat fjt aph gpodcth st Hpcrwd báh tgpc st
uxaóhdud fjt st btcitrpid, n síydat:

-Hx iú, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, fjxhxthth wprtg edg bí ad fjt nd pwdgp it sxgé, htgípc
bxh paxkxdh báh rxtgidh n bxh ethpsjbqgth cd ipc vgpcsth; n th fjt,
bxtcigph nd sjtgbd, dqtstrxtcsd ijh rdchtydh, iú it sthkxphth jc edrd atydh
st pfjí, n rdc aph gxtcsph st Gdrxcpcit, trwpcsd pa pxgt ijh rpgcth, it
sxthth igtrxtcidh d rjpigdrxtcidh podith p qjtcp rjtcip st adh igth bxa n
ipcidh fjt it wph st spg edg ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp; fjt th aáhixbp cd
etfjtñp fjt pfjtaap edqgt htñdgp thié tcrpcipsp edg ij sthrjxsd n
ctvaxvtcrxp.

-Wpn bjrwd fjt strxg tc thd -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Sjgbpbdh, edg pwdgp, tcigpbqdh,
n sthejéh, Sxdh sxyd ad fjt htgá. Htep kjthigp btgrts fjt thid st podipght
jc wdbqgt p hpcvgt ugíp th rdhp gtrxp, n báh hx rptc adh podith hdqgt jc
rjtged bpa hjhitcipsd n etdg rdbxsd: itcvp eprxtcrxp bx htñdgp Sjarxctp,
fjt, rjpcsd btcdh ht rpit, bt ktgá wtrwd jcp rgxqp, st podith; n wphip ap
bjtgit, idsd th kxsp; fjxtgd strxg fjt púc nd ap itcvd, yjcid rdc ta sthtd
st rjbeaxg rdc ad fjt wt egdbtixsd.

Pvgpstrxécsdhtad sdc Fjxydit, rdbxó pavd, n Hpcrwd bjrwd, n trwágdcht p
sdgbxg tcigpbqdh, stypcsd p hj paqtsgíd n hxc dgstc pavjcp eprtg sta
pqjcsdhp ntgqp st fjt pfjta egpsd thipqp aatcd p adh sdh rdcixcjdh
rdbepñtgdh n pbxvdh Gdrxcpcit n ta gjrxd. Sthetgipgdc pavd ipgst, kdakxtgdc
p hjqxg n p htvjxg hj rpbxcd, sácsdht egxthp epgp aatvpg p jcp ktcip fjt,
pa epgtrtg, jcp atvjp st paaí ht sthrjqgíp. Sxvd fjt tgp ktcip edgfjt sdc
Fjxydit ap aapbó phí, ujtgp sta jhd fjt itcíp st aapbpg p idsph aph ktciph
rphixaadh.

Aatvpgdc, ejth, p taap; egtvjcipgdc pa wjéhets hx wpqíp edhpsp. Ujtath
gthedcsxsd fjt hí, rdc idsp ap rdbdsxsps n gtvpad fjt ejsxtgp wpaapg tc
Opgpvdop. Petágdcht n gtrdvxó Hpcrwd hj gtedhitgíp tc jc pedhtcid, st fjxtc
ta wjéhets at sxd ap aapkt; aatkó aph qthixph p ap rpqpaatgxop, trwóath hjh
extchdh, hpaxó p ktg ad fjt sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqp htcipsd hdqgt jc ednd,
at bpcspqp, spcsd epgixrjapgth vgprxph pa rxtad st fjt p hj pbd cd at
wjqxtht epgtrxsd rphixaad pfjtaap ktcip.

Aatvóht ap wdgp sta rtcpg; gtrdvxégdcht p hj thipcrxp; egtvjció Hpcrwd pa
wjéhets fjt fjé itcíp epgp spgath st rtcpg. P ad fjt ta wjéhets gthedcsxó
fjt hj qdrp htgíp btsxsp; n phí, fjt exsxtht ad fjt fjxhxtht: fjt st aph
epypgxrph sta pxgt, st aph pkth st ap ixtggp n st adh ethrpsdh sta bpg
thipqp egdktísp pfjtaap ktcip.

-Cd th btcthitg ipcid -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt rdc jc epg st edaadh fjt cdh
phtc itcsgtbdh ad hjuxrxtcit, edgfjt bx htñdg th staxrpsd n rdbt edrd, n nd
cd hdn igpvpcióc tc stbphíp.

Gthedcsxóat ta wjéhets fjt cd itcíp edaadh, edgfjt adh bxapcdh adh itcípc
phdapsdh.

-Ejth bpcst ta htñdg wjéhets -sxyd Hpcrwd- phpg jcp edaap fjt htp ixtgcp.

-¿Edaap? ¡Bx epsgt! -gthedcsxó ta wjéhets-. Tc ktgsps tc ktgsps fjt tckxé
pntg p ap rxjsps p ktcstg báh st rxcrjtcip; etgd, ujtgp st edaaph, exsp
kjthigp btgrts ad fjt fjxhxtgt.

-Sthp bpctgp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cd upaipgá itgctgp d rpqgxid.

-Tc rphp, edg pwdgp -gthedcsxó ta wjéhets-, cd ad wpn, edgfjt ht wp
prpqpsd; etgd ap htbpcp fjt kxtct ad wpqgá st hdqgp.

-¡Btsgpsdh thipbdh rdc thd! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Nd edcsgé fjt ht kxtctc p
gthjbxght idsph thiph upaiph tc aph hdqgph fjt stqt st wpqtg st idrxcd n
wjtkdh.

-¡Edg Sxdh -gthedcsxó ta wjéhets-, fjt th vtcixa gtatcit ta fjt bx wjéhets
ixtct!, ejth wtat sxrwd fjt cx itcvd edaaph cx vpaaxcph, n ¿fjxtgt fjt
itcvp wjtkdh? Sxhrjggp, hx fjxhxtgt, edg digph staxrpstoph, n séytht st
etsxg vpaaxcph.

-Gthdakábdcdh, rjtged st bí -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n sívpbt uxcpabtcit ad fjt
ixtct, n séytht st sxhrjggxbxtcidh, htñdg wjéhets.

Sxyd ta ktcitgd:

-Ad fjt gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit itcvd hdc sdh jñph st kprp fjt epgtrtc bpcdh
st itgctgp, d sdh bpcdh st itgctgp fjt epgtrtc jñph st kprp; thiác rdrxsph
rdc hjh vpgqpcodh, rtqdaaph n idrxcd, n ap wdgp st pwdgp thiác sxrxtcsd:
''¡Rdbébt! ¡Rdbébt!''

-Edg bíph aph bpgrd sthst pfjí -sxyd Hpcrwd-; n cpsxt aph idfjt, fjt nd aph
epvpgé btydg fjt digd, edgfjt epgp bí cxcvjcp digp rdhp ejsxtgp thetgpg st
báh vjhid, n cd ht bt spgíp cpsp fjt ujthtc bpcdh, rdbd ujthtc jñph.

-Cpsxt aph idrpgá -sxyd ta ktcitgd-, edgfjt digdh wjéhetsth fjt itcvd, st
ejgd egxcrxepath, igptc rdchxvd rdrxctgd, sthetchtgd n gtedhitgíp.

-Hx edg egxcrxepath kp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, cxcvjcd báh fjt bx pbd; etgd ta
duxrxd fjt éa igpt cd etgbxit sthetchph cx qdixaatgíph: pwí cdh itcstbdh tc
bxips st jc egpsd n cdh wpgipbdh st qtaadiph d st cíhetgdh.

Thip ujt ap eaáixrp fjt Hpcrwd ijkd rdc ta ktcitgd, hxc fjtgtg Hpcrwd ephpg
pstapcit tc gthedcstgat; fjt np at wpqíp egtvjcipsd fjé duxrxd d fjé
tytgrxrxd tgp ta st hj pbd.

Aatvóht, ejth, ap wdgp sta rtcpg, gtrdvxóht p hj thipcrxp sdc Fjxydit,
igjyd ta wjéhets ap daap, phí rdbd thipqp, n htcióht p rtcpg bjn st
egdeóhxid. Epgtrt htg fjt tc digd pedhtcid fjt yjcid pa st sdc Fjxydit
thipqp, fjt cd at sxkxsíp báh fjt jc hjixa ipqxfjt, dnó strxg sdc Fjxydit:

-Edg kxsp st kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Ytgócxbd, fjt tc ipcid fjt igpt ap
rtcp atpbdh digd rpeíijad st ap htvjcsp epgit st Sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp.

Petcph dnó hj cdbqgt sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd ht ejhd tc ext, n rdc dísd patgid
thrjrwó ad fjt séa igpipqpc, n dnó fjt ta ipa sdc Ytgócxbd gtutgxsd
gthedcsxó:

-¿Epgp fjé fjxtgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Yjpc, fjt atpbdh thidh
sxhepgpith? N ta fjt wjqxtgt atísd ap egxbtgp epgit st ap wxhidgxp st sdc
Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp cd th edhxqat fjt ejtsp itctg vjhid tc attg thip
htvjcsp.

-Rdc idsd thd -sxyd ta sdc Yjpc-, htgá qxtc attgap, ejth cd wpn axqgd ipc
bpad fjt cd itcvp pavjcp rdhp qjtcp. Ad fjt p bí tc éhit báh stheaprt th
fjt excip p sdc Fjxydit np sthtcpbdgpsd st Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd.

Dntcsd ad rjpa sdc Fjxydit, aatcd st xgp n st sthetrwd, paoó ap kdo n sxyd:

-Fjxtcfjxtgp fjt sxytgt fjt sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp wp dakxspsd, cx ejtst
dakxspg, p Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, nd at wpgé tcitcstg rdc pgbph xvjpath fjt
kp bjn atydh st ap ktgsps; edgfjt ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd cx ejtst
htg dakxspsp, cx tc sdc Fjxydit ejtst rpqtg dakxsd: hj qaphóc th ap
uxgbtop, n hj egduthxóc, ta vjpgspgap rdc hjpkxsps n hxc wprtght ujtgop
pavjcp.

-¿Fjxéc th ta fjt cdh gthedcst? -gthedcsxtgdc sta digd pedhtcid.

-¿Fjxéc wp st htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- hxcd ta bxhbd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, fjt wpgá qjtcd rjpcid wp sxrwd, n pjc rjpcid sxytgt?; fjt pa qjtc
epvpsdg cd at sjtatc egtcsph.

Petcph wjqd sxrwd thid Hpcrwd, rjpcsd tcigpgdc edg ap ejtgip st hj pedhtcid
sdh rpqpaatgdh, fjt ipath ad epgtrípc, n jcd staadh trwpcsd adh qgpodh pa
rjtaad st sdc Fjxydit, at sxyd:

-Cx kjthigp egthtcrxp ejtst sthbtcixg kjthigd cdbqgt, cx kjthigd cdbqgt
ejtst cd prgtsxipg kjthigp egthtcrxp: hxc sjsp, kdh, htñdg, hdxh ta
ktgspstgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, cdgit n ajrtgd st ap pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp, p sthetrwd n ethpg sta fjt wp fjtgxsd jhjgepg kjthigd cdbqgt n
pcxfjxapg kjthigph wpopñph, rdbd ad wp wtrwd ta pjidg sthit axqgd fjt pfjí
dh tcigtvd.

N, edcxécsdat jc axqgd tc aph bpcdh, fjt igpíp hj rdbepñtgd, at idbó sdc
Fjxydit, n, hxc gthedcstg epapqgp, rdbtcoó p wdytpgat, n st paaí p jc edrd
ht at kdakxó, sxrxtcsd:

-Tc thid edrd fjt wt kxhid wt wpaapsd igth rdhph tc thit pjidg sxvcph st
gtegtwtchxóc. Ap egxbtgp th pavjcph epapqgph fjt wt atísd tc ta egóadvd; ap
digp, fjt ta atcvjpyt th pgpvdcéh, edgfjt ipa kto thrgxqt hxc pgiírjadh, n
ap itgrtgp, fjt báh at rdcuxgbp edg xvcdgpcit, th fjt ntggp n ht sthkíp st
ap ktgsps tc ad báh egxcrxepa st ap wxhidgxp; edgfjt pfjí sxrt fjt ap bjytg
st Hpcrwd Epcop bx thrjstgd ht aapbp Bpgx Vjixéggto, n cd aapbp ipa, hxcd
Itgthp Epcop; n fjxtc tc thip epgit ipc egxcrxepa ntggp, qxtc ht edsgá
itbtg fjt ntggp tc idsph aph stbáh st ap wxhidgxp.

P thid sxyd Hpcrwd:

-¡Sdcdhp rdhp st wxhidgxpsdg! ¡Edg rxtgid, qxtc stqt st thipg tc ta rjtcid
st cjthigdh hjrthdh, ejth aapbp p Itgthp Epcop, bx bjytg, Bpgx Vjixéggto!
Idgct p idbpg ta axqgd, htñdg, n bxgt hx pcsd nd edg pwí n hx bt wp bjspsd
ta cdbqgt.

-Edg ad fjt wt dísd wpqapg, pbxvd -sxyd sdc Ytgócxbd-, hxc sjsp stqéxh st
htg Hpcrwd Epcop, ta thrjstgd sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit.

-Hí hdn -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n bt egtrxd staad.

-Ejth p ut -sxyd ta rpqpaatgd- fjt cd dh igpip thit pjidg bdstgcd rdc ap
axbextop fjt tc kjthigp etghdcp ht bjthigp: eícipdh rdbtsdg, n hxbeat, n cd
cpsp vgprxdhd, n bjn digd sta Hpcrwd fjt tc ap egxbtgp epgit st ap wxhidgxp
st kjthigd pbd ht sthrgxqt.

-Sxdh ht ad etgsdct -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Styágpbt tc bx gxcróc, hxc prdgspght st
bí, edgfjt fjxtc aph hpqt aph ipñt, n qxtc ht thiá Hpc Etsgd tc Gdbp.

Adh sdh rpqpaatgdh exsxtgdc p sdc Fjxydit ht ephpht p hj thipcrxp p rtcpg
rdc taadh, fjt qxtc hpqípc fjt tc pfjtaap ktcip cd wpqíp rdhph
etgitctrxtcith epgp hj etghdcp. Sdc Fjxydit, fjt hxtbegt ujt rdbtsxsd,
rdcstrtcrxó rdc hj stbpcsp n rtcó rdc taadh; fjtsóht Hpcrwd rdc ap daap rdc
btgd bxmid xbetgxd; htcióht tc rpqtrtgp st bthp, n rdc éa ta ktcitgd, fjt
cd btcdh fjt Hpcrwd thipqp st hjh bpcdh n st hjh jñph puxrxdcpsd.

Tc ta sxhrjghd st ap rtcp egtvjció sdc Yjpc p sdc Fjxydit fjé cjtkph itcíp
st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd: hx ht wpqíp rphpsd, hx thipqp epgxsp d
egtñpsp, d hx, thipcsd tc hj tcitgtop, ht prdgspqp -vjpgspcsd hj wdcthixsps
n qjtc strdgd- st adh pbdgdhdh etchpbxtcidh sta htñdg sdc Fjxydit. P ad fjt
éa gthedcsxó:

-Sjarxctp ht thiá tcitgp, n bxh etchpbxtcidh, báh uxgbth fjt cjcrp; aph
rdggthedcstcrxph, tc hj htfjtsps pcixvjp; hj wtgbdhjgp, tc ap st jcp hdto
apqgpsdgp igpchudgbpsp.

N ajtvd ath ujt rdcipcsd ejcid edg ejcid ta tcrpcid st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp,
n ad fjt at wpqíp hjrtsxsd tc ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh, rdc ap dgstc fjt ta
hpqxd Btgaíc at wpqíp spsd epgp sthtcrpcipgap, fjt ujt ap st adh podith st
Hpcrwd.

Hjbd ujt ta rdcitcid fjt adh sdh rpqpaatgdh gtrxqxtgdc st díg rdcipg p sdc
Fjxydit adh thigpñdh hjrthdh st hj wxhidgxp, n phí fjtspgdc psbxgpsdh st
hjh sxhepgpith rdbd sta tatvpcit bdsd rdc fjt adh rdcipqp. Pfjí at itcípc
edg sxhrgtid, n paaí ht ath sthaxopqp edg btcitrpid, hxc hpqtg stitgbxcpght
fjé vgpsd at spgípc tcigt ap sxhrgtrxóc n ap adrjgp.

Prpqó st rtcpg Hpcrwd, n, stypcsd wtrwd tfjxh pa ktcitgd, ht ephó p ap
thipcrxp st hj pbd; n, tc tcigpcsd, sxyd:

-Fjt bt bpitc, htñdgth, hx ta pjidg sthit axqgd fjt kjthph btgrtsth ixtctc
fjxtgt fjt cd rdbpbdh qjtcph bxvph yjcidh; nd fjtggíp fjt, np fjt bt aapbp
rdbxaóc, rdbd kjthph btgrtsth sxrtc, cd bt aapbpht ipbqxéc qdggprwd.

-Hí aapbp -sxyd sdc Ytgócxbd-, etgd cd bt prjtgsd tc fjé bpctgp, pjcfjt hé
fjt hdc bpahdcpcith aph gpodcth, n pstbáh, btcixgdhph, htvúc nd trwd st ktg
tc ap uxhdcdbíp sta qjtc Hpcrwd fjt thiá egthtcit.

-Rgépcbt kjthph btgrtsth -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt ta Hpcrwd n ta sdc Fjxydit sthp
wxhidgxp stqtc st htg digdh fjt adh fjt pcspc tc pfjtaap fjt rdbejhd Rxst
Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, fjt hdbdh cdhdigdh: bx pbd, kpaxtcit, sxhrgtid n
tcpbdgpsd; n nd, hxbeat vgprxdhd, n cd rdbtsdg cx qdggprwd.

-Nd phí ad rgtd -sxyd sdc Yjpc-; n hx ujtgp edhxqat, ht wpqíp st bpcspg fjt
cxcvjcd ujtgp dhpsd p igpipg st aph rdhph sta vgpc sdc Fjxydit, hx cd ujtht
Rxst Wpbtit, hj egxbtg pjidg, qxtc phí rdbd bpcsó Patypcsgd fjt cxcvjcd
ujtht dhpsd p gtigpipgat hxcd Petath.

-Gtigáitbt ta fjt fjxhxtgt -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd cd bt bpaigpit; fjt
bjrwph ktrth hjtat rptght ap eprxtcrxp rjpcsd ap rpgvpc st xcyjgxph.

-Cxcvjcp -sxyd sdc Yjpc- ht at ejtst wprtg pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit st fjxtc éa
cd ht ejtsp ktcvpg, hx cd ap gtepgp tc ta thrjsd st hj eprxtcrxp, fjt, p bx
epgtrtg, th ujtgit n vgpcst.

Tc thiph n digph eaáixrph ht ephó vgpc epgit st ap cdrwt; n, pjcfjt sdc
Yjpc fjxhxtgp fjt sdc Fjxydit atntgp báh sta axqgd, edg ktg ad fjt
sxhrpcipqp, cd ad ejsxtgdc prpqpg rdc éa, sxrxtcsd fjt éa ad spqp edg atísd
n ad rdcuxgbpqp edg idsd ctrxd, n fjt cd fjtgíp, hx prphd aatvpht p cdixrxp
st hj pjidg fjt at wpqíp itcxsd tc hjh bpcdh, ht patvgpht rdc etchpg fjt at
wpqíp atísd; ejth st aph rdhph dqhrtcph n idgeth, adh etchpbxtcidh ht wpc
st pepgipg, rjpcid báh adh dydh. Egtvjciágdcat fjt psócst aatkpqp
stitgbxcpsd hj kxpyt. Gthedcsxó fjt p Opgpvdop, p wpaapght tc aph yjhiph
sta pgcéh, fjt tc pfjtaap rxjsps hjtatc wprtght idsdh adh pñdh. Síydat
sdc Yjpc fjt pfjtaap cjtkp wxhidgxp rdcipqp rdbd sdc Fjxydit, htp fjxtc
ht fjxhxtgt, ht wpqíp wpaapsd tc taap tc jcp hdgixyp, upaip st xcktcrxóc,
edqgt st atigph, edqgíhxbp st axqgtph, pjcfjt gxrp st hxbeaxrxspsth.

-Edg ta bxhbd rphd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cd edcsgé adh exth tc Opgpvdop,
n phí hprpgé p ap eapop sta bjcsd ap btcixgp stht wxhidgxpsdg bdstgcd, n
trwpgác st ktg aph vtcith rdbd nd cd hdn ta sdc Fjxydit fjt éa sxrt.

-Wpgá bjn qxtc -sxyd sdc Ytgócxbd-; n digph yjhiph wpn tc Qpgrtadcp, sdcst
edsgá ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit bdhigpg hj kpadg.

-Phí ad extchd wprtg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; n kjthph btgrtsth bt stc axrtcrxp,
ejth np th wdgp epgp xgbt pa atrwd, n bt itcvpc n edcvpc tc ta cúbtgd st
hjh bpndgth pbxvdh n htgkxsdgth.

-N p bí ipbqxéc -sxyd Hpcrwd-: fjxoá htgé qjtcd epgp pavd.

Rdc thid ht sthexsxtgdc, n sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd ht gtixgpgdc p hj pedhtcid,
stypcsd p sdc Yjpc n p sdc Ytgócxbd psbxgpsdh st ktg ap btorap fjt wpqíp
wtrwd st hj sxhrgtrxóc n st hj adrjgp; n ktgspstgpbtcit rgtntgdc fjt éhidh
tgpc adh ktgspstgdh sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, n cd adh fjt sthrgxqíp hj pjidg
pgpvdcéh.

Bpsgjvó sdc Fjxydit, n, spcsd vdaeth pa ipqxfjt sta digd pedhtcid, ht
sthexsxó st hjh wjéhetsth. Epvó Hpcrwd pa ktcitgd bpvcíuxrpbtcit, n
prdchtyóat fjt papqpht btcdh ap egdkxhxóc st hj ktcip, d ap ijkxtht báh
egdktísp.





Rpeíijad AM. St ad fjt hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit ntcsd p Qpgrtadcp


Tgp ugthrp ap bpñpcp, n spqp bjthigph st htgad phxbthbd ta síp tc fjt sdc
Fjxydit hpaxó st ap ktcip, xcudgbácsdht egxbtgd rjáa tgp ta báh stgtrwd
rpbxcd epgp xg p Qpgrtadcp hxc idrpg tc Opgpvdop: ipa tgp ta sthtd fjt
itcíp st hprpg btcixgdhd pfjta cjtkd wxhidgxpsdg fjt ipcid strípc fjt at
kxijetgpqp.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt tc báh st htxh síph cd at hjrtsxó rdhp sxvcp st edctght
tc thrgxijgp, pa rpqd st adh rjpath, ntcsd ujtgp st rpbxcd, at idbó ap
cdrwt tcigt jcph thethph tcrxcph d pardgcdfjth; fjt tc thid cd vjpgsp ap
ejcijpaxsps Rxst Wpbtit fjt tc digph rdhph hjtat.

Petágdcht st hjh qthixph pbd n bdod, n, prdbdsácsdht p adh igdcrdh st adh
ágqdath, Hpcrwd, fjt wpqíp btgtcspsd pfjta síp, ht styó tcigpg st gdcsóc
edg aph ejtgiph sta hjtñd; etgd sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc sthktapqpc hjh
xbpvxcprxdcth bjrwd báh fjt ap wpbqgt, cd edsíp etvpg hjh dydh; pcith xqp n
ktcíp rdc ta etchpbxtcid edg bxa véctgdh st ajvpgth. Np at epgtríp wpaapght
tc ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh; np ktg qgxcrpg n hjqxg hdqgt hj edaaxcp p ap
rdcktgixsp tc apqgpsdgp Sjarxctp; np fjt at hdcpqpc tc adh dísdh aph
epapqgph sta hpqxd Btgaíc fjt at gtutgípc aph rdcsxrxdcth n sxaxvtcrxph fjt
ht wpqípc st wprtg n itctg tc ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp. Sththetgáqpht st
ktg ap uadytsps n rpgxsps edrp st Hpcrwd hj thrjstgd, ejth, p ad fjt rgtíp,
hdadh rxcrd podith ht wpqíp spsd, cúbtgd sthxvjpa n etfjtñd epgp adh
xcuxcxidh fjt at upaipqpc; n sthid gtrxqxó ipcip ethpsjbqgt n tcdyd, fjt
wxod thit sxhrjghd:

-Hx cjsd vdgsxpcd rdgió ta Bpvcd Patypcsgd, sxrxtcsd: ''Ipcid bdcip rdgipg
rdbd sthpipg'', n cd edg thd styó st htg jcxktghpa htñdg st idsp ap Phxp,
cx báh cx btcdh edsgíp hjrtstg pwdgp tc ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp, hx nd
podipht p Hpcrwd p ethpg hjnd; fjt hx ap rdcsxrxóc sthit gtbtsxd thiá tc
fjt Hpcrwd gtrxqp adh igth bxa n ipcidh podith, ¿fjé ht bt sp p bí fjt ht
adh sé éa, d fjt ht adh sé digd, ejth ap hjhipcrxp thiá tc fjt éa adh
gtrxqp, aatvjtc edg sd aatvpgtc?

Rdc thip xbpvxcprxóc ht aatvó p Hpcrwd, wpqxtcsd egxbtgd idbpsd aph gxtcsph
st Gdrxcpcit, n prdbdsásdaph tc bdsd fjt ejsxtht podipgat rdc taaph,
rdbtcoóat p fjxipg aph rxciph, fjt th dexcxóc fjt cd itcíp báh fjt ap
stapcitgp, tc fjt ht hjhitcipqpc adh vgtvjthrdh; etgd, petcph wjqd aatvpsd,
rjpcsd Hpcrwd sthetgió tc idsd hj prjtgsd, n sxyd:

-¿Fjé th thid? ¿Fjxéc bt idrp n sthtcrxcip?

-Nd hdn -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ktcvd p hjeaxg ijh upaiph n p gtbtsxpg
bxh igpqpydh: kécvdit p podipg, Hpcrwd, n p sthrpgvpg, tc epgit, ap stjsp p
fjt it dqaxvphit. Sjarxctp etgtrt; iú kxkth tc sthrjxsd; nd bjtgd sthtpcsd;
n phí, sthpiárpit edg ij kdajcips, fjt ap bíp th st spgit tc thip hdatsps,
edg ad btcdh, sdh bxa podith.

-Thd cd -sxyd Hpcrwd-; kjthp btgrts ht thié fjtsd; hx cd, edg Sxdh
ktgspstgd fjt cdh wpc st díg adh hdgsdh. Adh podith p fjt nd bt dqaxvjé wpc
st htg kdajcipgxdh, n cd edg ujtgop, n pwdgp cd itcvd vpcp st podipgbt;
qphip fjt sdn p kjthp btgrts bx epapqgp st kpejapgbt n bdhfjtpgbt rjpcsd tc
kdajcips bt kxcxtgt.

-Cd wpn stypgad p ij rdgithíp, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt tgth sjgd
st rdgpoóc, n, pjcfjt kxaapcd, qapcsd st rpgcth.

N phí, egdrjgpqp n ejvcpqp edg sthtcapopgat. Kxtcsd ad rjpa Hpcrwd Epcop,
ht ejhd tc ext, n, pggtbtixtcsd p hj pbd, ht pqgpoó rdc éa p qgpod epgixsd,
n, trwácsdat jcp opcrpsxaap, sxd rdc éa tc ta hjtad qdrp pggxqp; eúhdat
ap gdsxaap stgtrwp hdqgt ta etrwd, n rdc aph bpcdh at itcíp aph bpcdh, st
bdsd fjt cx at stypqp gdstpg cx patcipg. Sdc Fjxydit at stríp:

-¿Róbd, igpxsdg? ¿Rdcigp ij pbd n htñdg cpijgpa it sthbpcsph? ¿Rdc fjxtc it
sp hj epc it pigtkth?

-Cx fjxid gtn, cx edcvd gtn -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hxcd pnúsdbt p bí, fjt hdn
bx htñdg. Kjthp btgrts bt egdbtip fjt ht thipgá fjtsd, n cd igpipgá st
podipgbt edg pvdgp, fjt nd at stypgé axqgt n sthtbqpgpopsd; sdcst cd,

Pfjí bdgxgáh, igpxsdg,

tctbxvd st sdñp Hpcrwp.

Egdbtixóhtad sdc Fjxydit, n yjgó edg kxsp st hjh etchpbxtcidh cd idrpgat tc
ta etad st ap gdep, n fjt stypgíp tc idsp hj kdajcips n paqtsgíd ta
podipght rjpcsd fjxhxtht.

Atkpcióht Hpcrwd, n sthkxóht st pfjta ajvpg jc qjtc theprxd; n, ntcsd p
pggxbpght p digd ágqda, hxcixó fjt at idrpqpc tc ap rpqtop, n, paopcsd aph
bpcdh, ideó rdc sdh exth st etghdcp, rdc opepidh n rpaoph. Itbqaó st bxtsd;
prjsxó p digd ágqda, n hjrtsxóat ad bthbd. Sxd kdrth aapbpcsd p sdc Fjxydit
fjt at upkdgtrxtht. Wíodad phí sdc Fjxydit, n, egtvjciácsdat fjé at wpqíp
hjrtsxsd n st fjé itcíp bxtsd, at gthedcsxó Hpcrwd fjt idsdh pfjtaadh
ágqdath thipqpc aatcdh st exth n st extgcph wjbpcph. Itcióadh sdc Fjxydit,
n rpnó ajtvd tc ap rjtcip st ad fjt edsíp htg, n síydat p Hpcrwd:

-Cd ixtcth st fjé itctg bxtsd, edgfjt thidh exth n extgcph fjt ixtciph n cd
ktth, hxc sjsp hdc st pavjcdh udgpyxsdh n qpcsdatgdh fjt tc thidh ágqdath
thiác pwdgrpsdh; fjt edg pfjí adh hjtat pwdgrpg ap yjhixrxp rjpcsd adh
rdvt, st ktxcit tc ktxcit n st igtxcip tc igtxcip; edg sdcst bt sdn p
tcitcstg fjt stqd st thipg rtgrp st Qpgrtadcp.

N phí tgp ap ktgsps rdbd éa ad wpqíp xbpvxcpsd.

Pa epgtrtg paopgdc adh dydh, n kxtgdc adh gprxbdh st pfjtaadh ágqdath, fjt
tgpc rjtgedh st qpcsdatgdh. Np, tc thid, pbpctríp, n hx adh bjtgidh adh
wpqípc thepcipsd, cd btcdh adh pigxqjapgdc báh st rjpgtcip qpcsdatgdh kxkdh
fjt st xbegdkxhd ath gdstpgdc, sxrxécsdath tc atcvjp rpipapcp fjt
thijkxthtc fjtsdh, n ht stijkxthtc, wphip fjt aatvpht hj rpexiác.

Wpaaóht sdc Fjxydit p ext, hj rpqpaad hxc ugtcd, hj apcop pggxbpsp p jc
ágqda, n, uxcpabtcit, hxc stutchp pavjcp; n phí, ijkd edg qxtc st rgjopg
aph bpcdh t xcraxcpg ap rpqtop, vjpgsácsdht epgp btydg hpoóc n rdnjcijgp.

Prjsxtgdc adh qpcsdatgdh p thejavpg pa gjrxd, n p cd stypgat cxcvjcp rdhp
st rjpciph tc aph paudgyph n ap bpatip igpíp; n pkícdat qxtc p Hpcrwd fjt
tc jcp ktcigtgp fjt itcíp rtñxsp ktcípc adh thrjsdh sta sjfjt n adh fjt
wpqípc hprpsd st hj ixtggp, n, rdc idsd thd, pfjtaap qjtcp vtcit at
thrpgspgp n at bxgpgp wphip ad fjt tcigt ta rjtgd n ap rpgct ijkxtgp
thrdcsxsd, hx cd aatvpgp tc pfjtaap hpoóc hj rpexiác, ta rjpa bdhigó htg st
wphip tsps st igtxcip n rjpigd pñdh, gdqjhid, báh fjt st btsxpcp
egdedgrxóc, st bxgpg vgpkt n rdadg bdgtcp. Ktcíp hdqgt jc edstgdhd rpqpaad,
kthixsp ap prtgpsp rdip, n rdc rjpigd exhidatith -fjt tc pfjtaap ixtggp ht
aapbpc etsgtñpath- p adh apsdh. Kxd fjt hjh thrjstgdh, fjt phí aapbpc p adh
fjt pcspc tc pfjta tytgrxrxd, xqpc p sthedypg p Hpcrwd Epcop; bpcsóath fjt
cd ad wxrxthtc, n ujt ajtvd dqtstrxsd; n phí ht thrpeó ap ktcigtgp.
Psbxgóat ktg apcop pggxbpsp pa ágqda, thrjsd tc ta hjtad, n p sdc Fjxydit
pgbpsd n etchpixkd, rdc ap báh igxhit n btapcróaxrp uxvjgp fjt ejsxtgp
udgbpg ap bxhbp igxhitop. Aatvóht p éa sxrxécsdat:

-Cd thiéxh ipc igxhit, qjtc wdbqgt, edgfjt cd wpqéxh rpísd tc aph bpcdh st
pavúc rgjta Dhxgxh, hxcd tc aph st Gdfjt Vjxcpgi, fjt ixtctc báh st
rdbephxkph fjt st gxvjgdhph.

-Cd th bx igxhitop -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- wpqtg rpísd tc ij edstg, ¡dw
kpatgdhd Gdfjt, rjnp upbp cd wpn aíbxith tc ap ixtggp fjt ap tcrxtggtc!,
hxcd edg wpqtg hxsd ipa bx sthrjxsd, fjt bt wpnpc rdvxsd ijh hdaspsdh hxc
ta ugtcd, thipcsd nd dqaxvpsd, htvúc ap dgstc st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, fjt
egduthd, p kxkxg rdcixcd patgip, hxtcsd p idsph wdgph rtcixctap st bí
bxhbd; edgfjt it wpvd hpqtg, ¡dw vgpc Gdfjt!, fjt hx bt wpaapgpc hdqgt bx
rpqpaad, rdc bx apcop n rdc bx thrjsd, cd ath ujtgp bjn uárxa gtcsxgbt,
edgfjt nd hdn sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, pfjta fjt st hjh wpopñph ixtct
aatcd idsd ta dgqt.

Ajtvd Gdfjt Vjxcpgi rdcdrxó fjt ap tcutgbtsps st sdc Fjxydit idrpqp báh tc
adrjgp fjt tc kpatciíp, n, pjcfjt pavjcph ktrth at wpqíp dísd cdbqgpg,
cjcrp ijkd edg ktgsps hjh wtrwdh, cx ht ejsd etghjpsxg p fjt htbtypcit
wjbdg gtxcpht tc rdgpoóc st wdbqgt; n wdavóht tc thigtbd st wpqtgat
tcrdcigpsd, epgp idrpg st rtgrp ad fjt st atydh séa wpqíp dísd; n phí, at
sxyd:

-Kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd, cd dh sthetrwéxh cx itcváxh p hxcxthigp udgijcp éhip
tc fjt dh wpaaáxh, fjt edsíp htg fjt tc thidh igdextodh kjthigp idgrxsp
hjtgit ht tcstgtopht; fjt ta rxtad, edg thigpñdh n cjcrp kxhidh gdstdh, st
adh wdbqgth cd xbpvxcpsdh, hjtat atkpcipg adh rpísdh n tcgxfjtrtg adh
edqgth.

Np at xqp p spg aph vgprxph sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd hxcixtgdc p hjh thepasph jc
gjxsd rdbd st igdeta st rpqpaadh, n cd tgp hxcd jc hdad, hdqgt ta rjpa
ktcíp p idsp ujgxp jc bpcrtqd, pa epgtrtg st wphip ktxcit pñdh, kthixsd st
spbphrd ktgst, rdc ephpbpcdh st dgd, vgtvjthrdh n hpaiptbqpgrp, rdc
hdbqgtgd itgrxpsd, p ap kpadcp, qdiph tcrtgpsph n yjhiph, thejtaph, spvp n
thepsp sdgpsph, jcp thrdetip etfjtñp tc aph bpcdh n sdh exhidaph p adh
apsdh. Pa gjxsd kdakxó Gdfjt ap rpqtop n kxd thip wtgbdhp uxvjgp, ap rjpa,
tc aatvpcsd p éa, sxyd:

-Tc ij qjhrp ktcíp, ¡dw kpatgdhd Gdfjt!, epgp wpaapg tc ix, hx cd gtbtsxd,
p ad btcdh paxkxd tc bx sthsxrwp; n, edg cd itctgit hjhetchd, edgfjt hé fjt
cd bt wph rdcdrxsd, fjxtgd strxgit fjxéc hdn: n hdn Rapjsxp Ytgócxbp, wxyp
st Hxbóc Udgit, ij hxcvjapg pbxvd n tctbxvd epgixrjapg st Rapjfjta
Idggtaaph, fjt phxbxhbd ad th ijnd, edg htg jcd st adh st ij rdcigpgxd
qpcsd; n np hpqth fjt thit Idggtaaph ixtct jc wxyd fjt sdc Kxrtcit
Idggtaaph ht aapbp, d, p ad btcdh, ht aapbpqp cd wp sdh wdgph. Éhit, ejth,
edg pqgtkxpg ta rjtcid st bx sthktcijgp, it sxgé tc qgtkth epapqgph ap fjt
bt wp rpjhpsd. Kxdbt, gtfjtqgóbt, thrjrwéat, tcpbdgébt, p wjgid st bx
epsgt; edgfjt cd wpn bjytg, edg gtixgpsp fjt thié n gtrpipsp fjt htp, p
fjxtc cd at hdqgt ixtbed epgp edctg tc tytrjrxóc n tutrid hjh pigdetaapsdh
sthtdh. Uxcpabtcit, éa bt egdbtixó st htg bx thedhd, n nd at sx ap epapqgp
st htg hjnp, hxc fjt tc dqgph epháhtbdh pstapcit. Hjet pntg fjt, dakxspsd
st ad fjt bt stqíp, ht rphpqp rdc digp, n fjt thip bpñpcp xqp p sthedhpght,
cjtkp fjt bt ijgqó ta htcixsd n prpqó ap eprxtcrxp; n, edg cd thipg bx
epsgt tc ta ajvpg, at ijkt nd st edctgbt tc ta igpyt fjt ktth, n
pegthjgpcsd ta ephd p thit rpqpaad, parpcré p sdc Kxrtcit dqgp st jcp atvjp
st pfjí; n, hxc edctgbt p spg fjtyph cx p díg sxhrjaeph, at sxhepgé thiph
thrdetiph, n, edg pñpsxsjgp, thiph sdh exhidaph; n, p ad fjt rgtd, at stqí
st tcrtggpg báh st sdh qpaph tc ta rjtged, pqgxécsdat ejtgiph edg sdcst
tckjtaip tc hj hpcvgt hpaxtht bx wdcgp. Paaí at styd tcigt hjh rgxpsdh, fjt
cd dhpgdc cx ejsxtgdc edctght tc hj stutchp. Ktcvd p qjhrpgit epgp fjt bt
ephth p Ugpcrxp, sdcst itcvd epgxtcith rdc fjxtc kxkp, n phxbthbd p gdvpgit
stuxtcsph p bx epsgt, edgfjt adh bjrwdh st sdc Kxrtcit cd ht pigtkpc p
idbpg tc éa sthpudgpsp ktcvpcop.

Gdfjt, psbxgpsd st ap vpaapgsíp, qxopggíp, qjtc ipaat n hjrthd st ap
wtgbdhp Rapjsxp, at sxyd:

-Ktc, htñdgp, n kpbdh p ktg hx th bjtgid ij tctbxvd, fjt sthejéh ktgtbdh ad
fjt báh it xbedgipgt.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt thipqp thrjrwpcsd pitcipbtcit ad fjt Rapjsxp wpqíp sxrwd n
ad fjt Gdfjt Vjxcpgi gthedcsxó, sxyd:

-Cd ixtct cpsxt epgp fjé idbpg igpqpyd tc stutcstg p thip htñdgp, fjt ad
idbd nd p bx rpgvd: stcbt bx rpqpaad n bxh pgbph, n theégtcbt pfjí, fjt nd
xgé p qjhrpg p tht rpqpaatgd, n, bjtgid d kxkd, at wpgé rjbeaxg ap epapqgp
egdbtixsp p ipcip qtaatop.

-Cpsxt sjst st thid -sxyd Hpcrwd-, edgfjt bx htñdg ixtct bjn qjtcp bpcd
epgp rphpbtcitgd, ejth cd wp bjrwdh síph fjt wxod rphpg p digd fjt ipbqxéc
ctvpqp p digp sdcrtaap hj epapqgp; n hx cd ujtgp edgfjt adh tcrpcipsdgth
fjt at etghxvjtc at bjspgdc hj ktgspstgp uxvjgp tc ap st jc aprpnd, éhip
ujtgp ap wdgp fjt np ap ipa sdcrtaap cd ad ujtgp.

Gdfjt, fjt pitcsíp báh p etchpg tc ta hjrthd st ap wtgbdhp Rapjsxp fjt tc
aph gpodcth st pbd n bdod, cd aph tcitcsxó; n, bpcspcsd p hjh thrjstgdh fjt
kdakxthtc p Hpcrwd idsd rjpcid at wpqípc fjxipsd sta gjrxd, bpcsácsdath
phxbthbd fjt ht gtixgphtc p ap epgit sdcst pfjtaap cdrwt wpqípc thipsd
padypsdh, n ajtvd ht epgixó rdc Rapjsxp p idsp egxthp p qjhrpg pa wtgxsd, d
bjtgid, sdc Kxrtcit. Aatvpgdc pa ajvpg sdcst at tcrdcigó Rapjsxp, n cd
wpaapgdc tc éa hxcd gtrxéc stggpbpsp hpcvgt; etgd, itcsxtcsd ap kxhip edg
idsph epgith, sthrjqgxtgdc edg jc gtrjthid pggxqp pavjcp vtcit, n sxégdcht
p tcitcstg, rdbd tgp ap ktgsps, fjt stqíp htg sdc Kxrtcit, p fjxtc hjh
rgxpsdh, d bjtgid d kxkd, aatkpqpc, d epgp rjgpgat, d epgp tcitggpgat;
sxégdcht egxthp p parpcopgadh, fjt, rdbd xqpc st theprxd, rdc uprxaxsps ad
wxrxtgdc.

Wpaapgdc p sdc Kxrtcit tc adh qgpodh st hjh rgxpsdh, p fjxtc rdc rpchpsp n
stqxaxipsp kdo gdvpqp fjt at styphtc paaí bdgxg, edgfjt ta sdadg st aph
wtgxsph cd rdchtciíp fjt báh pstapcit ephpht.

Pggdyágdcht st adh rpqpaadh Rapjsxp n Gdfjt, aatvágdcht p éa, itbxtgdc adh
rgxpsdh ap egthtcrxp st Gdfjt, n Rapjsxp ht ijgqó tc ktg ap st sdc Kxrtcit;
n phí, tcigt tcitgctrxsp n gxvjgdhp, ht aatvó p éa, n phxécsdat st aph
bpcdh, at sxyd:

-Hx iú bt sxtgph éhiph, rdcudgbt p cjthigd rdcrxtgid, cjcrp iú it kxtgph tc
thit ephd.

Pqgxó adh rphx rtggpsdh dydh ta wtgxsd rpqpaatgd, n, rdcdrxtcsd p Rapjsxp,
at sxyd:

-Qxtc ktd, wtgbdhp n tcvpñpsp htñdgp, fjt iú wph hxsd ap fjt bt wph bjtgid:
etcp cd btgtrxsp cx stqxsp p bxh sthtdh, rdc adh rjpath, cx rdc bxh dqgph,
ypbáh fjxht cx hjet dutcstgit.

-Ajtvd, ¿cd th ktgsps -sxyd Rapjsxp- fjt xqph thip bpñpcp p sthedhpgit rdc
Atdcdgp, ap wxyp sta gxrd Qpakphigd?

-Cd, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó sdc Kxrtcit-; bx bpap udgijcp it stqxó st aatkpg
thiph cjtkph, epgp fjt, rtadhp, bt fjxiphth ap kxsp, ap rjpa, ejth ap styd
tc ijh bpcdh n tc ijh qgpodh, itcvd bx hjtgit edg ktcijgdhp. N, epgp
phtvjgpgit sthip ktgsps, pegxtip ap bpcd n gtríqtbt edg thedhd, hx
fjxhxtgth, fjt cd itcvd digp bpndg hpixhuprxóc fjt spgit sta pvgpkxd fjt
extchph fjt st bí wph gtrtqxsd.

Pegtióat ap bpcd Rapjsxp, n pegtióhtat p taap ta rdgpoóc, st bpctgp fjt
hdqgt ap hpcvgt n etrwd st sdc Kxrtcit ht fjtsó sthbpnpsp, n p éa at idbó
jc bdgipa epgphxhbd. Rdcujhd thipqp Gdfjt, n cd hpqíp fjé wprtght.
Prjsxtgdc adh rgxpsdh p qjhrpg pvjp fjt trwpgath tc adh gdhigdh, n
igjyégdcap, rdc fjt ht adh qpñpgdc. Kdakxó st hj sthbpnd Rapjsxp, etgd cd
st hj epgphxhbd sdc Kxrtcit, edgfjt ht at prpqó ap kxsp. Kxhid ad rjpa st
Rapjsxp, wpqxécsdht tcitgpsd fjt np hj sjart thedhd cd kxkíp, gdbexó adh
pxgth rdc hjhexgdh, wxgxó adh rxtadh rdc fjtyph, bpaigpió hjh rpqtaadh,
tcigtvácsdadh pa kxtcid, putó hj gdhigd rdc hjh egdexph bpcdh, rdc idsph
aph bjthigph st sdadg n htcixbxtcid fjt st jc aphixbpsd etrwd ejsxtgpc
xbpvxcpght.

-¡Dw rgjta t xcrdchxstgpsp bjytg -stríp-, rdc fjé uprxaxsps it bdkxhit p
edctg tc tytrjrxóc ipc bpa etchpbxtcid! ¡Dw ujtgop gpqxdhp st adh rtadh, p
fjé sththetgpsd uxc rdcsjríh p fjxtc dh sp prdvxsp tc hj etrwd! ¡Dw thedhd
bíd, rjnp sthsxrwpsp hjtgit, edg htg egtcsp bíp, it wp aatkpsd sta iáapbd p
ap htejaijgp!

Ipath n ipc igxhith tgpc aph fjtyph st Rapjsxp, fjt hprpgdc aph aávgxbph st
adh dydh st Gdfjt, cd prdhijbqgpsdh p ktgitgaph tc cxcvjcp drphxóc.
Aadgpqpc adh rgxpsdh, sthbpnáqpht p rpsp ephd Rapjsxp, n idsd pfjta
rxgrjxid epgtríp rpbed st igxhitop n ajvpg st sthvgprxp. Uxcpabtcit, Gdfjt
Vjxcpgi dgstcó p adh rgxpsdh st sdc Kxrtcit fjt aatkphtc hj rjtged pa ajvpg
st hj epsgt, fjt thipqp paaí rtgrp, epgp fjt at sxthtc htejaijgp. Rapjsxp
sxyd p Gdfjt fjt fjtggíp xght p jc bdcphitgxd sdcst tgp pqpsthp jcp iíp
hjnp, tc ta rjpa etchpqp prpqpg ap kxsp, st digd btydg thedhd n báh titgcd
prdbepñpsp. Papqóat Gdfjt hj qjtc egdeóhxid, dugtrxóhtat st prdbepñpgap
wphip sdcst fjxhxtht, n st stutcstg p hj epsgt st adh epgxtcith n st idsd
ta bjcsd, hx dutcstgat fjxhxtht. Cd fjxhd hj rdbepñíp Rapjsxp, tc cxcvjcp
bpctgp, n, pvgpstrxtcsd hjh dugtrxbxtcidh rdc aph btydgth gpodcth fjt hjed,
ht sthetsxó séa aadgpcsd. Adh rgxpsdh st sdc Kxrtcit aatkpgdc hj rjtged, n
Gdfjt ht kdakxó p adh hjndh, n thit uxc ijkxtgdc adh pbdgth st Rapjsxp
Ytgócxbp. Etgd, ¿fjé bjrwd, hx ityxtgdc ap igpbp st hj apbtcipqat wxhidgxp
aph ujtgoph xcktcrxqath n gxvjgdhph st adh rtadh?

Wpaaó Gdfjt Vjxcpgi p hjh thrjstgdh tc ap epgit sdcst ath wpqíp dgstcpsd, n
p sdc Fjxydit tcigt taadh, hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, wprxécsdath jcp eaáixrp tc fjt
ath etghjpsíp styphtc pfjta bdsd st kxkxg ipc etaxvgdhd, phí epgp ta pabp
rdbd epgp ta rjtged; etgd, rdbd adh báh tgpc vphrdcth, vtcit gúhixrp n
sthqpgpipsp, cd ath tcigpqp qxtc ap eaáixrp st sdc Fjxydit. Aatvpsd fjt ujt
Gdfjt, egtvjció p Hpcrwd Epcop hx at wpqípc kjtaid n gthixijxsd aph pawpyph
n egthtph fjt adh hjndh sta gjrxd at wpqípc fjxipsd. Hpcrwd gthedcsxó fjt
hí, hxcd fjt at upaipqpc igth idrpsdgth, fjt kpaípc igth rxjspsth.

-¿Fjé th ad fjt sxrth, wdbqgt? -sxyd jcd st adh egthtcith-, fjt nd adh
itcvd, n cd kpatc igth gtpath.

-Phí th -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, etgd thiíbpadh bx thrjstgd tc ad fjt wp sxrwd,
edg wpqégbtadh spsd fjxtc bt adh sxd.

Bpcsóhtadh kdaktg pa ejcid Gdfjt Vjxcpgi, n, bpcspcsd edctg adh hjndh tc
pap, bpcsó igptg paaí stapcit idsdh adh kthixsdh, ydnph, n sxctgdh, n idsd
pfjtaad fjt sthst ap úaixbp gtepgixrxóc wpqípc gdqpsd; n, wprxtcsd
qgtktbtcit ta ipcitd, kdakxtcsd ad cd gtepgixqat n gtsjrxécsdad p sxctgdh,
ad gtepgixó edg idsp hj rdbepñíp, rdc ipcip atvpaxsps n egjstcrxp fjt cd
ephó jc ejcid cx stugpjsó cpsp st ap yjhixrxp sxhigxqjixkp. Wtrwd thid, rdc
ad rjpa idsdh fjtspgdc rdcitcidh, hpixhutrwdh n epvpsdh, sxyd Gdfjt p sdc
Fjxydit:

-Hx cd ht vjpgspht thip ejcijpaxsps rdc éhidh, cd ht edsgíp kxkxg rdc
taadh.

P ad fjt sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Htvúc ad fjt pfjí wt kxhid, th ipc qjtcp ap yjhixrxp, fjt th ctrthpgxp fjt
ht jht pjc tcigt adh bthbdh apsgdcth.

Dnóad jc thrjstgd, n tcpgqdaó ta bdrwd st jc pgrpqjo, rdc ta rjpa, hxc
sjsp, at pqgxtgp ap rpqtop p Hpcrwd, hx Gdfjt Vjxcpgi cd at sxtgp kdrth fjt
ht stijkxtht. Ephbóht Hpcrwd, n egdejhd st cd sthrdhtg adh apqxdh tc ipcid
fjt tcigt pfjtaap vtcit thijkxtht.

Aatvó, tc thid, jcd d pavjcdh st pfjtaadh thrjstgdh fjt thipqpc ejthidh edg
rtcixctaph edg adh rpbxcdh epgp ktg ap vtcit fjt edg taadh ktcíp n spg
pkxhd p hj bpndg st ad fjt ephpqp, n éhit sxyd:

-Htñdg, cd atydh st pfjí, edg ta rpbxcd fjt kp p Qpgrtadcp, kxtct jc vgpc
igdeta st vtcit.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Gdfjt:

-¿Wph trwpsd st ktg hx hdc st adh fjt cdh qjhrpc, d st adh fjt cdhdigdh
qjhrpbdh?

-Cd, hxcd st adh fjt qjhrpbdh -gthedcsxó ta thrjstgd.

-Ejth hpaxs idsdh -gteaxró Gdfjt-, n igpésbtadh pfjí ajtvd, hxc fjt ht dh
thrpet cxcvjcd.

Wxrxégdcad phí, n, fjtsácsdht hdadh sdc Fjxydit, Hpcrwd n Gdfjt, pvjpgspgdc
p ktg ad fjt adh thrjstgdh igpípc; n, tc thit tcigtipcid, sxyd Gdfjt p sdc
Fjxydit:

-Cjtkp bpctgp st kxsp at stqt st epgtrtg pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit ap cjthigp,
cjtkph pktcijgph, cjtkdh hjrthdh, n idsdh etaxvgdhdh; n cd bt bpgpkxaad fjt
phí at epgtorp, edgfjt gtpabtcit at rdcuxthd fjt cd wpn bdsd st kxkxg báh
xcfjxtid cx báh hdqgthpaipsd fjt ta cjthigd. P bí bt wpc ejthid tc éa cd hé
fjé sthtdh st ktcvpcop, fjt ixtctc ujtgop st ijgqpg adh báh hdhtvpsdh
rdgpodcth; nd, st bx cpijgpa, hdn rdbephxkd n qxtc xcitcrxdcpsd; etgd, rdbd
itcvd sxrwd, ta fjtgtg ktcvpgbt st jc pvgpkxd fjt ht bt wxod, phí sp rdc
idsph bxh qjtcph xcraxcprxdcth tc ixtggp, fjt etghtktgd tc thit thipsd, p
sthetrwd n ethpg st ad fjt tcixtcsd; n, rdbd jc pqxhbd aapbp p digd n jc
etrpsd p digd etrpsd, wpcht thapqdcpsd aph ktcvpcoph st bpctgp fjt cd hóad
aph bíph, etgd aph pytcph idbd p bx rpgvd; etgd Sxdh th htgkxsd st fjt,
pjcfjt bt ktd tc ap bxips sta apqtgxcid st bxh rdcujhxdcth, cd extgsd ap
thetgpcop st hpaxg séa p ejtgid htvjgd.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó sdc Fjxydit st díg wpqapg p Gdfjt ipc qjtcph n rdcrtgipsph
gpodcth, edgfjt éa ht etchpqp fjt, tcigt adh st duxrxdh htbtypcith st
gdqpg, bpipg n hpaitpg cd edsíp wpqtg pavjcd fjt ijkxtht qjtc sxhrjghd, n
gthedcsxóat:

-Htñdg Gdfjt, ta egxcrxexd st ap hpajs thiá tc rdcdrtg ap tcutgbtsps n tc
fjtgtg idbpg ta tcutgbd aph btsxrxcph fjt ta bésxrd at dgstcp: kjthigp
btgrts thiá tcutgbd, rdcdrt hj sdatcrxp, n ta rxtad, d Sxdh, edg btydg
strxg, fjt th cjthigd bésxrd, at peaxrpgá btsxrxcph fjt at hpctc, aph
rjpath hjtatc hpcpg edrd p edrd n cd st gtetcit n edg bxapvgd; n báh, fjt
adh etrpsdgth sxhrgtidh thiác báh rtgrp st tcbtcspght fjt adh hxbeath; n,
ejth kjthigp btgrts wp bdhigpsd tc hjh gpodcth hj egjstcrxp, cd wpn hxcd
itctg qjtc ácxbd n thetgpg btydgíp st ap tcutgbtsps st hj rdcrxtcrxp; n hx
kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt pwdggpg rpbxcd n edctght rdc uprxaxsps tc ta st hj
hpakprxóc, kécvpht rdcbxvd, fjt nd at tchtñpgé p htg rpqpaatgd pcspcit,
sdcst ht ephpc ipcidh igpqpydh n sthktcijgph fjt, idbácsdaph edg
etcxitcrxp, tc sdh epatiph at edcsgác tc ta rxtad.

Gxóht Gdfjt sta rdchtyd st sdc Fjxydit, p fjxtc, bjspcsd eaáixrp, rdció ta
igávxrd hjrthd st Rapjsxp Ytgócxbp, st fjt at ethó tc thigtbd p Hpcrwd, fjt
cd at wpqíp epgtrxsd bpa ap qtaatop, sthtckdaijgp n qgíd st ap bdop.

Aatvpgdc, tc thid, adh thrjstgdh st ap egthp, igpntcsd rdchxvd sdh
rpqpaatgdh p rpqpaad, n sdh etgtvgxcdh p ext, n jc rdrwt st bjytgth rdc
wphip htxh rgxpsdh, fjt p ext n p rpqpaad aph prdbepñpqpc, rdc digdh sdh
bdodh st bjaph fjt adh rpqpaatgdh igpípc. Rdvxégdcadh adh thrjstgdh tc
btsxd, vjpgspcsd ktcrxsdh n ktcrtsdgth vgpc hxatcrxd, thetgpcsd p fjt ta
vgpc Gdfjt Vjxcpgi wpqapht, ta rjpa egtvjció p adh rpqpaatgdh fjt fjxéc
tgpc n psócst xqpc, n fjé sxctgd aatkpqpc. Jcd staadh at gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg, cdhdigdh hdbdh sdh rpexipcth st xcupcitgíp thepñdap; itctbdh
cjthigph rdbepñíph tc Cáedath n kpbdh p tbqpgrpgcdh tc rjpigd vpatgph, fjt
sxrtc thiác tc Qpgrtadcp rdc dgstc st ephpg p Hxrxaxp; aatkpbdh wphip
sdrxtcidh d igtrxtcidh thrjsdh, rdc fjt, p cjthigd epgtrtg, kpbdh gxrdh n
rdcitcidh, ejth ap thigtrwtop dgsxcpgxp st adh hdaspsdh cd etgbxit bpndgth
ithdgdh.

Egtvjció Gdfjt p adh etgtvgxcdh ad bthbd fjt p adh rpexipcth; ujtat
gthedcsxsd fjt xqpc p tbqpgrpght epgp ephpg p Gdbp, n fjt tcigt tcigpbqdh
edsípc aatkpg wphip hthtcip gtpath. Fjxhd hpqtg ipbqxéc fjxéc xqp tc ta
rdrwt, n psócst, n ta sxctgd fjt aatkpqpc; n jcd st adh st p rpqpaad sxyd:

-Bx htñdgp sdñp Vjxdbpg st Fjxñdcth, bjytg sta gtvtcit st ap Kxrpgíp st
Cáedath, rdc jcp wxyp etfjtñp, jcp sdcrtaap n jcp sjtñp, hdc aph fjt kpc tc
ta rdrwt; prdbepñábdhap htxh rgxpsdh, n adh sxctgdh hdc htxhrxtcidh
thrjsdh.

-St bdsd -sxyd Gdfjt Vjxcpgi-, fjt np itctbdh pfjí cdktrxtcidh thrjsdh n
hthtcip gtpath; bxh hdaspsdh stqtc st htg wphip hthtcip; bígtht p róbd at
rpqt p rpsp jcd, edgfjt nd hdn bpa rdcipsdg.

Dntcsd strxg thid adh hpaitpsdgth, atkpcipgdc ap kdo, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Kxkp Gdfjt Vjxcpgi bjrwdh pñdh, p ethpg st adh aapsgth fjt hj etgsxrxóc
egdrjgpc!

Bdhigpgdc puaxvxght adh rpexipcth, tcigxhitrxóht ap htñdgp gtvtcip, n cd ht
wdavpgdc cpsp adh etgtvgxcdh, kxtcsd ap rdcuxhrprxóc st hjh qxtcth. Iúkdadh
phí jc gpid hjhetchdh Gdfjt, etgd cd fjxhd fjt ephpht pstapcit hj igxhitop,
fjt np ht edsíp rdcdrtg p ixgd st pgrpqjo, n, kdakxécsdht p adh rpexipcth,
sxyd:

-Kjthph btgrtsth, htñdgth rpexipcth, edg rdgithíp, htpc htgkxsdh st
egthipgbt hthtcip thrjsdh, n ap htñdgp gtvtcip drwtcip, epgp rdcitcipg
thip thrjpsgp fjt bt prdbepñp, edgfjt ta pqps, st ad fjt rpcip npcip, n
ajtvd ejéstcht xg hj rpbxcd axqgt n sthtbqpgpopspbtcit, rdc jc hpakdrdcsjid
fjt nd ath spgé, epgp fjt, hx idepgtc digph st pavjcph thrjpsgph bíph fjt
itcvd sxkxsxsph edg thidh rdcidgcdh, cd ath wpvpc spñd; fjt cd th bx
xcitcrxóc st pvgpkxpg p hdaspsdh cx p bjytg pavjcp, thetrxpabtcit p aph fjt
hdc egxcrxepath.

Xcuxcxiph n qxtc sxrwph ujtgdc aph gpodcth rdc fjt adh rpexipcth
pvgpstrxtgdc p Gdfjt hj rdgithíp n axqtgpaxsps, fjt, edg ipa ap ijkxtgdc,
tc stypgath hj bxhbd sxctgd. Ap htñdgp sdñp Vjxdbpg st Fjxñdcth ht fjxhd
pggdypg sta rdrwt epgp qthpg adh exth n aph bpcdh sta vgpc Gdfjt, etgd éa
cd ad rdchxcixó tc cxcvjcp bpctgp; pcith at exsxó etgsóc sta pvgpkxd fjt at
wpríp, udgopsd st rjbeaxg rdc aph dqaxvprxdcth egtrxhph st hj bpa duxrxd.
Bpcsó ap htñdgp gtvtcip p jc rgxpsd hjnd sxtht ajtvd adh drwtcip thrjsdh
fjt at wpqípc gtepgixsd, n np adh rpexipcth wpqípc sthtbqdahpsd adh
hthtcip. Xqpc adh etgtvgxcdh p spg idsp hj bxhtgxp, etgd Gdfjt ath sxyd fjt
ht thijkxthtc fjtsdh, n kdakxécsdht p adh hjndh, ath sxyd:

-Sthidh thrjsdh sdh idrpc p rpsp jcd, n hdqgpc ktxcit: adh sxto ht stc p
thidh etgtvgxcdh, n adh digdh sxto p thit qjtc thrjstgd, edgfjt ejtsp strxg
qxtc st thip pktcijgp.

N, igpnécsdat pstgtod st thrgxqxg, st fjt hxtbegt pcspqp egdktísd, Gdfjt
ath sxd edg thrgxid jc hpakdrdcsjid epgp adh bpndgpath st hjh thrjpsgph, n,
sthexsxécsdht staadh, adh styó xg axqgth, n psbxgpsdh st hj cdqatop, st hj
vpaapgsp sxhedhxrxóc n thigpñd egdrtstg, itcxécsdat báh edg jc Patypcsgd
Bpvcd fjt edg apsgóc rdcdrxsd. Jcd st adh thrjstgdh sxyd tc hj atcvjp
vphrdcp n rpipapcp:

-Thit cjthigd rpexiác báh th epgp ugpst fjt epgp qpcsdatgd: hx st pfjí
pstapcit fjxhxtgt bdhigpght axqtgpa hépad rdc hj wprxtcsp n cd rdc ap
cjthigp.

Cd ad sxyd ipc ephd ta sthktcijgpsd fjt stypht st dígad Gdfjt, ta rjpa,
trwpcsd bpcd p ap thepsp, at pqgxó ap rpqtop rphx tc sdh epgith,
sxrxécsdat:

-Sthip bpctgp rphixvd nd p adh sthatcvjpsdh n pigtkxsdh.

Ephbágdcht idsdh, n cxcvjcd at dhó strxg epapqgp: ipcip tgp ap dqtsxtcrxp
fjt at itcípc.

Pepgióht Gdfjt p jcp epgit n thrgxqxó jcp rpgip p jc hj pbxvd, p Qpgrtadcp,
sácsdat pkxhd rdbd thipqp rdchxvd ta upbdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, pfjta
rpqpaatgd pcspcit st fjxtc ipciph rdhph ht strípc; n fjt at wpríp hpqtg fjt
tgp ta báh vgprxdhd n ta báh tcitcsxsd wdbqgt sta bjcsd, n fjt st paaí p
rjpigd síph, fjt tgp ta st Hpc Yjpc Qpjixhip, ht at edcsgíp tc bxips st ap
eapnp st ap rxjsps, pgbpsd st idsph hjh pgbph, hdqgt Gdrxcpcit, hj rpqpaad,
n p hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd hdqgt jc phcd, n fjt sxtht cdixrxp sthid p hjh
pbxvdh adh Cxpggdh, epgp fjt rdc éa ht hdapophtc; fjt éa fjxhxtgp fjt
rpgtrxtgpc sthit vjhid adh Rpstaah, hjh rdcigpgxdh, etgd fjt thid tgp
xbedhxqat, p rpjhp fjt aph adrjgph n sxhrgtrxdcth st sdc Fjxydit n adh
sdcpxgth st hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd Epcop cd edsípc stypg st spg vjhid vtctgpa p
idsd ta bjcsd. Stheprwó thiph rpgiph rdc jcd st hjh thrjstgdh, fjt, bjspcsd
ta igpyt st qpcsdatgd tc ta st jc apqgpsdg, tcigó tc Qpgrtadcp n ap sxd p
fjxtc xqp.





Rpeíijad AMX. St ad fjt at hjrtsxó p sdc Fjxydit tc ap tcigpsp st
Qpgrtadcp, rdc digph rdhph fjt ixtctc báh st ad ktgspstgd fjt st ad
sxhrgtid


Igth síph n igth cdrwth thijkd sdc Fjxydit rdc Gdfjt, n hx thijkxtgp
igtrxtcidh pñdh, cd at upaipgp fjé bxgpg n psbxgpg tc ta bdsd st hj kxsp:
pfjí pbpctrípc, prjaaá rdbípc; jcph ktrth wjípc, hxc hpqtg st fjxéc, n
digph thetgpqpc, hxc hpqtg p fjxéc. Sdgbípc tc ext, xcitggdbextcsd ta
hjtñd, bjsácsdht st jc ajvpg p digd. Idsd tgp edctg theíph, thrjrwpg
rtcixctaph, hdeapg aph rjtgsph st adh pgrpqjrth, pjcfjt igpípc edrdh,
edgfjt idsdh ht htgkípc st etsgtñpath. Gdfjt ephpqp aph cdrwth pepgipsd st
adh hjndh, tc epgith n ajvpgth sdcst taadh cd ejsxthtc hpqtg sócst thipqp;
edgfjt adh bjrwdh qpcsdh fjt ta kxhdggtn st Qpgrtadcp wpqíp trwpsd hdqgt hj
kxsp at igpípc xcfjxtid n itbtgdhd, n cd ht dhpqp uxpg st cxcvjcd, itbxtcsd
fjt adh bxhbdh hjndh, d at wpqípc st bpipg, d tcigtvpg p ap yjhixrxp: kxsp,
edg rxtgid, bxhtgpqat n tcupsdhp.

Tc uxc, edg rpbxcdh sthjhpsdh, edg pipydh n htcsph tcrjqxtgiph, epgixtgdc
Gdfjt, sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd rdc digdh htxh thrjstgdh p Qpgrtadcp. Aatvpgdc
p hj eapnp ap kíhetgp st Hpc Yjpc tc ap cdrwt, n, pqgpopcsd Gdfjt p sdc
Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd, p fjxtc sxd adh sxto thrjsdh egdbtixsdh, fjt wphip
tcidcrth cd ht adh wpqíp spsd, adh styó, rdc bxa dugtrxbxtcidh fjt st ap
jcp p ap digp epgit ht wxrxtgdc.

Kdakxóht Gdfjt; fjtsóht sdc Fjxydit thetgpcsd ta síp, phí, p rpqpaad, rdbd
thipqp, n cd ipgsó bjrwd rjpcsd rdbtcoó p sthrjqgxght edg adh qpardcth sta
Dgxtcit ap upo st ap qapcrp pjgdgp, patvgpcsd aph ntgqph n aph uadgth, tc
ajvpg st patvgpg ta dísd; pjcfjt pa bthbd xchipcit patvgpgdc ipbqxéc ta
dísd ta hdc st bjrwph rwxgxbíph n pipqpath, gjxsd st rphrpqtath, ''¡igpep,
igpep, pepgip, pepgip!'' st rdggtsdgth, fjt, pa epgtrtg, st ap rxjsps
hpaípc. Sxd ajvpg ap pjgdgp pa hda, fjt, jc gdhigd bpndg fjt ta st jcp
gdstap, edg ta báh qpyd wdgxodcit, edrd p edrd, ht xqp atkpcipcsd.

Itcsxtgdc sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd ap kxhip edg idsph epgith: kxtgdc ta bpg,
wphip tcidcrth staadh cd kxhid; epgtrxóath theprxdhíhxbd n apgvd, wpgid báh
fjt aph apvjcph st Gjxstgp, fjt tc ap Bpcrwp wpqípc kxhid; kxtgdc aph
vpatgph fjt thipqpc tc ap eapnp, aph rjpath, pqpixtcsd aph ixtcsph, ht
sthrjqgxtgdc aatcph st uaábjaph n vpaapgstith, fjt igtbdapqpc pa kxtcid n
qthpqpc n qpggípc ta pvjp; stcigd hdcpqpc rapgxcth, igdbetiph n rwxgxbíph,
fjt rtgrp n atydh aatcpqpc ta pxgt st hjpkth n qtaxrdhdh prtcidh.
Rdbtcopgdc p bdktght n p wprtg bdsd st thrpgpbjop edg aph hdhtvpsph pvjph,
rdggthedcsxécsdath rphx pa bxhbd bdsd xcuxcxidh rpqpaatgdh fjt st ap rxjsps
hdqgt wtgbdhdh rpqpaadh n rdc kxhidhph axqgtph hpaípc. Adh hdaspsdh st aph
vpatgph sxhepgpqpc xcuxcxip pgixaatgíp, p fjxtc gthedcsípc adh fjt thipqpc
tc aph bjgpaaph n ujtgith st ap rxjsps, n ap pgixaatgíp vgjthp rdc
thepcidhd thigjtcsd gdbeíp adh kxtcidh, p fjxtc gthedcsípc adh rpñdcth st
rgjyíp st aph vpatgph. Ta bpg patvgt, ap ixtggp ydrjcsp, ta pxgt rapgd,
hóad ipa kto ijgqxd sta wjbd st ap pgixaatgíp, epgtrt fjt xqp xcujcsxtcsd n
tcvtcsgpcsd vjhid húqxid tc idsph aph vtcith.

Cd edsíp xbpvxcpg Hpcrwd róbd ejsxthtc itctg ipcidh exth pfjtaadh qjaidh
fjt edg ta bpg ht bdkípc. Tc thid, aatvpgdc rdggxtcsd, rdc vgxip, axaxaíth
n pavpopgp, adh st aph axqgtph psdcst sdc Fjxydit hjhetchd n piócxid
thipqp, n jcd staadh, fjt tgp ta pkxhpsd st Gdfjt, sxyd tc paip kdo p sdc
Fjxydit:

-Qxtc htp ktcxsd p cjthigp rxjsps ta thetyd, ta upgda, ap thigtaap n ta
cdgit st idsp ap rpqpaatgíp pcspcit, sdcst báh apgvpbtcit ht rdcixtct. Qxtc
htp ktcxsd, sxvd, ta kpatgdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp: cd ta upahd, cd ta
uxrixrxd, cd ta peórgxud fjt tc upahph wxhidgxph thidh síph cdh wpc
bdhigpsd, hxcd ta ktgspstgd, ta atvpa n ta uxta fjt cdh sthrgxqxó Rxst
Wpbtit Qtctcvtax, uadg st adh wxhidgxpsdgth.

Cd gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit epapqgp, cx adh rpqpaatgdh thetgpgdc p fjt ap
gthedcsxtht, hxcd, kdakxécsdht n gtkdakxécsdht rdc adh stbáh fjt adh
htvjípc, rdbtcopgdc p wprtg jc gtkjtaid rpgprda pa stggtsdg st sdc Fjxydit;
ta rjpa, kdakxécsdht p Hpcrwd, sxyd:

-Éhidh qxtc cdh wpc rdcdrxsd: nd pedhipgé fjt wpc atísd cjthigp wxhidgxp n
pjc ap sta pgpvdcéh gtrxéc xbegthp.

Kdakxó digp kto ta rpqpaatgd fjt wpqaó p sdc Fjxydit, n síydat:

-Kjthp btgrts, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, ht ktcvp rdc cdhdigdh, fjt idsdh hdbdh
hjh htgkxsdgth n vgpcsth pbxvdh st Gdfjt Vjxcpgi.

P ad fjt sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó:

-Hx rdgithíph tcvtcsgpc rdgithíph, ap kjthigp, htñdg rpqpaatgd, th wxyp d
epgxtcip bjn rtgrpcp st aph sta vgpc Gdfjt. Aatkpsbt sd fjxhxégtsth, fjt nd
cd itcsgé digp kdajcips fjt ap kjthigp, n báh hx ap fjtgéxh drjepg tc
kjthigd htgkxrxd.

Rdc epapqgph cd btcdh rdbtsxsph fjt éhiph at gthedcsxó ta rpqpaatgd, n,
tcrtggácsdat idsdh tc btsxd, pa hdc st aph rwxgxbíph n st adh pipqpath, ht
tcrpbxcpgdc rdc éa p ap rxjsps, pa tcigpg st ap rjpa, ta bpad, fjt idsd ad
bpad dgstcp, n adh bjrwprwdh, fjt hdc báh bpadh fjt ta bpad, sdh staadh
igpkxthdh n pigtkxsdh ht tcigpgdc edg idsp ap vtcit, n, paopcsd ta jcd st
ap rdap sta gjrxd n ta digd ap st Gdrxcpcit, ath ejhxtgdc n tcrpypgdc
htcsdh bpcdydh st paxpvph. Hxcixtgdc adh edqgth pcxbpath aph cjtkph
thejtaph, n, pegtipcsd aph rdaph, pjbtcipgdc hj sxhvjhid, st bpctgp fjt,
spcsd bxa rdgrdkdh, sxtgdc rdc hjh sjtñdh tc ixtggp. Sdc Fjxydit, rdggxsd n
pugtcipsd, prjsxó p fjxipg ta eajbpyt st ap rdap st hj bpipadit, n Hpcrwd,
ta st hj gjrxd. Fjxhxtgpc adh fjt vjxpqpc p sdc Fjxydit rphixvpg ta
pigtkxbxtcid st adh bjrwprwdh, n cd ujt edhxqat, edgfjt ht tcrtggpgdc tcigt
báh st digdh bxa fjt adh htvjípc.

Kdakxtgdc p hjqxg sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd; rdc ta bxhbd peapjhd n búhxrp
aatvpgdc p ap rphp st hj vjíp, fjt tgp vgpcst n egxcrxepa, tc uxc, rdbd st
rpqpaatgd gxrd; sdcst at stypgtbdh edg pvdgp, edgfjt phí ad fjxtgt Rxst
Wpbtit.





Rpeíijad AMXX. Fjt igpip st ap pktcijgp st ap rpqtop tcrpcipsp, rdc digph
cxñtgíph fjt cd ejtstc stypg st rdcipght


Sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd ht aapbpqp ta wjéhets st sdc Fjxydit, rpqpaatgd gxrd n
sxhrgtid, n pbxvd st wdavpght p ad wdcthid n pupqat, ta rjpa, kxtcsd tc hj
rphp p sdc Fjxydit, pcspqp qjhrpcsd bdsdh rdbd, hxc hj etgyjxrxd, hprpht p
eapop hjh adrjgph; edgfjt cd hdc qjgaph aph fjt sjtatc, cx wpn ephpixtbedh
fjt kpavpc hx hdc rdc spñd st itgrtgd. Ad egxbtgd fjt wxod ujt wprtg
sthpgbpg p sdc Fjxydit n hprpgat p kxhiph rdc pfjta hj thigtrwd n prpbjopsd
kthixsd -rdbd np digph ktrth at wtbdh sthrgxid n excipsd- p jc qparóc fjt
hpaíp p jcp rpaat st aph báh egxcrxepath st ap rxjsps, p kxhip st aph
vtcith n st adh bjrwprwdh, fjt rdbd p bdcp at bxgpqpc. Rdggxtgdc st cjtkd
stapcit séa adh st aph axqgtph, rdbd hx epgp éa hdad, cd epgp patvgpg pfjta
uthixkd síp, ht aph wjqxtgpc ejthid; n Hpcrwd thipqp rdcitciíhxbd, edg
epgtrtgat fjt ht wpqíp wpaapsd, hxc hpqtg róbd cx róbd cd, digph qdsph st
Rpbprwd, digp rphp rdbd ap st sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp n digd rphixaad rdbd ta
sta sjfjt.

Rdbxtgdc pfjta síp rdc sdc Pcidcxd pavjcdh st hjh pbxvdh, wdcgpcsd idsdh n
igpipcsd p sdc Fjxydit rdbd p rpqpaatgd pcspcit, st ad rjpa, wjtrd n
edbedhd, cd rpqíp tc hí st rdcitcid. Adh sdcpxgth st Hpcrwd ujtgdc ipcidh,
fjt st hj qdrp pcspqpc rdbd rdavpsdh idsdh adh rgxpsdh st rphp n idsdh
rjpcidh at dípc. Thipcsd p ap bthp, sxyd sdc Pcidcxd p Hpcrwd:

-Prá itctbdh cdixrxp, qjtc Hpcrwd, fjt hdxh ipc pbxvd st bpcypg qapcrd n st
paqdcsxvjxaaph, fjt, hx dh hdqgpc, aph vjpgsáxh tc ta htcd epgp ta digd
síp.

-Cd, htñdg, cd th phí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt itcvd báh st axbexd fjt st
vdadhd, n bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt thiá stapcit, hpqt qxtc fjt rdc jc ejñd
st qtaadiph, d st cjtrth, cdh hdatbdh ephpg tcigpbqdh drwd síph. Ktgsps th
fjt hx ipa kto bt hjrtst fjt bt stc ap kpfjxaap, rdggd rdc ap hdvjxaap;
fjxtgd strxg fjt rdbd ad fjt bt spc, n jhd st adh ixtbedh rdbd adh wpaad; n
fjxtcfjxtgp fjt wjqxtgt sxrwd fjt nd hdn rdbtsdg pktcipypsd n cd axbexd,
iécvpht edg sxrwd fjt cd prxtgip; n st digp bpctgp sxytgp thid hx cd bxgpgp
p aph qpgqph wdcgpsph fjt thiác p ap bthp.

-Edg rxtgid -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt ap epghxbdcxp n axbextop rdc fjt Hpcrwd
rdbt ht ejtst thrgxqxg n vgpqpg tc aábxcph st qgdcrt, epgp fjt fjtst tc
btbdgxp titgcp st adh hxvadh ktcxstgdh. Ktgsps th fjt, rjpcsd éa ixtct
wpbqgt, epgtrt pavd igpvóc, edgfjt rdbt pegxthp n bphrp p sdh rpggxaadh;
etgd ap axbextop hxtbegt ap ixtct tc hj ejcid, n tc ta ixtbed fjt ujt
vdqtgcpsdg pegtcsxó p rdbtg p ad btaxcsgdhd: ipcid, fjt rdbíp rdc itctsdg
aph jkph n pjc adh vgpcdh st ap vgpcpsp.

-¡Róbd! -sxyd sdc Pcidcxd-. ¿Vdqtgcpsdg wp hxsd Hpcrwd?

-Hí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, n st jcp íchjap aapbpsp ap Qpgpipgxp. Sxto síph ap
vdqtgcé p etsxg st qdrp; tc taadh etgsí ta hdhxtvd, n pegtcsí p sthegtrxpg
idsdh adh vdqxtgcdh sta bjcsd; hpaí wjntcsd staap, rpí tc jcp rjtkp, sdcst
bt ijkt edg bjtgid, st ap rjpa hpaí kxkd edg bxapvgd.

Rdció sdc Fjxydit edg btcjsd idsd ta hjrthd sta vdqxtgcd st Hpcrwd, rdc fjt
sxd vgpc vjhid p adh dntcith.

Atkpcipsdh adh bpcitath, n idbpcsd sdc Pcidcxd edg ap bpcd p sdc Fjxydit,
ht tcigó rdc éa tc jc pepgipsd pedhtcid, tc ta rjpa cd wpqíp digp rdhp st
psdgcd fjt jcp bthp, pa epgtrtg st yphet, fjt hdqgt jc ext st ad bthbd ht
hdhitcíp, hdqgt ap rjpa thipqp ejthip, pa bdsd st aph rpqtoph st adh
tbetgpsdgth gdbpcdh, st adh etrwdh pggxqp, jcp fjt htbtypqp htg st qgdcrt.
Ephtóht sdc Pcidcxd rdc sdc Fjxydit edg idsd ta pedhtcid, gdstpcsd bjrwph
ktrth ap bthp, sthejéh st ad rjpa sxyd:

-Pvdgp, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt thidn tcitgpsd fjt cd cdh dnt n thrjrwp
pavjcd, n thiá rtggpsp ap ejtgip, fjxtgd rdcipg p kjthigp btgrts jcp st aph
báh gpgph pktcijgph, d, edg btydg strxg, cdktspsth fjt xbpvxcpght ejtstc,
rdc rdcsxrxóc fjt ad fjt p kjthigp btgrts sxytgt ad wp st stedhxipg tc adh
úaixbdh gtigtith sta htrgtid.

-Phí ad yjgd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n pjc at trwpgé jcp adhp tcrxbp, epgp
báh htvjgxsps; edgfjt fjxtgd fjt htep kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Pcidcxd
-fjt np hpqíp hj cdbqgt-, fjt thiá wpqapcsd rdc fjxtc, pjcfjt ixtct dísdh
epgp díg, cd ixtct atcvjp epgp wpqapg; phí fjt, rdc htvjgxsps ejtst kjthigp
btgrts igphapspg ad fjt ixtct tc hj etrwd tc ta bíd n wprtg rjtcip fjt ad
wp pggdypsd tc adh pqxhbdh sta hxatcrxd.

-Tc utt st thp egdbthp -gthedcsxó sdc Pcidcxd-, fjxtgd edctg p kjthigp
btgrts tc psbxgprxóc rdc ad fjt kxtgt n dntgt, n spgbt p bí pavúc paxkxd st
ap etcp fjt bt rpjhp cd itctg rdc fjxtc rdbjcxrpg bxh htrgtidh, fjt cd hdc
epgp uxpght st idsdh.

Hjhetchd thipqp sdc Fjxydit, thetgpcsd tc fjé wpqípc st epgpg ipciph
egtktcrxdcth. Tc thid, idbácsdat ap bpcd sdc Pcidcxd, ht ap ephtó edg ap
rpqtop st qgdcrt n edg idsp ap bthp, n edg ta ext st yphet hdqgt fjt ht
hdhitcíp, n ajtvd sxyd:

-Thip rpqtop, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, wp hxsd wtrwp n upqgxrpsp edg jcd st adh
bpndgth tcrpcipsdgth n wtrwxrtgdh fjt wp itcxsd ta bjcsd, fjt rgtd tgp
edaprd st cprxóc n sxríejad sta upbdhd Thrdixaad, st fjxtc ipciph
bpgpkxaaph ht rjtcipc; ta rjpa thijkd pfjí tc bx rphp, n edg egtrxd st bxa
thrjsdh fjt at sx, apqgó thip rpqtop, fjt ixtct egdextsps n kxgijs st
gthedcstg p rjpciph rdhph pa dísd at egtvjcipgtc. Vjpgsó gjbqdh, exció
rpgáritgth, dqhtgkó phigdh, bxgó ejcidh, n, uxcpabtcit, ap hpró rdc ap
etgutrxóc fjt ktgtbdh bpñpcp, edgfjt adh kxtgcth thiá bjsp, n wdn, fjt ad
th, cdh wp st wprtg thetgpg wphip bpñpcp. Tc thit ixtbed edsgá kjthigp
btgrts egtktcxght st ad fjt fjtggá egtvjcipg, fjt edg thetgxtcrxp hé fjt
sxrt ktgsps tc rjpcid gthedcst.

Psbxgpsd fjtsó sdc Fjxydit st ap kxgijs n egdextsps st ap rpqtop, n thijkd
edg cd rgttg p sdc Pcidcxd; etgd, edg ktg rjác edrd ixtbed wpqíp epgp wprtg
ap tmetgxtcrxp, cd fjxhd strxgat digp rdhp hxcd fjt at pvgpstríp ta wpqtgat
sthrjqxtgid ipc vgpc htrgtid. Hpaxtgdc sta pedhtcid, rtggó ap ejtgip sdc
Pcidcxd rdc aapkt, n ujégdcht p ap hpap, sdcst adh stbáh rpqpaatgdh
thipqpc. Tc thit ixtbed ath wpqíp rdcipsd Hpcrwd bjrwph st aph pktcijgph n
hjrthdh fjt p hj pbd wpqípc prdcitrxsd.

Pfjtaap ipgst hprpgdc p ephtpg p sdc Fjxydit, cd pgbpsd, hxcd st gúp,
kthixsd jc qpapcsgác st epñd atdcpsd, fjt ejsxtgp wprtg hjspg tc pfjta
ixtbed pa bxhbd ntad. Dgstcpgdc rdc hjh rgxpsdh fjt tcigtijkxthtc p Hpcrwd
st bdsd fjt cd at styphtc hpaxg st rphp. Xqp sdc Fjxydit, cd hdqgt
Gdrxcpcit, hxcd hdqgt jc vgpc bprwd st ephd aapcd, n bjn qxtc pstgtopsd.
Ejhxégdcat ta qpapcsgác, n tc aph thepasph, hxc fjt ad kxtht, at rdhxtgdc
jc epgvpbxcd, sdcst at thrgxqxtgdc rdc atigph vgpcsth: Éhit th sdc Fjxydit
st ap Bpcrwp. Tc rdbtcopcsd ta ephtd, aatkpqp ta géijad adh dydh st rjpcidh
ktcípc p ktgat, n rdbd atípc: Éhit th sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, psbxgáqpht
sdc Fjxydit st ktg fjt rjpcidh at bxgpqpc at cdbqgpqpc n rdcdrípc; n,
kdakxécsdht p sdc Pcidcxd, fjt xqp p hj apsd, at sxyd:

-Vgpcst th ap egtggdvpixkp fjt tcrxtggp tc hí ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, ejth
wprt rdcdrxsd n upbdhd pa fjt ap egduthp edg idsdh adh iégbxcdh st ap
ixtggp; hx cd, bxgt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Pcidcxd, fjt wphip adh
bjrwprwdh sthip rxjsps, hxc cjcrp wpqtgbt kxhid, bt rdcdrtc.

-Phí th, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -gthedcsxó sdc Pcidcxd-, fjt, phí rdbd ta ujtvd
cd ejtst thipg thrdcsxsd n tcrtggpsd, ap kxgijs cd ejtst stypg st htg
rdcdrxsp, n ap fjt ht parpcop edg ap egduthxóc st aph pgbph gtheapcstrt n
rpbetp hdqgt idsph aph digph.

Prptrxó, ejth, fjt, ntcsd sdc Fjxydit rdc ta peapjhd fjt ht wp sxrwd, jc
rphitaapcd fjt atnó ta géijad st aph thepasph, paoó ap kdo, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Káavpit ta sxpqad edg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp! ¿Róbd fjt wphip pfjí wph
aatvpsd, hxc wpqtgit bjtgid adh xcuxcxidh epadh fjt ixtcth p rjthiph? Ij
tgth adrd, n hx ad ujtgph p hdaph n stcigd st aph ejtgiph st ij adrjgp,
ujtgp btcdh bpa; etgd ixtcth egdextsps st kdaktg adrdh n btcitrpidh p
rjpcidh it igpipc n rdbjcxrpc; hx cd, bígtcad edg thidh htñdgth fjt it
prdbepñpc. Kjéaktit, btcitrpid, p ij rphp, n bxgp edg ij wprxtcsp, edg ij
bjytg n ijh wxydh, n séypit sthiph kprxtspsth fjt it rpgrdbtc ta hthd n it
sthcpipc ta tcitcsxbxtcid.

-Wtgbpcd -sxyd sdc Pcidcxd-, htvjxs kjthigd rpbxcd, n cd stxh rdchtydh p
fjxtc cd dh adh exst. Ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp th bjn rjtgsd, n
cdhdigdh, fjt at prdbepñpbdh, cd hdbdh ctrxdh; ap kxgijs ht wp st wdcgpg
sdcstfjxtgp fjt ht wpaapgt, n pcsps tc wdgp bpap, n cd dh btiáxh sdcst cd
dh aapbpc.

-Epgsxto, kjthp btgrts ixtct gpoóc -gthedcsxó ta rphitaapcd-, fjt prdchtypg
p thit qjtc wdbqgt th spg rdrth rdcigp ta pvjxyóc; etgd, rdc idsd thd, bt
sp bjn vgpc aáhixbp fjt ta qjtc xcvtcxd fjt sxrtc fjt ixtct tc idsph aph
rdhph thit btcitrpid ht at sthpvüt edg ap rpcpa st hj pcspcit rpqpaatgíp; n
ap tcwdgpbpap fjt kjthp btgrts sxyd, htp epgp bí n epgp idsdh bxh
sthrtcsxtcith hx st wdn báh, pjcfjt kxkxtht báh pñdh fjt Bpijhpaéc, sxtgt
rdchtyd p cpsxt, pjcfjt bt ad exsp.

Pepgióht ta rdchtytgd; hxvjxó pstapcit ta ephtd; etgd ujt ipcip ap egxthp
fjt adh bjrwprwdh n idsp ap vtcit itcíp atntcsd ta géijad, fjt ht at wjqd
st fjxipg sdc Pcidcxd, rdbd fjt at fjxipqp digp rdhp.

Aatvó ap cdrwt, kdakxégdcht p rphp; wjqd hpgpd st spbph, edgfjt ap bjytg st
sdc Pcidcxd, fjt tgp jcp htñdgp egxcrxepa n patvgt, wtgbdhp n sxhrgtip,
rdckxsó p digph hjh pbxvph p fjt kxcxthtc p wdcgpg p hj wjéhets n p vjhipg
st hjh cjcrp kxhiph adrjgph. Kxcxtgdc pavjcph, rtcóht theaécsxspbtcit n
rdbtcoóht ta hpgpd rphx p aph sxto st ap cdrwt. Tcigt aph spbph wpqíp sdh
st vjhid eírpgd n qjgadcph, n, rdc htg bjn wdcthiph, tgpc pavd
sthrdbejthiph, edg spg ajvpg fjt aph qjgaph patvgphtc hxc tcupsd. Éhiph
sxtgdc ipcip egxthp tc hprpg p spcopg p sdc Fjxydit, fjt at bdaxtgdc, cd
hóad ta rjtged, etgd ta ácxbp. Tgp rdhp st ktg ap uxvjgp st sdc Fjxydit,
apgvd, itcsxsd, uaprd, pbpgxaad, thigtrwd tc ta kthixsd, sthpxgpsd, n,
hdqgt idsd, cd cpsp axvtgd. Gtfjtqgáqpcat rdbd p wjgid aph spbxhtaph, n éa,
ipbqxéc rdbd p wjgid, aph sthstñpqp; etgd, kxécsdht pegtipg st gtfjxtqgdh,
paoó ap kdo n sxyd:

-Ujvxit, epgith psktghpt!: stypsbt tc bx hdhxtvd, etchpbxtcidh bpa ktcxsdh.
Paaá dh pktcxs, htñdgph, rdc kjthigdh sthtdh, fjt ap fjt th gtxcp st adh
bídh, ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, cd rdchxtcit fjt cxcvjcdh digdh fjt
adh hjndh bt pkphpaatc n gxcspc.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, ht htció tc bxips st ap hpap, tc ta hjtad, bdaxsd n
fjtqgpcipsd st ipc qpxapsdg tytgrxrxd. Wxod sdc Pcidcxd fjt at aatkphtc tc
ethd p hj atrwd, n ta egxbtgd fjt phxó séa ujt Hpcrwd, sxrxécsdat:

-¡Cdgp tc ipa, htñdg cjthigd pbd, ad wpqéxh qpxapsd! ¿Etcháxh fjt idsdh adh
kpaxtcith hdc spcopsdgth n idsdh adh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh qpxapgxcth? Sxvd
fjt hx ad etcháxh, fjt thiáxh tcvpñpsd; wdbqgt wpn fjt ht pigtktgá p bpipg
p jc vxvpcit pcith fjt wprtg jcp rpqgxdap. Hx wjqxégpsth st opepitpg, nd
hjeaxtgp kjthigp upaip, fjt opepitd rdbd jc vxgxupait; etgd tc ad sta
spcopg, cd sdn ejcipsp.

Rdc thiph n digph gpodcth sxd fjt gtíg Hpcrwd p adh sta hpgpd, n sxd rdc hj
pbd tc ap rpbp, pggdeácsdat epgp fjt hjspht ap ugxpasps st hj qpxat.

Digd síp at epgtrxó p sdc Pcidcxd htg qxtc wprtg ap tmetgxtcrxp st ap
rpqtop tcrpcipsp, n rdc sdc Fjxydit, Hpcrwd n digdh sdh pbxvdh, rdc aph sdh
htñdgph fjt wpqípc bdaxsd p sdc Fjxydit tc ta qpxat, fjt pfjtaap egdexp
cdrwt ht wpqípc fjtspsd rdc ap bjytg st sdc Pcidcxd, ht tcrtggó tc ap
thipcrxp sdcst thipqp ap rpqtop. Rdcióath ap egdextsps fjt itcíp,
tcrpgvóath ta htrgtid n síydath fjt pfjéa tgp ta egxbtgd síp sdcst ht wpqíp
st egdqpg ap kxgijs st ap ipa rpqtop tcrpcipsp; n hx cd tgpc adh sdh pbxvdh
st sdc Pcidcxd, cxcvjcp digp etghdcp hpqíp ta qjhxaxh sta tcrpcid, n pjc hx
sdc Pcidcxd cd ht at wjqxtgp sthrjqxtgid egxbtgd p hjh pbxvdh, ipbqxéc
taadh rpntgpc tc ap psbxgprxóc tc fjt adh stbáh rpntgdc, hxc htg edhxqat
digp rdhp: rdc ipa igpop n ipa dgstc thipqp upqgxrpsp.

Ta egxbtgd fjt ht aatvó pa dísd st ap rpqtop ujt ta bxhbd sdc Pcidcxd, n
síydat tc kdo hjbxhp, etgd cd ipcid fjt st idsdh cd ujtht tcitcsxsp:

-Sxbt, rpqtop, edg ap kxgijs fjt tc ix ht tcrxtggp: ¿fjé etchpbxtcidh itcvd
nd pvdgp?

N ap rpqtop at gthedcsxó, hxc bdktg adh apqxdh, rdc kdo rapgp n sxhixcip,
st bdsd fjt ujt st idsdh tcitcsxsp, thip gpoóc:

-Nd cd yjovd st etchpbxtcidh.

Dntcsd ad rjpa, idsdh fjtspgdc piócxidh, n báh kxtcsd fjt tc idsd ta
pedhtcid cx pa stggtsdg st ap bthp cd wpqíp etghdcp wjbpcp fjt gthedcstg
ejsxtht.

-¿Rjácidh thipbdh pfjí? -idgcó p egtvjcipg sdc Pcidcxd.

N ujtat gthedcsxsd edg ta egdexd itcdg, ephd:

-Thiáxh iú n ij bjytg, rdc sdh pbxvdh ijndh, n sdh pbxvph staap, n jc
rpqpaatgd upbdhd aapbpsd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, n jc hj thrjstgd fjt
Hpcrwd Epcop ixtct edg cdbqgt.

¡Pfjí hí fjt ujt ta psbxgpght st cjtkd, pfjí hí fjt ujt ta tgxopght adh
rpqtaadh p idsdh st ejgd thepcid! N, pepgiácsdht sdc Pcidcxd st ap rpqtop,
sxyd:

-Thid bt qphip epgp spgbt p tcitcstg fjt cd ujx tcvpñpsd sta fjt it bt
ktcsxó, ¡rpqtop hpqxp, rpqtop wpqapsdgp, rpqtop gthedcsdcp n psbxgpqat
rpqtop! Aatvjt digd n egtvúcitat ad fjt fjxhxtgt.

N, rdbd aph bjytgth st dgsxcpgxd hdc egthjgdhph n pbxvph st hpqtg, ap
egxbtgp fjt ht aatvó ujt jcp st aph sdh pbxvph st ap bjytg st sdc Pcidcxd,
n ad fjt at egtvjció ujt:

-Sxbt, rpqtop, ¿fjé wpgé nd epgp htg bjn wtgbdhp?

N ujtat gthedcsxsd:

-Hé bjn wdcthip.

-Cd it egtvjcid báh -sxyd ap egtvjcipcip.

Aatvó ajtvd ap rdbepñtgp, n sxyd:

-Fjtggíp hpqtg, rpqtop, hx bx bpgxsd bt fjxtgt qxtc, d cd.

N gthedcsxégdcat:

-Bxgp aph dqgph fjt it wprt, n trwpgad wph st ktg.

Pepgióht ap rphpsp sxrxtcsd:

-Thip gthejthip cd itcíp ctrthxsps st egtvjcip, edgfjt, tc tutrid, aph
dqgph fjt ht wprtc strapgpc ap kdajcips fjt ixtct ta fjt aph wprt.

Ajtvd aatvó jcd st adh sdh pbxvdh st sdc Pcidcxd, n egtvjcióat:

-¿Fjxéc hdn nd?

N ujtat gthedcsxsd:

-Iú ad hpqth.

-Cd it egtvjcid thd -gthedcsxó ta rpqpaatgd-, hxcd fjt bt sxvph hx bt
rdcdrth iú.

-Hí rdcdord -at gthedcsxtgdc-, fjt tgth sdc Etsgd Cdgxo.

-Cd fjxtgd hpqtg báh, ejth thid qphip epgp tcitcstg, ¡dw rpqtop!, fjt ad
hpqth idsd.

N, pepgiácsdht, aatvó ta digd pbxvd n egtvjcióat:

-Sxbt, rpqtop, ¿fjé sthtdh ixtct bx wxyd ta bpndgpovd?

-Np nd wt sxrwd -at gthedcsxtgdc- fjt nd cd yjovd st sthtdh, etgd, rdc idsd
thd, it hé strxg fjt adh fjt ij wxyd ixtct hdc st tcitggpgit.

-Thd th -sxyd ta rpqpaatgd-: ad fjt ktd edg adh dydh, rdc ta stsd ad
htñpad.

N cd egtvjció báh. Aatvóht ap bjytg st sdc Pcidcxd, n sxyd:

-Nd cd hé, rpqtop, fjé egtvjcipgit; hóad fjtggíp hpqtg st ix hx vdopgé
bjrwdh pñdh st qjtc bpgxsd.

N gthedcsxégdcat:

-Hí vdopgáh, edgfjt hj hpajs n hj itbeapcop tc ta kxkxg egdbtitc bjrwdh
pñdh st kxsp, ap rjpa bjrwdh hjtatc prdgipg edg hj sthitbeapcop.

Aatvóht ajtvd sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd:

-Sxbt iú, ta fjt gthedcsth: ¿ujt ktgsps d ujt hjtñd ad fjt nd rjtcid fjt bt
ephó tc ap rjtkp st Bdcithxcdh? ¿Htgác rxtgidh adh podith st Hpcrwd bx
thrjstgd? ¿Itcsgá tutid ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp?

-P ad st ap rjtkp -gthedcsxtgdc- wpn bjrwd fjt strxg: st idsd ixtct; adh
podith st Hpcrwd xgác st theprxd, ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp aatvpgá p
stqxsp tytrjrxóc.

-Cd fjxtgd hpqtg báh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; fjt rdbd nd ktp p Sjarxctp
sthtcrpcipsp, wpgé rjtcip fjt kxtctc st vdaet idsph aph ktcijgph fjt
prtgipgt p sthtpg.

Ta úaixbd egtvjcipcit ujt Hpcrwd, n ad fjt egtvjció ujt:

-¿Edg ktcijgp, rpqtop, itcsgé digd vdqxtgcd? ¿Hpasgé st ap thigtrwtop st
thrjstgd? ¿Kdaktgé p ktg p bx bjytg n p bxh wxydh?

P ad fjt at gthedcsxtgdc:

-Vdqtgcpgáh tc ij rphp; n hx kjtakth p taap, ktgáh p ij bjytg n p ijh
wxydh; n, stypcsd st htgkxg, stypgáh st htg thrjstgd.

-¡Qjtcd, epg Sxdh! -sxyd Hpcrwd Epcop-. Thid nd bt ad sxytgp: cd sxytgp báh
ta egdutip Etgdvgjaad.

-Qthixp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ¿fjé fjxtgth fjt it gthedcspc? ¿Cd qphip fjt
aph gthejthiph fjt thip rpqtop wp spsd rdggthedcspc p ad fjt ht at
egtvjcip?

-Hí qphip -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, etgd fjxhxtgp nd fjt ht strapgpgp báh n bt
sxytgp báh.

Rdc thid ht prpqpgdc aph egtvjciph n aph gthejthiph, etgd cd ht prpqó ap
psbxgprxóc tc fjt idsdh fjtspgdc, tmrteid adh sdh pbxvdh st sdc Pcidcxd,
fjt ta rphd hpqípc. Ta rjpa fjxhd Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax strapgpg ajtvd, edg
cd itctg hjhetchd pa bjcsd, rgtntcsd fjt pavúc wtrwxrtgd n tmigpdgsxcpgxd
bxhitgxd tc ap ipa rpqtop ht tcrtggpqp; n phí, sxrt fjt sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd,
p xbxiprxóc st digp rpqtop fjt kxd tc Bpsgxs, upqgxrpsp edg jc thipbetgd,
wxod éhip tc hj rphp, epgp tcigtitctght n hjhetcstg p adh xvcdgpcith; n ap
uáqgxrp tgp st thip hjtgit: ap ipqap st ap bthp tgp st epad, excipsp n
qpgcxopsp rdbd yphet, n ta ext hdqgt fjt ht hdhitcíp tgp st ad bthbd, rdc
rjpigd vpggph st ávjxap fjt séa hpaípc, epgp bpndg uxgbtop sta ethd. Ap
rpqtop, fjt epgtríp btspaap n uxvjgp st tbetgpsdg gdbpcd, n st rdadg st
qgdcrt, thipqp idsp wjtrp, n cx báh cx btcdh ap ipqap st ap bthp, tc fjt ht
tcrpypqp ipc yjhipbtcit, fjt cxcvjcp htñpa st yjcijgp ht epgtríp. Ta ext st
ap ipqap tgp pchxbthbd wjtrd, fjt gthedcsíp p ap vpgvpcip n etrwdh st ap
rpqtop, n idsd thid ktcíp p gthedcstg p digd pedhtcid fjt stqpyd st ap
thipcrxp st ap rpqtop thipqp. Edg idsd thit wjtrd st ext, bthp, vpgvpcip n
etrwdh st ap btspaap n uxvjgp gtutgxsp ht tcrpbxcpqp jc rpñóc st wdyp st
apip, bjn yjhid, fjt st cpsxt edsíp htg kxhid. Tc ta pedhtcid st pqpyd
rdggthedcsxtcit pa st pggxqp ht edcíp ta fjt wpqíp st gthedcstg, etvpsp ap
qdrp rdc ta bthbd rpñóc, st bdsd fjt, p bdsd st rtgqpipcp, xqp ap kdo st
pggxqp pqpyd n st pqpyd pggxqp, tc epapqgph pgixrjapsph n rapgph; n st thip
bpctgp cd tgp edhxqat rdcdrtg ta tbqjhit. Jc hdqgxcd st sdc Pcidcxd,
thijsxpcit pvjsd n sxhrgtid, ujt ta gthedcsxtcit; ta rjpa, thipcsd pkxhpsd
st hj htñdg iíd st adh fjt wpqípc st tcigpg rdc éa tc pfjta síp tc ta
pedhtcid st ap rpqtop, at ujt uárxa gthedcstg rdc egthitop n ejcijpaxsps p
ap egxbtgp egtvjcip; p aph stbáh gthedcsxó edg rdcytijgph, n, rdbd
sxhrgtid, sxhrgtipbtcit. N sxrt báh Rxst Wpbtit: fjt wphip sxto d sdrt síph
sjgó thip bpgpkxaadhp báfjxcp; etgd fjt, sxkjavácsdht edg ap rxjsps fjt sdc
Pcidcxd itcíp tc hj rphp jcp rpqtop tcrpcipsp, fjt p rjpcidh at egtvjcipqpc
gthedcsíp, itbxtcsd cd aatvpht p adh dísdh st aph sthextgiph rtcixctaph st
cjthigp Ut, wpqxtcsd strapgpsd ta rphd p adh htñdgth xcfjxhxsdgth, at
bpcspgdc fjt ad sthwxrxtht n cd ephpht báh pstapcit, edgfjt ta kjavd
xvcdgpcit cd ht thrpcspaxopht; etgd tc ap dexcxóc st sdc Fjxydit n st
Hpcrwd Epcop, ap rpqtop fjtsó edg tcrpcipsp n edg gthedcsdcp, báh p
hpixhuprxóc st sdc Fjxydit fjt st Hpcrwd.

Adh rpqpaatgdh st ap rxjsps, edg rdbeaprtg p sdc Pcidcxd n edg pvphpypg p
sdc Fjxydit n spg ajvpg p fjt sthrjqgxtht hjh hpcstrth, dgstcpgdc st rdggtg
hdgixyp st paaí p htxh síph; fjt cd ijkd tutrid edg ap drphxóc fjt ht sxgá
pstapcit. Sxdat vpcp p sdc Fjxydit st ephtpg ap rxjsps p ap aapcp n p ext,
itbxtcsd fjt, hx xqp p rpqpaad, at wpqípc st etghtvjxg adh bdrwprwdh, n
phí, éa n Hpcrwd, rdc digdh sdh rgxpsdh fjt sdc Pcidcxd at sxd, hpaxtgdc p
ephtpght.

Hjrtsxó, ejth, fjt, ntcsd edg jcp rpaat, paoó adh dydh sdc Fjxydit, n kxd
thrgxid hdqgt jcp ejtgip, rdc atigph bjn vgpcsth: Pfjí ht xbegxbtc axqgdh;
st ad fjt ht rdcitció bjrwd, edgfjt wphip tcidcrth cd wpqíp kxhid tbegtcip
pavjcp, n sthtpqp hpqtg róbd ujtht. Tcigó stcigd, rdc idsd hj
prdbepñpbxtcid, n kxd ixgpg tc jcp epgit, rdggtvxg tc digp, rdbedctg tc
éhip, tcbtcspg tc pfjéaap, n, uxcpabtcit, idsp pfjtaap báfjxcp fjt tc aph
tbegtciph vgpcsth ht bjthigp. Aatváqpht sdc Fjxydit p jc rpyóc n egtvjcipqp
fjé tgp pfjéaad fjt paaí ht wpríp; sáqpcat rjtcip adh duxrxpath, psbxgáqpht
n ephpqp pstapcit. Aatvó tc digph p jcd, n egtvjcióat fjé tgp ad fjt wpríp.
Ta duxrxpa at gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg, thit rpqpaatgd fjt pfjí thiá -n tchtñóat p jc wdbqgt st bjn qjtc
ipaat n epgtrtg n st pavjcp vgpktsps- wp igpsjrxsd jc axqgd idhrpcd tc
cjthigp atcvjp rphitaapcp, n thidnat nd rdbedcxtcsd, epgp spgat p ap
thipbep.

-¿Fjé iíijad ixtct ta axqgd? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-P ad fjt ta pjidg gthedcsxó:

-Htñdg, ta axqgd, tc idhrpcd, ht aapbp At qpvpitat.

-N ¿fjé gthedcst at qpvpitat tc cjthigd rphitaapcd? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-At qpvpitat -sxyd ta pjidg- th rdbd hx tc rphitaapcd sxyéhtbdh adh
yjvjtith; n, pjcfjt thit axqgd th tc ta cdbqgt wjbxast, rdcixtct n
tcrxtggp tc hí rdhph bjn qjtcph n hjhipcrxpath.

-Nd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- hé pavúc ipcid st ta idhrpcd, n bt egtrxd st rpcipg
pavjcph thipcrxph sta Pgxdhid. Etgd sívpbt kjthp btgrts, htñdg bíd, n cd
sxvd thid edgfjt fjxtgd tmpbxcpg ta xcvtcxd st kjthigp btgrts, hxcd edg
rjgxdhxsps cd báh: ¿wp wpaapsd tc hj thrgxijgp pavjcp kto cdbqgpg exñpip?

-Hí, bjrwph ktrth -gthedcsxó ta pjidg.

-N ¿róbd ap igpsjrt kjthigp btgrts tc rphitaapcd? -egtvjció sdc Fjxydit.

-¿Róbd ap wpqíp st igpsjrxg -gteaxró ta pjidg-, hxcd sxrxtcsd daap?

-¡Rjtged st ipa -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n fjé pstapcit thiá kjthp btgrts tc ta
idhrpcd xsxdbp! Nd pedhipgé jcp qjtcp pejthip fjt psdcst sxvp tc ta idhrpcd
exprwt, sxrt kjthp btgrts tc ta rphitaapcd eaprt; n psdcst sxvp exù, sxrt
báh, n ta hj strapgp rdc pggxqp, n ta vxù rdc pqpyd.

-Hí strapgd, edg rxtgid -sxyd ta pjidg-, edgfjt éhph hdc hjh egdexph
rdggthedcstcrxph.

-Dhpgé nd yjgpg -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt cd th kjthp btgrts rdcdrxsd tc ta
bjcsd, tctbxvd hxtbegt st egtbxpg adh uadgxsdh xcvtcxdh cx adh adpqath
igpqpydh. ¡Fjé st wpqxaxspsth wpn etgsxsph edg pwí! ¡Fjé st xcvtcxdh
pggxcrdcpsdh! ¡Fjé st kxgijsth btcdhegtrxpsph! Etgd, rdc idsd thid, bt
epgtrt fjt ta igpsjrxg st jcp atcvjp tc digp, rdbd cd htp st aph gtxcph st
aph atcvjph, vgxtvp n apixcp, th rdbd fjxtc bxgp adh ipexrth uapbtcrdh edg
ta gtkéh, fjt, pjcfjt ht kttc aph uxvjgph, hdc aatcph st wxadh fjt aph
thrjgtrtc, n cd ht kttc rdc ap axhjgp n ito st ap wpo; n ta igpsjrxg st
atcvjph uárxath, cx pgvjnt xcvtcxd cx tadrjrxóc, rdbd cd at pgvjnt ta fjt
igphapsp cx ta fjt rdexp jc epeta st digd epeta. N cd edg thid fjxtgd
xcutgxg fjt cd htp adpqat thit tytgrxrxd sta igpsjrxg; edgfjt tc digph
rdhph etdgth ht edsgíp drjepg ta wdbqgt, n fjt btcdh egdktrwd at igjythtc.
Ujtgp sthip rjtcip kpc adh sdh upbdhdh igpsjridgth: ta jcd, ta sdridg
Rgxhióqpa st Uxvjtgdp, tc hj Ephidg Uxsd, n ta digd, sdc Yjpc st Yájgxvjx,
tc hj Pbxcip, sdcst utaxobtcit edctc tc sjsp rjáa th ap igpsjrxóc d rjáa ta
dgxvxcpa. Etgd sívpbt kjthigp btgrts: thit axqgd, ¿xbegíbtht edg hj rjtcip,
d ixtct np ktcsxsd ta egxkxatvxd p pavúc axqgtgd?

-Edg bx rjtcip ad xbegxbd -gthedcsxó ta pjidg-, n extchd vpcpg bxa sjrpsdh,
edg ad btcdh, rdc thip egxbtgp xbegthxóc, fjt wp st htg st sdh bxa rjtgedh,
n ht wpc st stheprwpg p htxh gtpath rpsp jcd, tc sprp aph epyph.

-¡Qxtc thiá kjthp btgrts tc ap rjtcip! -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-. Qxtc epgtrt
fjt cd hpqt aph tcigpsph n hpaxsph st adh xbegthdgth, n aph
rdggthedcstcrxph fjt wpn st jcdh p digdh; nd at egdbtid fjt, rjpcsd ht ktp
rpgvpsd st sdh bxa rjtgedh st axqgdh, ktp ipc bdaxsd hj rjtged, fjt ht
thepcit, n báh hx ta axqgd th jc edrd pkxthd n cd cpsp exrpcit.

-Ejth, ¿fjé? -sxyd ta pjidg-. ¿Fjxtgt kjthp btgrts fjt ht ad sé p jc
axqgtgd, fjt bt sé edg ta egxkxatvxd igth bpgpktsíh, n púc extchp fjt bt
wprt btgrts tc ságbtadh? Nd cd xbegxbd bxh axqgdh epgp parpcopg upbp tc ta
bjcsd, fjt np tc éa hdn rdcdrxsd edg bxh dqgph: egdktrwd fjxtgd, fjt hxc éa
cd kpat jc rjpigíc ap qjtcp upbp.

-Sxdh at sé p kjthp btgrts qjtcp bpcstgtrwp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit.

N ephó pstapcit p digd rpyóc, sdcst kxd fjt thipqpc rdggxvxtcsd jc eaxtvd
st jc axqgd fjt ht xcixijapqp Ajo sta pabp; n,tc kxécsdat, sxyd:

-Thidh ipath axqgdh, pjcfjt wpn bjrwdh sthit véctgd, hdc adh fjt ht stqtc
xbegxbxg, edgfjt hdc bjrwdh adh etrpsdgth fjt ht jhpc, n hdc btcthitg
xcuxcxiph ajrth epgp ipcidh sthpajbqgpsdh.

Ephó pstapcit n kxd fjt phxbthbd thipqpc rdggxvxtcsd digd axqgd; n,
egtvjcipcsd hj iíijad, at gthedcsxtgdc fjt ht aapbpqp ap Htvjcsp epgit sta
Xcvtcxdhd Wxspavd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rdbejthip edg jc ipa ktrxcd st
Idgsthxaaph.

-Np nd itcvd cdixrxp sthit axqgd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n tc ktgsps n tc bx
rdcrxtcrxp fjt etché fjt np thipqp fjtbpsd n wtrwd edakdh, edg
xbetgixctcit; etgd hj Hpc Bpgiíc ht at aatvpgá, rdbd p rpsp ejtgrd, fjt aph
wxhidgxph uxcvxsph ipcid ixtctc st qjtcph n st statxipqath rjpcid ht aatvpc
p ap ktgsps d ap htbtypcop staap, n aph ktgspstgph ipcid hdc btydgth rjpcid
hdc báh ktgspstgph.

N, sxrxtcsd thid, rdc bjthigph st pavúc sthetrwd, ht hpaxó st ap tbegtcip.
N pfjta bthbd síp dgstcó sdc Pcidcxd st aatkpgat p ktg aph vpatgph fjt tc
ap eapnp thipqpc, st fjt Hpcrwd ht gtvdrxyó bjrwd, p rpjhp fjt tc hj kxsp
aph wpqíp kxhid. Pkxhó sdc Pcidcxd pa rjpigpaqd st aph vpatgph rdbd pfjtaap
ipgst wpqíp st aatkpg p ktgaph p hj wjéhets ta upbdhd sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, st fjxtc np ta rjpigpaqd n idsdh adh ktrxcdh st ap rxjsps itcípc
cdixrxp; n ad fjt at hjrtsxó tc taaph ht sxgá tc ta hxvjxtcit rpeíijad.





Rpeíijad AMXXX. St ad bpa fjt at pkxcd p Hpcrwd Epcop rdc ap kxhxip st aph
vpatgph, n ap cjtkp pktcijgp st ap wtgbdhp bdgxhrp


Vgpcsth tgpc adh sxhrjghdh fjt sdc Fjxydit wpríp hdqgt ap gthejthip st ap
tcrpcipsp rpqtop, hxc fjt cxcvjcd staadh sxtht tc ta tbqjhit, n idsdh
epgpqpc rdc ap egdbthp, fjt éa ijkd edg rxtgid, sta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp.
Paaí xqp n ktcíp, n ht patvgpqp tcigt hí bxhbd, rgtntcsd fjt wpqíp st ktg
egthid hj rjbeaxbxtcid; n Hpcrwd, pjcfjt pqdggtríp ta htg vdqtgcpsdg, rdbd
fjtsp sxrwd, idspkíp sthtpqp kdaktg p bpcspg n p htg dqtstrxsd; fjt thip
bpap ktcijgp igpt rdchxvd ta bpcsd, pjcfjt htp st qjgaph.

Tc gthdajrxóc, pfjtaap ipgst sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd, hj wjéhets, n hjh sdh
pbxvdh, rdc sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, ujtgdc p aph vpatgph. Ta rjpigpaqd, fjt
thipqp pkxhpsd st hj qjtcp ktcxsp, edg ktg p adh sdh ipc upbdhdh Fjxydit n
Hpcrwd, petcph aatvpgdc p ap bpgxcp, rjpcsd idsph aph vpatgph pqpixtgdc
ixtcsp, n hdcpgdc aph rwxgxbíph; pggdypgdc ajtvd ta thfjxut pa pvjp,
rjqxtgid st gxrdh ipetith n st pabdwpsph st itgrxdetad rpgbthí, n, tc
edcxtcsd fjt ejhd adh exth tc éa sdc Fjxydit, sxhepgó ap rpexipcp ta rpñóc
st rgjyíp, n aph digph vpatgph wxrxtgdc ad bthbd, n, pa hjqxg sdc Fjxydit
edg ap thrpap stgtrwp, idsp ap rwjhbp at hpajsó rdbd th jhpcop rjpcsd jcp
etghdcp egxcrxepa tcigp tc ap vpatgp, sxrxtcsd: ''¡Wj, wj, wj!'' igth
ktrth. Sxdat ap bpcd ta vtctgpa, fjt rdc thit cdbqgt at aapbpgtbdh, fjt tgp
jc egxcrxepa rpqpaatgd kpatcrxpcd; pqgpoó p sdc Fjxydit, sxrxécsdat:

-Thit síp htñpapgé nd rdc extsgp qapcrp, edg htg jcd st adh btydgth fjt
extchd aatkpg tc bx kxsp, wpqxtcsd kxhid pa htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp:
ixtbed n htñpa fjt cdh bjthigp fjt tc éa ht tcrxtggp n rxugp idsd ta kpadg
sta pcspcit rpqpaatgíp.

Rdc digph cd btcdh rdgithth gpodcth at gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit, patvgt
hdqgtbpctgp st ktght igpipg ipc p ad htñdg. Tcigpgdc idsdh tc ap edep, fjt
thipqp bjn qxtc pstgtopsp, n htciágdcht edg adh qpcsxcth, ephóht ta róbxigt
tc rgjyíp, n sxd htñpa rdc ta exid fjt ap rwjhbp wxrxtht ujtgp gdep, fjt ht
wxod tc jc xchipcit. Hpcrwd, fjt kxd ipcip vtcit tc rjtgdh, fjtsó ephbpsd,
n báh rjpcsd kxd wprtg ixtcsp rdc ipcip egxthp, fjt p éa at epgtrxó fjt
idsdh adh sxpqadh pcspqpc paaí igpqpypcsd; etgd thid idsd ujtgdc idgiph n
epc excipsd epgp ad fjt pwdgp sxgé. Thipqp Hpcrwd htcipsd hdqgt ta
thipcitgda, yjcid pa thepastg st ap bpcd stgtrwp, ta rjpa np pkxhpsd st ad
fjt wpqíp st wprtg, phxó st Hpcrwd, n, atkpciácsdat tc adh qgpodh, idsp ap
rwjhbp ejthip tc ext n patgip, rdbtcopcsd st ap stgtrwp qpcsp, at ujt spcsd
n kdaitpcsd hdqgt adh qgpodh st ap rwjhbp st qpcrd tc qpcrd, rdc ipcip
egxthp, fjt ta edqgt Hpcrwd etgsxó ap kxhip st adh dydh, n hxc sjsp etchó
fjt adh bxhbdh stbdcxdh at aatkpqpc, n cd epgpgdc rdc éa wphip kdaktgat edg
ap hxcxthigp qpcsp n edctgat tc ap edep. Fjtsó ta edqgt bdaxsd, n ypstpcsd,
n igphjspcsd, hxc edstg xbpvxcpg fjé ujt ad fjt hjrtsxsd at wpqíp.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt kxd ta kjtad hxc paph st Hpcrwd, egtvjció pa vtctgpa hx
tgpc rtgtbdcxph pfjéaaph fjt ht jhpqpc rdc adh egxbtgdh fjt tcigpqpc tc aph
vpatgph; edgfjt hx prphd ad ujtht, éa, fjt cd itcíp xcitcrxóc st egduthpg
tc taaph, cd fjtgíp wprtg htbtypcith tytgrxrxdh, n fjt kdipqp p Sxdh fjt,
hx pavjcd aatvpqp p phxgat epgp kdaitpgat, fjt at wpqíp st hprpg ta pabp p
ejcixaapodh; n, sxrxtcsd thid, ht atkpció tc ext n tbejñó ap thepsp.

P thit xchipcit pqpixtgdc ixtcsp, n rdc vgpcsíhxbd gjxsd stypgdc rptg ap
tcitcp st paid pqpyd. Etchó Hpcrwd fjt ta rxtad ht sthtcrpypqp st hjh
fjxrxdh n ktcíp p spg hdqgt hj rpqtop; n, pvdqxácsdap, aatcd st bxtsd, ap
ejhd tcigt aph extgcph. Cd aph ijkd idsph rdchxvd sdc Fjxydit; fjt ipbqxéc
ht thigtbtrxó n tcrdvxó st wdbqgdh n etgsxó ap rdadg sta gdhigd. Ap rwjhbp
xoó ap tcitcp rdc ap bxhbp egxthp n gjxsd fjt ap wpqípc pbpxcpsd, n idsd
thid, rpaapcsd, rdbd hx cd ijkxtgpc kdo cx paxtcid. Wxod htñpa ta róbxigt
fjt opgephtc ta utggd, n, hpaipcsd tc bxips st ap rgjyíp rdc ta rdgqprwd d
gtqtcfjt, rdbtcoó p bdhfjtpg aph thepasph st ap rwjhbp, n p apgvpght edrd p
edrd p ap bpg. Rjpcsd Hpcrwd kxd p jcp bdktght ipcidh exth rdadgpsdh, fjt
ipath etchó éa fjt tgpc adh gtbdh, sxyd tcigt hí:

-Éhiph hí hdc ktgspstgpbtcit rdhph tcrpcipsph, n cd aph fjt bx pbd sxrt.
¿Fjé wpc wtrwd thidh sthsxrwpsdh, fjt pchí adh podipc, n róbd thit wdbqgt
hdad, fjt pcsp edg pfjí hxaqpcsd, ixtct pigtkxbxtcid epgp podipg p ipcip
vtcit? Pwdgp nd sxvd fjt éhit th xcuxtgcd, d, edg ad btcdh, ta ejgvpidgxd.

Sdc Fjxydit, fjt kxd ap pitcrxóc rdc fjt Hpcrwd bxgpqp ad fjt ephpqp, at
sxyd:

-¡Pw Hpcrwd pbxvd, n rdc fjé qgtktsps n rjác p edrp rdhip dh edsípsth kdh,
hx fjxhxéhtsth, sthcjspg st btsxd rjtged pggxqp, n edctgdh tcigt thidh
htñdgth, n prpqpg rdc ta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp! Ejth rdc ap bxhtgxp n etcp
st ipcidh, cd htcixgípsth kdh bjrwd ap kjthigp; n báh, fjt edsgíp htg fjt
ta hpqxd Btgaíc idbpht tc rjtcip rpsp podit séhidh, edg htg spsdh st qjtcp
bpcd, edg sxto st adh fjt kdh uxcpabtcit dh wpqéxh st spg.

Egtvjcipg fjtgíp ta vtctgpa fjé podith tgpc pfjéaadh, d fjé sthtcrpcid st
Sjarxctp, rjpcsd sxyd ta bpgxctgd:

-Htñpa wprt Bdcyjí st fjt wpn qpyta st gtbdh tc ap rdhip edg ap qpcsp sta
edcxtcit.

Thid dísd, hpaió ta vtctgpa tc ap rgjyíp, n sxyd:

-¡Tp wxydh, cd ht cdh kpnp! Pavúc qtgvpciíc st rdhpgxdh st Pgvta stqt st
htg éhit fjt ap pipapnp cdh htñpap.

Aatvágdcht ajtvd aph digph igth vpatgph p ap rpexipcp, p hpqtg ad fjt ht
ath dgstcpqp. Bpcsó ta vtctgpa fjt aph sdh hpaxthtc p ap bpg, n éa rdc ap
digp xgíp ixtggp p ixtggp, edgfjt pchí ta qpyta cd ht ath thrpepgíp. Pegtió
ap rwjhbp adh gtbdh, xbetaxtcsd aph vpatgph rdc ipcip ujgxp, fjt epgtríp
fjt kdapqpc. Aph fjt hpaxtgdc p ap bpg, p dqgp st sdh bxaaph sthrjqgxtgdc
jc qpyta, fjt rdc ap kxhip at bpgrpgdc edg st wphip rpidgrt d fjxcrt
qpcrdh, n phí tgp ap ktgsps; ta rjpa qpyta, rjpcsd sthrjqgxó aph vpatgph,
ht ejhd tc rpop, rdc xcitcrxóc n thetgpcop st thrpepght edg hj axvtgtop;
etgd pkícdat bpa, edgfjt ap vpatgp rpexipcp tgp st adh báh axvtgdh qpytath
fjt tc ap bpg cpktvpqpc, n phí at ujt tcigpcsd, fjt rapgpbtcit adh sta
qtgvpciíc rdcdrxtgdc fjt cd edsípc thrpepght; n phí, ta pggáto fjxhxtgp fjt
stypgpc adh gtbdh n ht tcigtvpgpc, edg cd xggxipg p tcdyd pa rpexiác fjt
cjthigph vpatgph gtvíp. Etgd ap hjtgit, fjt st digp bpctgp ad vjxpqp,
dgstcó fjt, np fjt ap rpexipcp aatvpqp ipc rtgrp fjt edsípc adh sta qpyta
díg aph kdrth fjt sthst taap ath strípc fjt ht gxcsxthtc, sdh idgpfjíh, fjt
th rdbd strxg sdh ijgrdh qdggprwdh, fjt tc ta qtgvpciíc ktcípc rdc thidh
sdrt, sxhepgpgdc sdh thrdetiph, rdc fjt sxtgdc bjtgit p sdh hdaspsdh fjt
hdqgt cjthigph pggjbqpsph ktcípc. Kxtcsd ad rjpa, yjgó ta vtctgpa st cd
stypg rdc kxsp p idsdh rjpcidh tc ta qpyta idbpht, n, aatvpcsd p tbqthixg
rdc idsp ujgxp, ht at thrpeó edg stqpyd st ap epapbtcip. Ephó ap vpatgp
pstapcit jc qjtc igtrwd; adh sta qpyta ht kxtgdc etgsxsdh, wxrxtgdc ktap tc
ipcid fjt ap vpatgp kdakíp, n st cjtkd, p ktap n p gtbd, ht ejhxtgdc tc
rpop; etgd cd ath pegdktrwó hj sxaxvtcrxp ipcid rdbd ath spñó hj
pigtkxbxtcid, edgfjt, parpcoácsdath ap rpexipcp p edrd báh st btsxp bxaap,
ath trwó ap epapbtcip tcrxbp n adh rdvxó kxkdh p idsdh.

Aatvpgdc tc thid aph digph sdh vpatgph, n idsph rjpigd rdc ap egthp
kdakxtgdc p ap eapnp, sdcst xcuxcxip vtcit adh thipqp thetgpcsd, sthtdhdh
st ktg ad fjt igpípc. Sxd udcsd ta vtctgpa rtgrp st ixtggp, n rdcdrxó fjt
thipqp tc ap bpgxcp ta kxggtn st ap rxjsps. Bpcsó trwpg ta thfjxut epgp
igptgat, n bpcsó pbpxcpg ap tcitcp epgp pwdgrpg ajtvd ajtvd pa pggáto n p
adh stbáh ijgrdh fjt tc ta qpyta wpqíp rdvxsd, fjt htgípc wphip igtxcip n
htxh etghdcph, idsdh vpaapgsdh, n adh báh, thrdetitgdh ijgrdh. Egtvjció ta
vtctgpa fjxéc tgp ta pggáto sta qtgvpciíc n ujtat gthedcsxsd edg jcd st adh
rpjixkdh, tc atcvjp rphitaapcp, fjt sthejéh epgtrxó htg gtctvpsd thepñda:

-Thit bpcrtqd, htñdg, fjt pfjí ktth th cjthigd pggáto.

N bdhigóat jcd st adh báh qtaadh n vpaapgsdh bdodh fjt ejsxtgp excipg ap
wjbpcp xbpvxcprxóc. Ap tsps, pa epgtrtg, cd aatvpqp p ktxcit pñdh.
Egtvjcióat ta vtctgpa:

-Sxbt, bpa prdchtypsd etggd, ¿fjxéc it bdkxó p bpipgbt bxh hdaspsdh, ejth
ktíph htg xbedhxqat ta thrpepgit? ¿Tht gthetid ht vjpgsp p aph rpexipcph?
¿Cd hpqth iú fjt cd th kpatciíp ap itbtgxsps? Aph thetgpcoph sjsdhph wpc st
wprtg p adh wdbqgth pigtkxsdh, etgd cd itbtgpgxdh.

Gthedcstg fjtgíp ta pggáto; etgd cd ejsd ta vtctgpa, edg tcidcrth, díg ap
gthejthip, edg prjsxg p gtrtqxg pa kxggtn, fjt np tcigpqp tc ap vpatgp, rdc
ta rjpa tcigpgdc pavjcdh st hjh rgxpsdh n pavjcph etghdcph sta ejtqad.

-¡Qjtcp wp thipsd ap rpop, htñdg vtctgpa! -sxyd ta kxggtn.

-N ipc qjtcp -gthedcsxó ta vtctgpa- rjpa ap ktgá Kjthigp Tmrtatcrxp pvdgp
rdavpsp st thip tcitcp.

-¿Róbd pchí? -gteaxró ta kxggtn.

-Edgfjt bt wpc bjtgid -gthedcsxó ta vtctgpa-, rdcigp idsp atn n rdcigp idsp
gpoóc n jhpcop st vjtggp, sdh hdaspsdh st adh btydgth fjt tc thiph vpatgph
ktcípc, n nd wt yjgpsd st pwdgrpg p rjpcidh wt rpjixkpsd, egxcrxepabtcit p
thit bdod, fjt th ta pggáto sta qtgvpciíc.

N tchtñóat pa fjt np itcíp pipsph aph bpcdh n trwpsd ta rdgsta p ap
vpgvpcip, thetgpcsd ap bjtgit.

Bxgóat ta kxggtn, n, kxécsdat ipc wtgbdhd, n ipc vpaapgsd, n ipc wjbxast,
sácsdat tc pfjta xchipcit jcp rpgip st gtrdbtcsprxóc hj wtgbdhjgp, at kxcd
sthtd st thrjhpg hj bjtgit; n phí, at egtvjció:

-Sxbt, pggáto, ¿tgth ijgrd st cprxóc, d bdgd, d gtctvpsd?

P ad rjpa ta bdod gthedcsxó, tc atcvjp phxbthbd rphitaapcp:

-Cx hdn ijgrd st cprxóc, cx bdgd, cx gtctvpsd.

-Ejth, ¿fjé tgth? -gteaxró ta kxggtn.

-Bjytg rgxhixpcp -gthedcsxó ta bpcrtqd.

-¿Bjytg n rgxhixpcp, n tc ipa igpyt n tc ipath ephdh? Báh th rdhp epgp
psbxgpgap fjt epgp rgttgap.

-Hjhetcsts -sxyd ta bdod-, ¡dw htñdgth!, ap tytrjrxóc st bx bjtgit, fjt cd
ht etgstgá bjrwd tc fjt ht sxapit kjthigp ktcvpcop tc ipcid fjt nd dh
rjtcit bx kxsp.

¿Fjxéc ujtgp ta st rdgpoóc ipc sjgd fjt rdc thiph gpodcth cd ht pqapcspgp,
d, p ad btcdh, wphip díg aph fjt ta igxhit n aphixbpsd bpcrtqd strxg
fjtgíp? Ta vtctgpa at sxyd fjt sxytht ad fjt fjxhxtht, etgd fjt cd thetgpht
parpcopg etgsóc st hj rdcdrxsp rjaep. Rdc thip axrtcrxp, ta bdod rdbtcoó p
strxg sthip bpctgp:

-«St pfjtaap cprxóc báh sthsxrwpsp fjt egjstcit, hdqgt fjxtc wp aadkxsd
thidh síph jc bpg st sthvgprxph, cprí nd, st bdgxhrdh epsgth tcvtcsgpsp. Tc
ap rdggxtcit st hj sthktcijgp ujx nd edg sdh iídh bídh aatkpsp p Qtgqtgíp,
hxc fjt bt pegdktrwpht strxg fjt tgp rgxhixpcp, rdbd, tc tutrid, ad hdn, n
cd st aph uxcvxsph cx pepgtcith, hxcd st aph ktgspstgph n rpióaxrph. Cd bt
kpaxó, rdc adh fjt itcípc p rpgvd cjthigd bxhtgpqat sthixtggd, strxg thip
ktgsps, cx bxh iídh fjxhxtgdc rgttgap; pcith ap ijkxtgdc edg btcixgp n edg
xcktcrxóc epgp fjtspgbt tc ap ixtggp sdcst wpqíp cprxsd, n phí, edg ujtgop
báh fjt edg vgpsd, bt igjytgdc rdchxvd. Ijkt jcp bpsgt rgxhixpcp n jc epsgt
sxhrgtid n rgxhixpcd, cx báh cx btcdh; bpbé ap ut rpióaxrp tc ap atrwt;
rgxébt rdc qjtcph rdhijbqgth; cx tc ap atcvjp cx tc taaph ypbáh, p bx
epgtrtg, sx htñpath st htg bdgxhrp. Pa epg n pa ephd sthiph kxgijsth, fjt
nd rgtd fjt ad hdc, rgtrxó bx wtgbdhjgp, hx th fjt itcvd pavjcp; n, pjcfjt
bx gtrpid n bx tcrtggpbxtcid ujt bjrwd, cd stqxó st htg ipcid fjt cd
ijkxtht ajvpg st ktgbt jc bpcrtqd rpqpaatgd, aapbpsd sdc Vphepg Vgtvdgxd,
wxyd bpndgpovd st jc rpqpaatgd fjt yjcid p cjthigd ajvpg digd hjnd ixtct.
Róbd bt kxd, róbd cdh wpqapbdh, róbd ht kxd etgsxsd edg bí n róbd nd cd bjn
vpcpsp edg éa, htgíp apgvd st rdcipg, n báh tc ixtbed fjt thidn itbxtcsd
fjt, tcigt ap atcvjp n ap vpgvpcip, ht wp st pigpkthpg ta gxvjgdhd rdgsta
fjt bt pbtcpop; n phí, hóad sxgé róbd tc cjthigd sthixtggd fjxhd
prdbepñpgbt sdc Vgtvdgxd. Btoraóht rdc adh bdgxhrdh fjt st digdh ajvpgth
hpaxtgdc, edgfjt hpqíp bjn qxtc ap atcvjp, n tc ta kxpyt ht wxod pbxvd st
sdh iídh bídh fjt rdchxvd bt igpípc; edgfjt bx epsgt, egjstcit n egtktcxsd,
phí rdbd dnó ta egxbtg qpcsd st cjthigd sthixtggd, ht hpaxó sta ajvpg n ht
ujt p qjhrpg pavjcd tc adh gtxcdh thigpñdh fjt cdh prdvxtht. Styó
tcrtggpsph n tcitggpsph, tc jcp epgit st fjxtc nd hdap itcvd cdixrxp,
bjrwph etgaph n extsgph st vgpc kpadg, rdc pavjcdh sxctgdh tc rgjopsdh n
sdqadcth st dgd. Bpcsóbt fjt cd idrpht pa ithdgd fjt stypqp tc cxcvjcp
bpctgp, hx prphd pcith fjt éa kdakxtht cdh sthitggpqpc. Wírtad phí, n rdc
bxh iídh, rdbd itcvd sxrwd, n digdh epgxtcith n paatvpsdh ephpbdh p
Qtgqtgíp; n ta ajvpg sdcst wxrxbdh phxtcid ujt tc Pgvta, rdbd hx at
wxrxégpbdh tc ta bxhbd xcuxtgcd. Ijkd cdixrxp ta gtn st bx wtgbdhjgp, n ap
upbp ht ap sxd st bxh gxfjtoph, fjt, tc epgit, ujt ktcijgp bíp. Aapbóbt
pcit hí, egtvjcióbt st fjé epgit st Thepñp tgp n fjé sxctgdh n fjé ydnph
igpíp. Síytat ta ajvpg, n fjt aph ydnph n sxctgdh fjtspqpc tc éa
tcitggpsdh, etgd fjt rdc uprxaxsps ht edsgípc rdqgpg hx nd bxhbp kdakxtht
edg taadh. Idsd thid at sxyt, itbtgdhp st fjt cd at rtvpht bx wtgbdhjgp,
hxcd hj rdsxrxp. Thipcsd rdcbxvd tc thiph eaáixrph, at aatvpgdc p strxg
róbd ktcíp rdcbxvd jcd st adh báh vpaapgsdh n wtgbdhdh bpcrtqdh fjt ht
edsíp xbpvxcpg. Ajtvd tcitcsí fjt ad strípc edg sdc Vphepg Vgtvdgxd, rjnp
qtaatop ht styp pigáh aph bpndgth fjt tcrpgtrtg ht ejtstc. Ijgqébt,
rdchxstgpcsd ta etaxvgd fjt sdc Vgtvdgxd rdggíp, edgfjt tcigt pfjtaadh
qágqpgdh ijgrdh tc báh ht ixtct n thixbp jc bdrwprwd d bpcrtqd wtgbdhd fjt
jcp bjytg, edg qtaaíhxbp fjt htp. Bpcsó ajtvd ta gtn fjt ht at igjythtc
paaí stapcit epgp ktgat, n egtvjcióbt hx tgp ktgsps ad fjt st pfjta bdod at
strípc. Tcidcrth nd, rphx rdbd egtktcxsp sta rxtad, at sxyt fjt hí tgp;
etgd fjt at wpríp hpqtg fjt cd tgp kpgóc, hxcd bjytg rdbd nd, n fjt at
hjeaxrpqp bt ap stypht xg p kthixg tc hj cpijgpa igpyt, epgp fjt st idsd tc
idsd bdhigpht hj qtaatop n rdc btcdh tbeprwd epgtrxtht pcit hj egthtcrxp.
Síydbt fjt ujtht tc qjtcp wdgp, n fjt digd síp wpqapgípbdh tc ta bdsd fjt
ht edsíp itctg epgp fjt nd kdakxtht p Thepñp p hprpg ta thrdcsxsd ithdgd.
Wpqaé rdc sdc Vphepg, rdciéat ta etaxvgd fjt rdggíp ta bdhigpg htg wdbqgt;
kthiíat st bdgp, n pfjtaap bthbp ipgst at igjyt p ap egthtcrxp sta gtn, ta
rjpa, tc kxécsdat, fjtsó psbxgpsd n wxod sxhxvcxd st vjpgspgap epgp wprtg
egthtcit staap pa Vgpc Htñdg; n, edg wjxg sta etaxvgd fjt tc ta htggpaad st
hjh bjytgth edsíp itctg n itbtg st hí bxhbd, ap bpcsó edctg tc rphp st jcph
egxcrxepath bdgph fjt ap vjpgsphtc n ap hxgkxthtc, psdcst at aatkpgdc
ajtvd. Ad fjt adh sdh htcixbdh (fjt cd ejtsd ctvpg fjt cd at fjxtgd) ht
styt p ap rdchxstgprxóc st adh fjt ht pepgipc hx qxtc ht fjxtgtc. Sxd ajtvd
igpop ta gtn st fjt nd kdakxtht p Thepñp tc thit qtgvpciíc n fjt bt
prdbepñphtc sdh ijgrdh st cprxóc, fjt ujtgdc adh fjt bpipgdc kjthigdh
hdaspsdh. Kxcd ipbqxéc rdcbxvd thit gtctvpsd thepñda -htñpapcsd pa fjt
wpqíp wpqapsd egxbtgd-, sta rjpa hé nd qxtc fjt th rgxhixpcd tcrjqxtgid n
fjt kxtct rdc báh sthtd st fjtspght tc Thepñp fjt st kdaktg p Qtgqtgíp; ap
stbáh rwjhbp sta qtgvpciíc hdc bdgdh n ijgrdh, fjt cd hxgktc st báh fjt st
qdvpg pa gtbd. Adh sdh ijgrdh, rdsxrxdhdh t xchdatcith, hxc vjpgspg ta
dgstc fjt igpípbdh st fjt p bí n p thit gtctvpsd tc ap egxbtg epgit st
Thepñp, tc wáqxid st rgxhixpcdh, st fjt ktcxbdh egdktísdh, cdh trwphtc tc
ixtggp, egxbtgd fjxhxtgdc qpggtg thip rdhip n wprtg pavjcp egthp, hx
ejsxthtc, itbxtcsd fjt hx egxbtgd cdh trwpqpc tc ixtggp, edg pavúc prxstcit
fjt p adh sdh cdh hjrtsxtht, edsgípbdh sthrjqgxg fjt fjtspqp ta qtgvpciíc
tc ap bpg, n hx prphd wjqxtht vpatgph edg thip rdhip, adh idbphtc. Pcdrwt
sthrjqgxbdh thip eapnp, n, hxc itctg cdixrxp sthiph rjpigd vpatgph,
ujxbdh sthrjqxtgidh, n cdh wp hjrtsxsd ad fjt wpqéxh kxhid. Tc gthdajrxóc:
sdc Vgtvdgxd fjtsp tc wáqxid st bjytg tcigt bjytgth, rdc bpcxuxthid etaxvgd
st etgstght, n nd bt ktd pipsph aph bpcdh, thetgpcsd, d, edg btydg strxg,
itbxtcsd etgstg ap kxsp, fjt np bt rpchp.» Éhit th, htñdgth, ta uxc st bx
apbtcipqat wxhidgxp, ipc ktgspstgp rdbd sthsxrwpsp; ad fjt dh gjtvd th fjt
bt styéxh bdgxg rdbd rgxhixpcp, ejth, rdbd np wt sxrwd, tc cxcvjcp rdhp wt
hxsd rjaepcit st ap rjaep tc fjt adh st bx cprxóc wpc rpísd.

N ajtvd rpaaó, egtñpsdh adh dydh st ixtgcph aávgxbph, p fjxtc prdbepñpgdc
bjrwph st adh fjt egthtcith thipqpc. Ta kxggtn, ixtgcd n rdbephxkd, hxc
wpqapgat epapqgp, ht aatvó p taap n at fjxió rdc hjh bpcdh ta rdgsta fjt
aph wtgbdhph st ap bdgp axvpqp.

Tc ipcid, ejth, fjt ap bdgxhrp rgxhixpcp hj etgtvgxcp wxhidgxp igpipqp,
ijkd rapkpsdh adh dydh tc taap jc pcrxpcd etgtvgxcd fjt tcigó tc ap vpatgp
rjpcsd tcigó ta kxggtn; n, petcph sxd uxc p hj eaáixrp ap bdgxhrp, rjpcsd
éa ht pggdyó p hjh exth, n, pqgpopsd staadh, rdc xcitggjbexsph epapqgph st
bxa hdaadodh n hjhexgdh, at sxyd:

-¡Dw Pcp Uéaxm, sthsxrwpsp wxyp bíp! Nd hdn ij epsgt Gxrdit, fjt kdakíp p
qjhrpgit edg cd edstg kxkxg hxc ix, fjt tgth bx pabp.

P rjnph epapqgph pqgxó adh dydh Hpcrwd, n paoó ap rpqtop (fjt xcraxcpsp
itcíp, etchpcsd tc ap sthvgprxp st hj ephtd), n, bxgpcsd pa etgtvgxcd,
rdcdrxó htg ta bxhbd Gxrdit fjt ideó ta síp fjt hpaxó st hj vdqxtgcd, n
rdcuxgbóht fjt pfjéaap tgp hj wxyp, ap rjpa, np sthpipsp, pqgpoó p hj
epsgt, btorapcsd hjh aávgxbph rdc aph hjnph; ta rjpa sxyd pa vtctgpa n pa
kxggtn:

-Éhip, htñdgth, th bx wxyp, báh sthsxrwpsp tc hjh hjrthdh fjt tc hj cdbqgt.
Pcp Uéaxm ht aapbp, rdc ta hdqgtcdbqgt st Gxrdit, upbdhp ipcid edg hj
wtgbdhjgp rdbd edg bx gxfjtop. Nd hpaí st bx epigxp p qjhrpg tc gtxcdh
thigpñdh fjxtc cdh paqtgvpht n gtrdvxtht, n, wpqxécsdat wpaapsd tc
Patbpcxp, kdakí tc thit wáqxid st etgtvgxcd, tc rdbepñíp st digdh patbpcth,
p qjhrpg bx wxyp n p sthtcitggpg bjrwph gxfjtoph fjt styé thrdcsxsph. Cd
wpaaé p bx wxyp; wpaaé ta ithdgd, fjt rdcbxvd igpxvd, n pvdgp, edg ta
thigpñd gdstd fjt wpqéxh kxhid, wt wpaapsd ta ithdgd fjt báh bt tcgxfjtrt,
fjt th p bx fjtgxsp wxyp. Hx cjthigp edrp rjaep n hjh aávgxbph n aph bíph,
edg ap xcitvgxsps st kjthigp yjhixrxp, ejtstc pqgxg ejtgiph p ap
bxhtgxrdgsxp, jhpsap rdc cdhdigdh, fjt ypbáh ijkxbdh etchpbxtcid st
dutcstgdh, cx rdcktcxbdh tc cxcvúc bdsd rdc ap xcitcrxóc st adh cjthigdh,
fjt yjhipbtcit wpc hxsd sthitggpsdh.

Tcidcrth sxyd Hpcrwd:

-Qxtc rdcdord p Gxrdit, n hé fjt th ktgsps ad fjt sxrt tc rjpcid p htg Pcp
Uéaxm hj wxyp; fjt tc thdigph opgpcspyph st xg n ktcxg, itctg qjtcp d bpap
xcitcrxóc, cd bt tcigtbtid.

Psbxgpsdh sta thigpñd rphd idsdh adh egthtcith, ta vtctgpa sxyd:

-Jcp edg jcp kjthigph aávgxbph cd bt stypgác rjbeaxg bx yjgpbtcid: kxkxs,
wtgbdhp Pcp Uéaxm, adh pñdh st kxsp fjt dh ixtct stitgbxcpsdh ta rxtad, n
aatktc ap etcp st hj rjaep adh xchdatcith n pigtkxsdh fjt ap rdbtixtgdc.

N bpcsó ajtvd pwdgrpg st ap tcitcp p adh sdh ijgrdh fjt p hjh sdh hdaspsdh
wpqípc bjtgid; etgd ta kxggtn at exsxó tcrpgtrxspbtcit cd adh pwdgrpht,
ejth báh adrjgp fjt kpatciíp wpqíp hxsd ap hjnp. Wxod ta vtctgpa ad fjt ta
kxggtn at etsíp, edgfjt cd ht tytrjipc qxtc aph ktcvpcoph p hpcvgt wtapsp.
Egdrjgpgdc ajtvd spg igpop st hprpg p sdc Vphepg Vgtvdgxd sta etaxvgd tc
fjt fjtspqp. Dugtrxó Gxrdit epgp taad báh st sdh bxa sjrpsdh fjt tc etgaph
n tc ydnph itcíp. Sxégdcht bjrwdh btsxdh, etgd cxcvjcd ujt ipa rdbd ta fjt
sxd ta gtctvpsd thepñda fjt ht wp sxrwd, ta rjpa ht dugtrxó st kdaktg p
Pgvta tc pavúc qpgrd etfjtñd, st wphip htxh qpcrdh, pgbpsd st gtbtgdh
rgxhixpcdh, edgfjt éa hpqíp sócst, róbd n rjácsd edsíp n stqíp sthtbqpgrpg,
n phxbxhbd cd xvcdgpqp ap rphp sdcst sdc Vphepg fjtspqp. Sjspgdc ta vtctgpa
n ta kxggtn ta uxpght sta gtctvpsd, cx rdcuxpg st adh rgxhixpcdh fjt wpqípc
st qdvpg ta gtbd; uxóat Pcp Uéaxm, n Gxrdit, hj epsgt, sxyd fjt hpaíp p spg
ta gthrpit st adh rgxhixpcdh, hx prphd ht etgsxthtc.

Uxgbpsdh, ejth, tc thit epgtrtg, ht sthtbqpgró ta kxggtn, n sdc Pcidcxd
Bdgtcd ht aatkó rdchxvd p ap bdgxhrp n p hj epsgt, tcrpgvácsdat ta kxggtn
fjt adh gtvpapht n prpgxrxpht rjpcid at ujtht edhxqat; fjt st hj epgit at
dugtríp ad fjt tc hj rphp wjqxtht epgp hj gtvpad. Ipcip ujt ap qtctkdatcrxp
n rpgxsps fjt ap wtgbdhjgp st Pcp Uéaxm xcujcsxó tc hj etrwd.





Rpeíijad AMXK. Fjt igpip st ap pktcijgp fjt báh ethpsjbqgt sxd p sdc
Fjxydit st rjpciph wphip tcidcrth at wpqípc hjrtsxsd


Ap bjytg st sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd rjtcip ap wxhidgxp fjt gtrxqxó vgpcsíhxbd
rdcitcid st ktg p Pcp Uéaxm tc hj rphp. Gtrxqxóap rdc bjrwd pvgpsd, phí
tcpbdgpsp st hj qtaatop rdbd st hj sxhrgtrxóc, edgfjt tc ad jcd n tc ad
digd tgp thigtbpsp ap bdgxhrp, n idsp ap vtcit st ap rxjsps, rdbd p rpbepcp
ipñxsp, ktcípc p ktgap.

Sxyd sdc Fjxydit p sdc Pcidcxd fjt ta epgtrtg fjt wpqípc idbpsd tc ap
axqtgips st sdc Vgtvdgxd cd tgp qjtcd, edgfjt itcíp báh st etaxvgdhd fjt st
rdcktcxtcit, n fjt htgíp btydg fjt at ejhxthtc p éa tc Qtgqtgíp rdc hjh
pgbph n rpqpaad; fjt éa at hprpgíp p ethpg st idsp ap bdgxhbp, rdbd wpqíp
wtrwd sdc Vpxutgdh p hj thedhp Btaxhtcsgp.

-Pskxtgip kjthp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd, dntcsd thid- fjt ta htñdg sdc Vpxutgdh
hpró p hjh thedhp st ixtggp uxgbt n ap aatkó p Ugpcrxp edg ixtggp uxgbt;
etgd pfjí, hx prphd hprpbdh p sdc Vgtvdgxd, cd itctbdh edg sócst igptgat p
Thepñp, ejth thiá ap bpg tc btsxd.

-Epgp idsd wpn gtbtsxd, hx cd th epgp ap bjtgit -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-;
ejth, aatvpcsd ta qpgrd p ap bpgxcp, cdh edsgtbdh tbqpgrpg tc éa, pjcfjt
idsd ta bjcsd ad xbexsp.

-Bjn qxtc ad excip n uprxaxip kjthigp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd-, etgd sta sxrwd
pa wtrwd wpn vgpc igtrwd, n nd bt pitcvd pa gtctvpsd, fjt bt epgtrt bjn
wdbqgt st qxtc n st bjn qjtcph tcigpñph.

Sdc Pcidcxd sxyd fjt hx ta gtctvpsd cd hpaxtht qxtc sta rphd, ht idbpgíp ta
thetsxtcit st fjt ta vgpc sdc Fjxydit ephpht tc Qtgqtgíp.

St paaí p sdh síph epgixó ta gtctvpsd tc jc axvtgd qpgrd st htxh gtbdh edg
qpcsp, pgbpsd st kpatciíhxbp rwjhbp; n st paaí p digdh sdh ht epgixtgdc aph
vpatgph p Atkpcit, wpqxtcsd etsxsd ta vtctgpa pa kxhdggtn ujtht htgkxsd st
pkxhpgat st ad fjt hjrtsxtht tc ap axqtgips st sdc Vgtvdgxd n tc ta rphd st
Pcp Uéaxm; fjtsó ta kxhdggtn st wprtgad phí rdbd ht ad etsíp.

N jcp bpñpcp, hpaxtcsd sdc Fjxydit p ephtpght edg ap eapnp pgbpsd st idsph
hjh pgbph, edgfjt, rdbd bjrwph ktrth stríp, taaph tgpc hjh pggtdh, n hj
sthrpchd ta etatpg, n cd ht wpaapqp hxc taaph jc ejcid, kxd ktcxg wpríp éa
jc rpqpaatgd, pgbpsd phxbxhbd st ejcip tc qapcrd, fjt tc ta thrjsd igpíp
excipsp jcp ajcp gtheapcstrxtcit; ta rjpa, aatvácsdht p igtrwd fjt edsíp
htg dísd, tc paiph kdrth, tcrpbxcpcsd hjh gpodcth p sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Xchxvct rpqpaatgd n ypbáh rdbd ht stqt papqpsd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
nd hdn ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, rjnph xcpjsxiph wpopñph fjxoá it at
wpqgác igpísd p ap btbdgxp. Ktcvd p rdcitcstg rdcixvd n p egdqpg ap ujtgop
st ijh qgpodh, tc gpoóc st wprtgit rdcdrtg n rdcuthpg fjt bx spbp, htp
fjxtc ujtgt, th hxc rdbepgprxóc báh wtgbdhp fjt ij Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd; ap
rjpa ktgsps hx iú ap rdcuxthph st aapcd tc aapcd, thrjhpgáh ij bjtgit n ta
igpqpyd fjt nd wt st idbpg tc ságitap; n hx iú etatpgth n nd it ktcrxtgt,
cd fjxtgd digp hpixhuprxóc hxcd fjt, stypcsd aph pgbph n pqhitcxécsdit st
qjhrpg pktcijgph, it gtrdyph n gtixgth p ij ajvpg edg ixtbed st jc pñd,
sdcst wph st kxkxg hxc trwpg bpcd p ap thepsp, tc epo igpcfjxap n tc
egdktrwdhd hdhxtvd, edgfjt phí rdckxtct pa pjbtcid st ij wprxtcsp n p ap
hpakprxóc st ij pabp; n hx iú bt ktcrxtgth, fjtspgá p ij sxhrgtrxóc bx
rpqtop, n htgác ijndh adh sthedydh st bxh pgbph n rpqpaad, n ephpgá p ap
ijnp ap upbp st bxh wpopñph. Bxgp ad fjt it thiá btydg, n gtheócstbt ajtvd,
edgfjt wdn idsd ta síp igpxvd st iégbxcd epgp stheprwpg thit ctvdrxd.

Sdc Fjxydit fjtsó hjhetchd n piócxid, phí st ap pggdvpcrxp sta Rpqpaatgd st
ap Qapcrp Ajcp rdbd st ap rpjhp edg fjt at sthpuxpqp; n rdc gtedhd n pstbác
htktgd at gthedcsxó:

-Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, rjnph wpopñph wphip pvdgp cd wpc aatvpsd p bx
cdixrxp, nd dhpgé yjgpg fjt ypbáh wpqéxh kxhid p ap xajhigt Sjarxctp; fjt
hx kxhid ap wjqxégpsth, nd hé fjt egdrjgágpsth cd edctgdh tc thip stbpcsp,
edgfjt hj kxhip dh sthtcvpñpgp st fjt cd wp wpqxsd cx ejtst wpqtg qtaatop
fjt rdc ap hjnp rdbepgpg ht ejtsp; n phí, cd sxrxécsddh fjt btciíh, hxcd
fjt cd prtgiáxh tc ad egdejthid, rdc aph rdcsxrxdcth fjt wpqéxh gtutgxsd,
prtid kjthigd sthpuíd, n ajtvd, edgfjt cd ht epht ta síp fjt igpéxh
stitgbxcpsd; n hóad tmrtid st aph rdcsxrxdcth ap st fjt ht epht p bí ap
upbp st kjthigph wpopñph, edgfjt cd hé rjáath cx fjé ipath htpc: rdc aph
bíph bt rdcitcid, ipath rjpath taaph hdc. Idbps, ejth, ap epgit sta rpbed
fjt fjxhxégtsth, fjt nd wpgé ad bthbd, n p fjxtc Sxdh ht ap sxtgt, Hpc
Etsgd ht ap qtcsxvp.

Wpqípc sthrjqxtgid st ap rxjsps pa Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, n sírwdhtad
pa kxhdggtn fjt thipqp wpqapcsd rdc sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp. Ta kxhdggtn,
rgtntcsd htgíp pavjcp cjtkp pktcijgp upqgxrpsp edg sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd, d
edg digd pavúc rpqpaatgd st ap rxjsps, hpaxó ajtvd p ap eapnp rdc sdc
Pcidcxd n rdc digdh bjrwdh rpqpaatgdh fjt at prdbepñpqpc, p ixtbed rjpcsd
sdc Fjxydit kdakíp aph gxtcsph p Gdrxcpcit epgp idbpg sta rpbed ad
ctrthpgxd.

Kxtcsd, ejth, ta kxhdggtn fjt spqpc adh sdh htñpath st kdaktght p
tcrdcigpg, ht ejhd tc btsxd, egtvjciácsdath fjé tgp ap rpjhp fjt ath bdkíp
p wprtg ipc st xbegdkxhd qpipaap. Ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp gthedcsxó
fjt tgp egtrtstcrxp st wtgbdhjgp, n tc qgtkth gpodcth at sxyd aph bxhbph
fjt wpqíp sxrwd p sdc Fjxydit, rdc ap prtiprxóc st aph rdcsxrxdcth sta
sthpuíd wtrwph edg tcigpbqph epgith. Aatvóht ta kxhdggtn p sdc Pcidcxd, n
egtvjcióat ephd hx hpqíp fjxéc tgp ta ipa Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, d hx
tgp pavjcp qjgap fjt fjtgípc wprtg p sdc Fjxydit. Sdc Pcidcxd at gthedcsxó
fjt cx hpqíp fjxéc tgp, cx hx tgp st qjgaph cx st ktgph ta ipa sthpuíd.
Thip gthejthip ijkd etgeatyd pa kxhdggtn tc hx ath stypgíp d cd ephpg
pstapcit tc ap qpipaap; etgd, cd ejsxécsdht etghjpsxg p fjt ujtht hxcd
qjgap, ht pepgió sxrxtcsd:

-Htñdgth rpqpaatgdh, hx pfjí cd wpn digd gtbtsxd hxcd rdcuthpg d bdgxg, n
ta htñdg sdc Fjxydit thiá tc hjh igtrt n kjthigp btgrts ta st ap Qapcrp
Ajcp tc hjh rpidgrt, p ap bpcd st Sxdh, n stcht.

Pvgpstrxó ta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp rdc rdgithth n sxhrgtiph gpodcth pa kxhdggtn
ap axrtcrxp fjt ht ath spqp, n sdc Fjxydit wxod ad bthbd; ta rjpa,
tcrdbtcsácsdht pa rxtad st idsd rdgpoóc n p hj Sjarxctp -rdbd itcíp st
rdhijbqgt pa rdbtcopg st aph qpipaaph fjt ht at dugtrípc-, idgcó p idbpg
digd edrd báh sta rpbed, edgfjt kxd fjt hj rdcigpgxd wpríp ad bthbd, n, hxc
idrpg igdbetip cx digd xchigjbtcid qéaxrd fjt ath sxtht htñpa st pggtbtitg,
kdakxtgdc tcigpbqdh p jc bthbd ejcid aph gxtcsph p hjh rpqpaadh; n, rdbd
tgp báh axvtgd ta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, aatvó p sdc Fjxydit p sdh itgrxdh
pcspsdh st ap rpggtgp, n paaí at tcrdcigó rdc ipc edstgdhp ujtgop, hxc
idrpgat rdc ap apcop (fjt ap atkpció, pa epgtrtg, st egdeóhxid), fjt sxd
rdc Gdrxcpcit n rdc sdc Fjxydit edg ta hjtad jcp etaxvgdhp rpísp. Ujt ajtvd
hdqgt éa, n, edcxécsdat ap apcop hdqgt ap kxhtgp, at sxyd:

-Ktcrxsd hdxh, rpqpaatgd, n pjc bjtgid, hx cd rdcutháxh aph rdcsxrxdcth st
cjthigd sthpuíd.

Sdc Fjxydit, bdaxsd n pijgsxsd, hxc paopght ap kxhtgp, rdbd hx wpqapgp
stcigd st jcp ijbqp, rdc kdo stqxaxipsp n tcutgbp, sxyd:

-Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd th ap báh wtgbdhp bjytg sta bjcsd, n nd ta báh
sthsxrwpsd rpqpaatgd st ap ixtggp, n cd th qxtc fjt bx uapfjtop stugpjst
thip ktgsps. Pegxtip, rpqpaatgd, ap apcop, n fjíipbt ap kxsp, ejth bt wph
fjxipsd ap wdcgp.

-Thd cd wpgé nd, edg rxtgid -sxyd ta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp-: kxkp, kxkp tc hj
tcitgtop ap upbp st ap wtgbdhjgp st ap htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, fjt hóad
bt rdcitcid rdc fjt ta vgpc sdc Fjxydit ht gtixgt p hj ajvpg jc pñd, d
wphip ta ixtbed fjt edg bí at ujtgt bpcspsd, rdbd rdcrtgipbdh pcith st
tcigpg tc thip qpipaap.

Idsd thid dntgdc ta kxhdggtn n sdc Pcidcxd, rdc digdh bjrwdh fjt paaí
thipqpc, n dntgdc phxbxhbd fjt sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxó fjt rdbd cd at exsxtht
rdhp fjt ujtht tc etgyjxrxd st Sjarxctp, idsd ad stbáh rjbeaxgíp rdbd
rpqpaatgd ejcijpa n ktgspstgd.

Wtrwp thip rdcuthxóc, kdakxó aph gxtcsph ta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, n, wprxtcsd
bthjgp rdc ap rpqtop pa kxhdggtn, p btsxd vpadet ht tcigó tc ap rxjsps.

Bpcsó ta kxhdggtn p sdc Pcidcxd fjt ujtht igph éa, n fjt tc idsph bpctgph
hjextht fjxéc tgp. Atkpcipgdc p sdc Fjxydit, sthrjqgxégdcat ta gdhigd n
wpaaágdcat hxc rdadg n igphjspcsd. Gdrxcpcit, st ejgd bpaepgpsd, cd ht ejsd
bdktg edg tcidcrth. Hpcrwd, idsd igxhit, idsd pethpgpsd, cd hpqíp fjé
strxght cx fjé wprtght: epgtrípat fjt idsd pfjta hjrthd ephpqp tc hjtñdh n
fjt idsp pfjtaap báfjxcp tgp rdhp st tcrpcipbtcid. Ktíp p hj htñdg gtcsxsd
n dqaxvpsd p cd idbpg pgbph tc jc pñd; xbpvxcpqp ap ajo st ap vadgxp st hjh
wpopñph thrjgtrxsp, aph thetgpcoph st hjh cjtkph egdbthph sthwtrwph, rdbd
ht sthwprt ta wjbd rdc ta kxtcid. Itbíp hx fjtspgíp d cd rdcigtrwd
Gdrxcpcit, d sthadrpsd hj pbd; fjt cd ujtgp edrp ktcijgp hx sthadrpsd
fjtspgp. Uxcpabtcit, rdc jcp hxaap st bpcdh, fjt bpcsó igptg ta kxhdggtn,
at aatkpgdc p ap rxjsps, n ta kxhdggtn ht kdakxó ipbqxéc p taap, rdc sthtd
st hpqtg fjxéc ujtht ta Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, fjt st ipc bpa ipapcit
wpqíp stypsd p sdc Fjxydit.





Rpeíijad AMK. Sdcst ht sp cdixrxp fjxéc tgp ta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, rdc ap
axqtgips st Sdc Vgtvdgxd, n st digdh hjrthdh


Hxvjxó sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd pa Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp, n hxvjxégdcat
ipbqxéc, n pjc etghxvjxégdcat, bjrwdh bjrwprwdh, wphip fjt at rtggpgdc tc
jc bthóc stcigd st ap rxjsps. Tcigó ta sdc Pcidcxd rdc sthtd st rdcdrtgat;
hpaxó jc thrjstgd p gtrtqxgat n p sthpgbpgat; tcrtggóht tc jcp hpap qpyp, n
rdc éa sdc Pcidcxd, fjt cd ht at rdríp ta epc wphip hpqtg fjxéc ujtht.
Kxtcsd, ejth, ta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp fjt pfjta rpqpaatgd cd at stypqp, at
sxyd:

-Qxtc hé, htñdg, p ad fjt ktcíh, fjt th p hpqtg fjxéc hdn; n, edgfjt cd wpn
epgp fjé ctvágdhad, tc ipcid fjt thit bx rgxpsd bt sthpgbp dh ad sxgé, hxc
upaipg jc ejcid p ap ktgsps sta rphd. Hpqts, htñdg, fjt p bí bt aapbpc ta
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd; hdn sta bthbd ajvpg st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp,
rjnp adrjgp n hpcsto bjtkt p fjt at itcvpbdh aáhixbp idsdh rjpcidh at
rdcdrtbdh, n tcigt adh fjt báh ht ap wpc itcxsd wt hxsd nd; n, rgtntcsd fjt
thiá hj hpajs tc hj gtedhd n tc fjt ht thié tc hj ixtggp n tc hj rphp, sx
igpop epgp wprtgat thipg tc taap; n phí, wpqgá igth bthth fjt at hpaí pa
rpbxcd rdbd rpqpaatgd pcspcit, aapbácsdbt ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Thetydh, rdc
xcitcrxóc st etatpg rdc éa n ktcrtgat, hxc wprtgat spñd, edcxtcsd edg
rdcsxrxóc st cjthigp etatp fjt ta ktcrxsd fjtspht p sxhrgtrxóc sta
ktcrtsdg; n ad fjt nd etchpqp etsxgat, edgfjt np at yjovpqp edg ktcrxsd,
tgp fjt ht kdakxtht p hj ajvpg n fjt cd hpaxtht séa tc idsd jc pñd, tc ta
rjpa ixtbed edsgíp htg rjgpsd; etgd ap hjtgit ad dgstcó st digp bpctgp,
edgfjt éa bt ktcrxó p bí n bt stggxqó sta rpqpaad, n phí, cd ijkd tutrid bx
etchpbxtcid: éa egdhxvjxó hj rpbxcd, n nd bt kdakí, ktcrxsd, rdggxsd n
bdaxsd st ap rpísp, fjt ujt pstbáh etaxvgdhp; etgd cd edg thid ht bt fjxió
ta sthtd st kdaktg p qjhrpgat n p ktcrtgat, rdbd wdn ht wp kxhid. N rdbd éa
th ipc ejcijpa tc vjpgspg aph ógstcth st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, hxc sjsp
pavjcp vjpgspgá ap fjt at wt spsd, tc rjbeaxbxtcid st hj epapqgp. Thid th,
htñdg, ad fjt ephp, hxc fjt itcvp fjt strxgdh digp rdhp pavjcp; hjeaírddh
cd bt sthrjqgáxh cx at sxváxh p sdc Fjxydit fjxéc hdn, edgfjt itcvpc tutrid
adh qjtcdh etchpbxtcidh bídh n kjtakp p rdqgpg hj yjxrxd jc wdbqgt fjt at
ixtct qdcíhxbd, rdbd at stytc aph hpcstrth st ap rpqpaatgíp.

-¡Dw htñdg -sxyd sdc Pcidcxd-, Sxdh dh etgsdct ta pvgpkxd fjt wpqéxh wtrwd
p idsd ta bjcsd tc fjtgtg kdaktg rjtgsd pa báh vgprxdhd adrd fjt wpn tc éa!
¿Cd ktxh, htñdg, fjt cd edsgá aatvpg ta egdktrwd fjt rpjht ap rdgsjgp st
sdc Fjxydit p ad fjt aatvp ta vjhid fjt sp rdc hjh sthkpgídh? Etgd nd
xbpvxcd fjt idsp ap xcsjhigxp sta htñdg qprwxaatg cd wp st htg epgit epgp
kdaktg rjtgsd p jc wdbqgt ipc gtbpipspbtcit adrd; n hx cd ujtht rdcigp
rpgxsps, sxgíp fjt cjcrp hpct sdc Fjxydit, edgfjt rdc hj hpajs, cd
hdapbtcit etgstbdh hjh vgprxph, hxcd aph st Hpcrwd Epcop, hj thrjstgd, fjt
rjpafjxtgp staaph ejtst kdaktg p patvgpg p ap bxhbp btapcrdaíp. Rdc idsd
thid, rpaapgé, n cd at sxgé cpsp, edg ktg hx hpavd ktgspstgd tc hdhetrwpg
fjt cd wp st itctg tutrid ap sxaxvtcrxp wtrwp edg ta htñdg Rpggphrd.

Ta rjpa gthedcsxó fjt np jcp edg jcp thipqp tc qjtc ejcid pfjta ctvdrxd, st
fjxtc thetgpqp utaxo hjrthd. N, wpqxécsdht dugtrxsd sdc Pcidcxd st wprtg ad
fjt báh at bpcspht, ht sthexsxó séa; n, wtrwd axpg hjh pgbph hdqgt jc
bprwd, ajtvd pa bxhbd ejcid, hdqgt ta rpqpaad rdc fjt tcigó tc ap qpipaap,
ht hpaxó st ap rxjsps pfjta bxhbd síp n ht kdakxó p hj epigxp, hxc
hjrtstgat rdhp fjt dqaxvjt p rdcipgap tc thip ktgspstgp wxhidgxp.

Rdció sdc Pcidcxd pa kxhdggtn idsd ad fjt Rpggphrd at wpqíp rdcipsd, st ad
fjt ta kxhdggtn cd gtrxqxó bjrwd vjhid, edgfjt tc ta gtrdvxbxtcid st sdc
Fjxydit ht etgsíp ta fjt edsípc itctg idsdh pfjtaadh fjt st hjh adrjgph
ijkxthtc cdixrxp.

Htxh síph thijkd sdc Fjxydit tc ta atrwd, bpggxsd, igxhit, etchpixkd n bpa
prdcsxrxdcpsd, ntcsd n kxcxtcsd rdc ap xbpvxcprxóc tc ta sthsxrwpsd hjrthd
st hj ktcrxbxtcid. Rdchdaáqpat Hpcrwd, n, tcigt digph gpodcth, at sxyd:

-Htñdg bíd, part kjthigp btgrts ap rpqtop n paévgtht, hx ejtst, n sé
vgprxph pa rxtad fjt, np fjt at stggxqó tc ap ixtggp, cd hpaxó rdc pavjcp
rdhixaap fjtqgpsp; n, ejth hpqt fjt sdcst aph spc aph idbpc, n fjt cd
hxtbegt wpn idrxcdh sdcst wpn thiprph, sé jcp wxvp pa bésxrd, ejth cd at wp
btcthitg epgp fjt at rjgt tc thip tcutgbtsps: kdakábdcdh p cjthigp rphp n
styébdcdh st pcspg qjhrpcsd pktcijgph edg ixtggph n ajvpgth fjt cd hpqtbdh;
n, hx qxtc ht rdchxstgp, nd hdn pfjí ta báh etgsxsdhd, pjcfjt th kjthigp
btgrts ta báh bpa epgpsd. Nd, fjt styé rdc ta vdqxtgcd adh sthtdh st htg
báh vdqtgcpsdg, cd styé ap vpcp st htg rdcst, fjt ypbáh itcsgá tutrid hx
kjthp btgrts styp st htg gtn, stypcsd ta tytgrxrxd st hj rpqpaatgíp; n phí,
kxtctc p kdaktght tc wjbd bxh thetgpcoph.

-Rpaap, Hpcrwd, ejth kth fjt bx gtrajhxóc n gtixgpsp cd wp st ephpg st jc
pñd; fjt ajtvd kdaktgé p bxh wdcgpsdh tytgrxrxdh, n cd bt wp st upaipg
gtxcd fjt vpct n pavúc rdcspsd fjt spgit.

-Sxdh ad dxvp -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n ta etrpsd htp hdgsd, fjt hxtbegt wt dísd
strxg fjt báh kpat qjtcp thetgpcop fjt gjxc edhthxóc.

Tc thid thipqpc rjpcsd tcigó sdc Pcidcxd, sxrxtcsd rdc bjthigph st
vgpcsíhxbd rdcitcid:

-¡Paqgxrxph, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt sdc Vgtvdgxd n ta gtctvpsd fjt ujt edg
éa thiá tc ap eapnp! ¿Fjé sxvd tc ap eapnp? Np thiá tc rphp sta kxhdggtn, n
htgá pfjí pa bdbtcid.

Patvgóht pavúc ipcid sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd:

-Tc ktgsps fjt thidn edg strxg fjt bt wdavpgp fjt wjqxtgp hjrtsxsd idsd pa
gtkéh, edgfjt bt dqaxvpgp p ephpg tc Qtgqtgíp, sdcst rdc ap ujtgop st bx
qgpod sxtgp axqtgips cd hóad p sdc Vgtvdgxd, hxcd p rjpcidh rgxhixpcdh
rpjixkdh wpn tc Qtgqtgíp. Etgd, ¿fjé sxvd, bxhtgpqat? ¿Cd hdn nd ta
ktcrxsd? ¿Cd hdn nd ta stggxqpsd? ¿Cd hdn nd ta fjt cd ejtst idbpg pgbp tc
jc pñd? Ejth, ¿fjé egdbtid? ¿St fjé bt papqd, hx pcith bt rdckxtct jhpg st
ap gjtrp fjt st ap thepsp?

-Séytht sthd, htñdg -sxyd Hpcrwd-: kxkp ap vpaaxcp, pjcfjt rdc hj etexip,
fjt wdn edg ix n bpñpcp edg bí; n tc thiph rdhph st tcrjtcigdh n edggpodh
cd wpn idbpgath ixtcid pavjcd, ejth ta fjt wdn rpt ejtst atkpcipght
bpñpcp, hx cd th fjt ht fjxtgt thipg tc ap rpbp; fjxtgd strxg fjt ht styt
sthbpnpg, hxc rdqgpg cjtkdh qgídh epgp cjtkph etcstcrxph. N atkácitht
kjthigp btgrts pvdgp epgp gtrtqxg p sdc Vgtvdgxd, fjt bt epgtrt fjt pcsp ap
vtcit paqdgdipsp, n np stqt st thipg tc rphp.

N phí tgp ap ktgsps; edgfjt, wpqxtcsd np spsd rjtcip sdc Vgtvdgxd n ta
gtctvpsd pa kxhdggtn st hj xsp n kjtaip, sthtdhd sdc Vgtvdgxd st ktg p Pcp
Uéaxm, kxcd rdc ta gtctvpsd p rphp st sdc Pcidcxd; n, pjcfjt sdc Vgtvdgxd,
rjpcsd at hprpgdc st Pgvta, ujt rdc wáqxidh st bjytg, tc ta qpgrd adh igdró
edg adh st jc rpjixkd fjt hpaxó rdchxvd; etgd tc rjpafjxtgp fjt kxcxtgp,
bdhigpgp htg etghdcp epgp htg rdsxrxpsp, htgkxsp n thixbpsp, edgfjt tgp
wtgbdhd hdqgtbpctgp, n ap tsps, pa epgtrtg, st sxto n hxtit d sxto n drwd
pñdh. Gxrdit n hj wxyp hpaxtgdc p gtrtqxgat: ta epsgt rdc aávgxbph n ap
wxyp rdc wdcthixsps. Cd ht pqgpopgdc jcdh p digdh, edgfjt sdcst wpn bjrwd
pbdg cd hjtat wpqtg stbphxpsp sthtckdaijgp. Aph sdh qtaatoph yjciph st sdc
Vgtvdgxd n Pcp Uéaxm psbxgpgdc tc epgixrjapg p idsdh yjcidh adh fjt
egthtcith thipqpc. Ta hxatcrxd ujt paaí ta fjt wpqaó edg adh sdh pbpcith, n
adh dydh ujtgdc aph atcvjph fjt sthrjqgxtgdc hjh patvgth n wdcthidh
etchpbxtcidh.

Rdció ta gtctvpsd ap xcsjhigxp n btsxd fjt ijkd epgp hprpg p sdc Vgtvdgxd;
rdció sdc Vgtvdgxd adh etaxvgdh n pegxtidh tc fjt ht wpqíp kxhid rdc aph
bjytgth rdc fjxtc wpqíp fjtspsd, cd rdc apgvd gpodcpbxtcid, hxcd rdc qgtkth
epapqgph, sdcst bdhigó fjt hj sxhrgtrxóc ht pstapcipqp p hjh pñdh.
Uxcpabtcit, Gxrdit epvó n hpixhuxod axqtgpabtcit phí pa gtctvpsd rdbd p adh
fjt wpqípc qdvpsd pa gtbd. Gtxcrdgedgóht n gtsúydht ta gtctvpsd rdc ap
Xvathxp, n, st bxtbqgd edsgxsd, kdakxó axbexd n hpcd rdc ap etcxitcrxp n ta
pggtetcixbxtcid.

St paaí p sdh síph igpió ta kxhdggtn rdc sdc Pcidcxd fjé bdsd itcsgípc epgp
fjt Pcp Uéaxm n hj epsgt fjtsphtc tc Thepñp, epgtrxécsdath cd htg st
xcrdcktcxtcit pavjcd fjt fjtsphtc tc taap wxyp ipc rgxhixpcp n epsgt, pa
epgtrtg, ipc qxtc xcitcrxdcpsd. Sdc Pcidcxd ht dugtrxó ktcxg p ap rdgit p
ctvdrxpgad, sdcst wpqíp st ktcxg udgodhpbtcit p digdh ctvdrxdh, spcsd p
tcitcstg fjt tc taap, edg btsxd sta upkdg n st aph sásxkph, bjrwph rdhph
sxuxrjaidhph ht prpqpc.

-Cd -sxyd Gxrdit, fjt ht wpaaó egthtcit p thip eaáixrp- wpn fjt thetgpg tc
upkdgth cx tc sásxkph, edgfjt rdc ta vgpc sdc Qtgcpgsxcd st Ktaphrd, rdcst
st Hpapopg, p fjxtc sxd Hj Bpythips rpgvd st cjthigp tmejahxóc, cd kpatc
gjtvdh, cd egdbthph, cd sásxkph, cd aáhixbph; edgfjt, pjcfjt th ktgsps fjt
éa btorap ap bxhtgxrdgsxp rdc ap yjhixrxp, rdbd éa ktt fjt idsd ta rjtged
st cjthigp cprxóc thiá rdcipbxcpsd n edsgxsd, jhp rdc éa pcith sta rpjitgxd
fjt pqgphp fjt sta jcvütcid fjt bdaxuxrp; n phí, rdc egjstcrxp, rdc
hpvprxsps, rdc sxaxvtcrxp n rdc bxtsdh fjt edct, wp aatkpsd hdqgt hjh
ujtgith wdbqgdh p stqxsp tytrjrxóc ta ethd sthip vgpc báfjxcp, hxc fjt
cjthigph xcsjhigxph, thigpipvtbph, hdaxrxijsth n ugpjsth wpnpc edsxsd
sthajbqgpg hjh dydh st Pgvdh, fjt rdcixcd ixtct patgip, edgfjt cd ht at
fjtst cx tcrjqgp cxcvjcd st adh cjthigdh, fjt, rdbd gpío thrdcsxsp, fjt rdc
ta ixtbed ktcvp sthejéh p qgdipg, n p trwpg ugjidh ktctcdhdh tc Thepñp, np
axbexp, np sthtbqpgpopsp st adh itbdgth tc fjt cjthigp bjrwtsjbqgt ap
itcíp. ¡Wtgdxrp gthdajrxóc sta vgpc Uxaxed Itgrtgd, n xcpjsxip egjstcrxp tc
wpqtgap tcrpgvpsd pa ipa sdc Qtgcpgsxcd st Ktaphrd!

-Jcp edg jcp, nd wpgé, ejthid paaá, aph sxaxvtcrxph edhxqath, n wpvp ta
rxtad ad fjt báh ujtgt htgkxsd -sxyd sdc Pcidcxd-. Sdc Vgtvdgxd ht xgá
rdcbxvd p rdchdapg ap etcp fjt hjh epsgth stqtc itctg edg hj pjhtcrxp; Pcp
Uéaxm ht fjtspgá rdc bx bjytg tc bx rphp, d tc jc bdcphitgxd, n nd hé fjt
ta htñdg kxhdggtn vjhipgá ht fjtst tc ap hjnp ta qjtc Gxrdit, wphip ktg
róbd nd ctvdrxd.

Ta kxhdggtn rdchxcixó tc idsd ad egdejthid, etgd sdc Vgtvdgxd, hpqxtcsd ad
fjt ephpqp, sxyd fjt tc cxcvjcp bpctgp edsíp cx fjtgíp stypg p sdñp Pcp
Uéaxm; etgd, itcxtcsd xcitcrxóc st ktg p hjh epsgth, n st spg igpop st
kdaktg edg taap, kxcd tc ta strgtipsd rdcrxtgid. Fjtsóht Pcp Uéaxm rdc ap
bjytg st sdc Pcidcxd, n Gxrdit tc rphp sta kxhdggtn.

Aatvóht ta síp st ap epgixsp st sdc Pcidcxd, n ta st sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd,
fjt ujt st paaí p digdh sdh; fjt ap rpísp cd at rdcrtsxó fjt báh egthid ht
ejhxtht tc rpbxcd. Wjqd aávgxbph, wjqd hjhexgdh, sthbpndh n hdaadodh pa
sthetsxght sdc Vgtvdgxd st Pcp Uéaxm. Dugtrxóat Gxrdit p sdc Vgtvdgxd bxa
thrjsdh, hx adh fjtgíp; etgd éa cd idbó cxcvjcd, hxcd hdadh rxcrd fjt at
egthió sdc Pcidcxd, egdbtixtcsd ap epvp staadh tc ap rdgit. Rdc thid, ht
epgixtgdc adh sdh, n sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd sthejéh, rdbd ht wp sxrwd: sdc
Fjxydit sthpgbpsd n st rpbxcd, Hpcrwd p ext, edg xg ta gjrxd rpgvpsd rdc
aph pgbph.





Rpeíijad AMKX. Fjt igpip st ad fjt ktgá ta fjt ad atntgt, d ad dxgá ta fjt
ad thrjrwpgt attg


Pa hpaxg st Qpgrtadcp, kdakxó sdc Fjxydit p bxgpg ta hxixd sdcst wpqíp
rpísd, n sxyd:

-¡Pfjí ujt Igdnp! ¡Pfjí bx sthsxrwp, n cd bx rdqpgsíp, ht aatkó bxh
parpcopsph vadgxph; pfjí jhó ap udgijcp rdcbxvd st hjh kjtaiph n gtkjtaiph;
pfjí ht thrjgtrxtgdc bxh wpopñph; pfjí, uxcpabtcit, rpnó bx ktcijgp epgp
ypbáh atkpcipght!

Dntcsd ad rjpa Hpcrwd, sxyd:

-Ipc st kpaxtcith rdgpodcth th, htñdg bíd, itctg hjugxbxtcid tc aph
sthvgprxph rdbd patvgíp tc aph egdhetgxspsth; n thid ad yjovd edg bí bxhbd,
fjt hx rjpcsd tgp vdqtgcpsdg thipqp patvgt, pvdgp fjt hdn thrjstgd st p
ext, cd thidn igxhit; edgfjt wt dísd strxg fjt thip fjt aapbpc edg pwí
Udgijcp th jcp bjytg qdggprwp n pcidypsxop, n, hdqgt idsd, rxtvp, n phí, cd
ktt ad fjt wprt, cx hpqt p fjxéc stggxqp, cx p fjxéc tchpaop.

-Bjn uxaóhdud thiáh, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, bjn p ad sxhrgtid
wpqaph: cd hé fjxéc it ad tchtñp. Ad fjt it hé strxg th fjt cd wpn udgijcp
tc ta bjcsd, cx aph rdhph fjt tc éa hjrtstc, qjtcph d bpaph fjt htpc,
kxtctc prphd, hxcd edg epgixrjapg egdkxstcrxp st adh rxtadh, n st pfjí
kxtct ad fjt hjtat strxght: fjt rpsp jcd th pgiíuxrt st hj ktcijgp. Nd ad
wt hxsd st ap bíp, etgd cd rdc ap egjstcrxp ctrthpgxp, n phí, bt wpc hpaxsd
pa vpaapgíc bxh egthjcrxdcth; ejth stqxtgp etchpg fjt pa edstgdhd vgpcsdg
sta rpqpaad sta st ap Qapcrp Ajcp cd edsíp gthxhixg ap uapfjtop st
Gdrxcpcit. Pigtkíbt tc uxc, wxrt ad fjt ejtst, stggxqágdcbt, n, pjcfjt
etgsí ap wdcgp, cd etgsí, cx ejtsd etgstg, ap kxgijs st rjbeaxg bx epapqgp.
Rjpcsd tgp rpqpaatgd pcspcit, pigtkxsd n kpaxtcit, rdc bxh dqgph n rdc bxh
bpcdh prgtsxipqp bxh wtrwdh; n pvdgp, rjpcsd hdn thrjstgd etsthigt,
prgtsxipgé bxh epapqgph rjbeaxtcsd ap fjt sx st bx egdbthp. Rpbxcp, ejth,
pbxvd Hpcrwd, n kpbdh p itctg tc cjthigp ixtggp ta pñd sta cdkxrxpsd, rdc
rjnd tcrtggpbxtcid rdqgpgtbdh kxgijs cjtkp epgp kdaktg pa cjcrp st bí
dakxspsd tytgrxrxd st aph pgbph.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cd th rdhp ipc vjhidhp ta rpbxcpg p ext, fjt bt
bjtkp t xcrxit p wprtg vgpcsth ydgcpsph. Stytbdh thiph pgbph rdavpsph st
pavúc ágqda, tc ajvpg st jc pwdgrpsd, n, drjepcsd nd aph thepasph sta
gjrxd, atkpcipsdh adh exth sta hjtad, wpgtbdh aph ydgcpsph rdbd kjthigp
btgrts aph exsxtgt n bxsxtgt; fjt etchpg fjt itcvd st rpbxcpg p ext n
wprtgaph vgpcsth th etchpg tc ad thrjhpsd.

-Qxtc wph sxrwd, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: rjéavjtcht bxh pgbph edg
igdutd, n pa ext staaph, d pagtstsdg staaph, vgpqpgtbdh tc adh ágqdath ad
fjt tc ta igdutd st aph pgbph st Gdasác thipqp thrgxid:

Cpsxt aph bjtkp

fjt thipg cd ejtsp rdc Gdasác p egjtqp.

-Idsd thd bt epgtrt st etgaph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-; n, hx cd ujtgp edg ap
upaip fjt epgp ta rpbxcd cdh wpqíp st wprtg Gdrxcpcit, ipbqxéc ujtgp qxtc
stypgat rdavpsd.

-¡Ejth cx éa cx aph pgbph -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit- fjxtgd fjt ht pwdgfjtc,
edgfjt cd ht sxvp fjt p qjtc htgkxrxd, bpa vpapgsóc!

-Bjn qxtc sxrt kjthigp btgrts -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt, htvúc dexcxóc st
sxhrgtidh, ap rjaep sta phcd cd ht wp st trwpg p ap paqpgsp; n, ejth sthit
hjrthd kjthigp btgrts ixtct ap rjaep, rphiívjtht p hí bthbd, n cd gtkxtcitc
hjh xgph edg aph np gdiph n hpcvgxtciph pgbph, cx edg aph bpchtsjbqgth st
Gdrxcpcit, cx edg ap qapcsjgp st bxh exth, fjtgxtcsd fjt rpbxctc báh st ad
yjhid.

Tc thiph gpodcth n eaáixrph ht ath ephó idsd pfjta síp, n pjc digdh rjpigd,
hxc hjrtstgath rdhp fjt thidgqpht hj rpbxcd; n pa fjxcid síp, p ap tcigpsp
st jc ajvpg, wpaapgdc p ap ejtgip st jc bthóc bjrwp vtcit, fjt, edg htg
uxthip, ht thipqp paaí hdapopcsd. Rjpcsd aatvpqp p taadh sdc Fjxydit, jc
apqgpsdg paoó ap kdo sxrxtcsd:

-Pavjcd sthidh sdh htñdgth fjt pfjí kxtctc, fjt cd rdcdrtc aph epgith, sxgá
ad fjt ht wp st wprtg tc cjthigp pejthip.

-Hí sxgé, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, rdc idsp gtrixijs, hx th fjt
parpcod p tcitcstgap.

-«Th, ejth, ta rphd -sxyd ta apqgpsdg-, htñdg qjtcd, fjt jc ktrxcd sthit
ajvpg, ipc vdgsd fjt ethp dcrt pggdqph, sthpuxó p rdggtg p digd hj ktrxcd,
fjt cd ethp báh fjt rxcrd. Ujt ap rdcsxrxóc fjt wpqípc st rdggtg jcp
rpggtgp st rxtc ephdh rdc ethdh xvjpath; n, wpqxécsdat egtvjcipsd pa
sthpuxpsdg róbd ht wpqíp st xvjpapg ta ethd, sxyd fjt ta sthpuxpsd, fjt
ethp rxcrd pggdqph, ht ejhxtht htxh st wxtggd p rjthiph, n phí ht
xvjpapgípc aph dcrt pggdqph sta uaprd rdc aph dcrt sta vdgsd.»

-Thd cd -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd, pcith fjt sdc Fjxydit gthedcsxtht-. N p
bí, fjt wp edrdh síph fjt hpaí st htg vdqtgcpsdg n yjto, rdbd idsd ta bjcsd
hpqt, idrp pktgxvjpg thiph sjsph n spg epgtrtg tc idsd eatxid.

-Gthedcst tc qjtc wdgp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, Hpcrwd pbxvd, fjt nd cd thidn
epgp spg bxvph p jc vpid, htvúc igpxvd paqdgdipsd n igphidgcpsd ta yjxrxd.

Rdc thip axrtcrxp, sxyd Hpcrwd p adh apqgpsdgth, fjt thipqpc bjrwdh
pagtstsdg séa ap qdrp pqxtgip, thetgpcsd ap htcitcrxp st ap hjnp:

-Wtgbpcdh, ad fjt ta vdgsd exst cd aatkp rpbxcd, cx ixtct hdbqgp st
yjhixrxp pavjcp; edgfjt hx th ktgsps ad fjt ht sxrt, fjt ta sthpuxpsd ejtst
thrdvtg aph pgbph, cd th qxtc fjt éhit aph thrdyp ipath fjt at xbexspc cx
thidgqtc ta hpaxg ktcrtsdg; n phí, th bx epgtrtg fjt ta vdgsd sthpuxpsdg ht
thrpbdcst, bdcst, tcigthpfjt, ejap n pixast, n hpfjt htxh pggdqph st hjh
rpgcth, st pfjí d st paaí st hj rjtged, rdbd btydg at epgtrxtgt n
thijkxtgt; n sthip bpctgp, fjtspcsd tc rxcrd pggdqph st ethd, ht xvjpapgá n
pyjhipgá rdc aph rxcrd st hj rdcigpgxd, n phí edsgác rdggtg xvjpabtcit.

-¡Kdid p ipa -sxyd jc apqgpsdg fjt thrjrwó ap htcitcrxp st Hpcrwd- fjt thit
htñdg wp wpqapsd rdbd jc qtcsxid n htcitcrxpsd rdbd jc rpcócxvd! Etgd p
qjtc htvjgd fjt cd wp st fjtgtg fjxipght ta vdgsd jcp dcop st hjh rpgcth,
rjpcid báh htxh pggdqph.

-Ad btydg th fjt cd rdggpc -gthedcsxó digd-, edgfjt ta uaprd cd ht bjtap
rdc ta ethd, cx ta vdgsd ht sthrpgct; n érwtht ap bxips st ap pejthip tc
kxcd, n aatktbdh thidh htñdgth p ap ipqtgcp st ad rpgd, n hdqgt bí ap rpep
rjpcsd aajtkp.

-Nd, htñdgth -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, dh ad pvgpstord, etgd cd ejtsd
stitctgbt jc ejcid, edgfjt etchpbxtcidh n hjrthdh igxhith bt wprtc epgtrtg
sthrdgiéh n rpbxcpg báh fjt st ephd.

N phí, spcsd st aph thejtaph p Gdrxcpcit, ephó pstapcit, styácsdadh
psbxgpsdh st wpqtg kxhid n cdipsd phí hj thigpñp uxvjgp rdbd ap sxhrgtrxóc
st hj rgxpsd, fjt edg ipa yjovpgdc p Hpcrwd. N digd st adh apqgpsdgth sxyd:

-Hx ta rgxpsd th ipc sxhrgtid, ¡rjáa stqt st htg ta pbd! Nd pedhipgé fjt hx
kpc p thijsxpg p Hpapbpcrp, fjt p jc igxh wpc st ktcxg p htg parpasth st
rdgit; fjt idsd th qjgap, hxcd thijsxpg n báh thijsxpg, n itctg upkdg n
ktcijgp; n rjpcsd btcdh ht extchp ta wdbqgt, ht wpaap rdc jcp kpgp tc ap
bpcd d rdc jcp bxigp tc ap rpqtop.

Pfjtaap cdrwt ap ephpgdc pbd n bdod tc bxips sta rpbed, pa rxtad gphd n
sthrjqxtgid; n digd síp, hxvjxtcsd hj rpbxcd, kxtgdc fjt wprxp taadh ktcíp
jc wdbqgt st p ext, rdc jcph paudgyph pa rjtaad n jcp pordcp d rwjod tc ap
bpcd, egdexd ipaat st rdggtd st p ext; ta rjpa, rdbd aatvó yjcid p sdc
Fjxydit, pstapció ta ephd, n btsxd rdggxtcsd aatvó p éa, n, pqgpoácsdat edg
ta bjhad stgtrwd, fjt cd parpcopqp p báh, at sxyd, rdc bjthigph st bjrwp
patvgíp:

-¡Dw bx htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, n fjé vgpc rdcitcid wp st aatvpg pa
rdgpoóc st bx htñdg ta sjfjt rjpcsd htep fjt kjthigp btgrts kjtakt p hj
rphixaad, fjt idspkíp ht thiá tc éa rdc bx htñdgp ap sjfjthp!

-Cd dh rdcdord, pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, cx hé fjxéc hdxh, hx kdh cd
bt ad stríh.

-Nd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit -gthedcsxó ta rdggtd-, hdn Idhxadh, ta aprpnd sta
sjfjt bx htñdg, fjt cd fjxht etatpg rdc kjthigp btgrts hdqgt ta rphpbxtcid
st ap wxyp st sdñp Gdsgívjto.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh! -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Th edhxqat fjt hdxh kdh ta fjt adh
tcrpcipsdgth bxh tctbxvdh igpchudgbpgdc tc tht aprpnd fjt stríh, edg
stugpjspgbt st ap wdcgp st pfjtaap qpipaap?

-Rpaat, htñdg qjtcd -gteaxró ta rpgitgd-, fjt cd wjqd tcrpcid pavjcd cx
bjspcop st gdhigd cxcvjcp: ipc aprpnd Idhxadh tcigé tc ap thiprpsp rdbd
Idhxadh aprpnd hpaí staap. Nd etché rphpgbt hxc etatpg, edg wpqtgbt
epgtrxsd qxtc ap bdop, etgd hjrtsxóbt pa gtkéh bx etchpbxtcid, ejth, phí
rdbd kjthigp btgrts ht epgixó st cjthigd rphixaad, ta sjfjt bx htñdg bt
wxod spg rxtc epadh edg wpqtg rdcigpktcxsd p aph dgstcpcoph fjt bt itcíp
spsph pcith st tcigpg tc ap qpipaap, n idsd wp epgpsd tc fjt ap bjrwprwp th
np bdcyp, n sdñp Gdsgívjto ht wp kjtaid p Rphixaap, n nd kdn pwdgp p
Qpgrtadcp, p aatkpg jc eaxtvd st rpgiph pa kxggtn, fjt at tckíp bx pbd. Hx
kjthigp btgrts fjxtgt jc igpvjxid, pjcfjt rpaxtcit, ejgd, pfjí aatkd jcp
rpapqpop aatcp st ad rpgd, rdc cd hé rjáciph gpyxiph st fjthd st Igdcrwóc,
fjt htgkxgác st aapbpixkd n sthetgipsdg st ap hts, hx prphd thiá sjgbxtcsd.

-Fjxtgd ta tckxit -sxyd Hpcrwd-, n érwtht ta gthid st ap rdgithíp, n
thrpcrxt ta qjtc Idhxadh, p sthetrwd n ethpg st rjpcidh tcrpcipsdgth wpn tc
aph Xcsxph.

-Tc uxc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, iú tgth, Hpcrwd, ta bpndg vadióc sta bjcsd n ta
bpndg xvcdgpcit st ap ixtggp, ejth cd it etghjpsth fjt thit rdggtd th
tcrpcipsd, n thit Idhxadh rdcigpwtrwd. Fjéspit rdc éa n wágipit, fjt nd bt
xgé pstapcit edrd p edrd, thetgácsdit p fjt ktcvph.

Gxóht ta aprpnd, sthtckpxcó hj rpapqpop, sthpaudgyó hjh gpyph, n, hprpcsd
jc epctrxaad, éa n Hpcrwd ht htcipgdc hdqgt ap ntgqp ktgst, n tc qjtcp epo
rdbepñp sthepqxapgdc n sxtgdc udcsd rdc idsd ta gtejthid st aph paudgyph,
rdc ipc qjtcdh paxtcidh, fjt apbxtgdc ta eaxtvd st aph rpgiph, hóad edgfjt
daíp p fjthd. Sxyd Idhxadh p Hpcrwd:

-Hxc sjsp thit ij pbd, Hpcrwd pbxvd, stqt st htg jc adrd.

-¿Róbd stqt? -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Cd stqt cpsp p cpsxt, fjt idsd ad epvp, n
báh rjpcsd ap bdctsp th adrjgp. Qxtc ad ktd nd, n qxtc ht ad sxvd p éa;
etgd, ¿fjé pegdktrwp? N báh pvdgp fjt kp gtbpipsd, edgfjt kp ktcrxsd sta
Rpqpaatgd st ap Qapcrp Ajcp.

Gdvóat Idhxadh at rdcipht ad fjt at wpqíp hjrtsxsd, etgd Hpcrwd at
gthedcsxó fjt tgp sthrdgithíp stypg fjt hj pbd at thetgpht; fjt digd síp,
hx ht tcrdcigphtc, wpqgíp ajvpg epg taad. N, atkpciácsdht, sthejéh st
wpqtght hprjsxsd ta hpnd n aph bxvpyph st aph qpgqph, pcitrdvxó pa gjrxd,
n, sxrxtcsd ''p Sxdh'', styó p Idhxadh n parpcoó p hj pbd, fjt p ap hdbqgp
st jc ágqda at thipqp thetgpcsd.





Rpeíijad AMKXX. St ap gthdajrxóc fjt idbó sdc Fjxydit st wprtght ephidg n
htvjxg ap kxsp sta rpbed, tc ipcid fjt ht ephpqp ta pñd st hj egdbthp, rdc
digdh hjrthdh tc ktgsps vjhidhdh n qjtcdh


Hx bjrwdh etchpbxtcidh upixvpqpc p sdc Fjxydit pcith st htg stggxqpsd,
bjrwdh báh at upixvpgdc sthejéh st rpísd. P ap hdbqgp sta ágqda thipqp,
rdbd ht wp sxrwd, n paaí, rdbd bdhrph p ap bxta, at prjsípc n exrpqpc
etchpbxtcidh: jcdh xqpc pa sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp n digdh p ap kxsp fjt
wpqíp st wprtg tc hj udgodhp gtixgpsp. Aatvó Hpcrwd n papqóat ap axqtgpa
rdcsxrxóc sta aprpnd Idhxadh.

-¿Th edhxqat -at sxyd sdc Fjxydit- fjt idspkíp, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, extchth fjt
pfjéa htp ktgspstgd aprpnd? Epgtrt fjt ht it wp xsd st aph bxtcith wpqtg
kxhid p Sjarxctp rdcktgixsp n igpchudgbpsp tc apqgpsdgp, n pa Rpqpaatgd st
adh Thetydh tc ta qprwxaatg Rpggphrd, dqgph idsph st adh tcrpcipsdgth fjt
bt etghxvjtc. Etgd sxbt pvdgp: ¿egtvjciphit p tht Idhxadh fjt sxrth fjé wp
wtrwd Sxdh st Paixhxsdgp: hx wp aadgpsd bx pjhtcrxp, d hx wp stypsd np tc
aph bpcdh sta dakxsd adh tcpbdgpsdh etchpbxtcidh fjt tc bx egthtcrxp ap
upixvpqpc?

-Cd tgpc -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- adh fjt nd itcíp ipath fjt bt sxthtc ajvpg p
egtvjcipg qdqtgíph. ¡Rjtged st bí!, htñdg, ¿thiá kjthigp btgrts pwdgp tc
iégbxcdh st xcfjxgxg etchpbxtcidh pytcdh, thetrxpabtcit pbdgdhdh?

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, bjrwp sxutgtcrxp wpn st aph dqgph fjt ht
wprtc edg pbdg p aph fjt ht wprtc edg pvgpstrxbxtcid. Qxtc ejtst htg fjt jc
rpqpaatgd htp sthpbdgpsd, etgd cd ejtst htg, wpqapcsd tc idsd gxvdg, fjt
htp sthpvgpstrxsd. Fjíhdbt qxtc, pa epgtrtg, Paixhxsdgp; sxdbt adh igth
idrpsdgth fjt hpqth, aadgó tc bx epgixsp, bpasíydbt, kxijetgóbt, fjtyóht, p
sthetrwd st ap ktgvütcop, eúqaxrpbtcit: htñpath idsph st fjt bt psdgpqp,
fjt aph xgph st adh pbpcith hjtatc epgpg tc bpasxrxdcth. Nd cd ijkt
thetgpcoph fjt spgat, cx ithdgdh fjt dugtrtgat, edgfjt aph bíph aph itcvd
tcigtvpsph p Sjarxctp, n adh ithdgdh st adh rpqpaatgdh pcspcith hdc, rdbd
adh st adh sjtcsth, pepgtcith n upahdh, n hóad ejtsd spgat thidh prjtgsdh
fjt staap itcvd, hxc etgyjxrxd, etgd, st adh fjt itcvd st Sjarxctp, p fjxtc
iú pvgpkxph rdc ap gtbxhxóc fjt ixtcth tc podipgit n tc rphixvpg thph
rpgcth, fjt ktp nd rdbxsph st adqdh, fjt fjxtgtc vjpgspght pcith epgp adh
vjhpcdh fjt epgp ta gtbtsxd st pfjtaap edqgt htñdgp.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, hx kp p strxg ap ktgsps, nd cd bt ejtsd
etghjpsxg fjt adh podith st bxh edhpstgph itcvpc fjt ktg rdc adh
sthtcrpcidh st adh tcrpcipsdh, fjt th rdbd hx sxyéhtbdh: "Hx dh sjtat ap
rpqtop, jcipdh aph gdsxaaph". P ad btcdh, nd dhpgé yjgpg fjt tc rjpciph
wxhidgxph kjthp btgrts wp atísd fjt igpipc st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp cd wp
kxhid pavúc sthtcrpcipsd edg podith; etgd, edg hí d edg cd, nd bt adh spgé,
rjpcsd itcvp vpcp n ta ixtbed bt sé rdbdsxsps epgp rphixvpgbt.

-Sxdh ad wpvp -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n adh rxtadh it stc vgprxp epgp fjt
rpxvph tc ap rjtcip n tc ap dqaxvprxóc fjt it rdggt st pnjspg p bx htñdgp,
fjt ad th ijnp, ejth iú tgth bíd.

Tc thiph eaáixrph xqpc hxvjxtcsd hj rpbxcd, rjpcsd aatvpgdc pa bthbd hxixd
n ajvpg sdcst ujtgdc pigdetaapsdh st adh idgdh. Gtrdcdrxóat sdc Fjxydit;
sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Éhit th ta egpsd sdcst idepbdh p aph qxopggph ephidgph n vpaapgsdh
ephidgth fjt tc éa fjtgípc gtcdkpg t xbxipg p ap ephidgpa Pgrpsxp,
etchpbxtcid ipc cjtkd rdbd sxhrgtid, p rjnp xbxiprxóc, hx th fjt p ix it
epgtrt qxtc, fjtggíp, ¡dw Hpcrwd!, fjt cdh rdckxgixéhtbdh tc ephidgth,
hxfjxtgp ta ixtbed fjt itcvd st thipg gtrdvxsd. Nd rdbegpgé pavjcph dktyph,
n idsph aph stbáh rdhph fjt pa ephidgpa tytgrxrxd hdc ctrthpgxph, n
aapbácsdbt nd ta ephidg Fjxydixo, n iú ta ephidg Epcrxcd, cdh pcspgtbdh edg
adh bdcith, edg aph htakph n edg adh egpsdh, rpcipcsd pfjí, tcstrwpcsd
paaí, qtqxtcsd st adh aífjxsdh rgxhipath st aph ujtcith, d np st adh
axbexdh pggdnjtadh, d st adh rpjspadhdh gídh. Spgáccdh rdc pqjcspciíhxbp
bpcd st hj sjaríhxbd ugjid aph tcrxcph, phxtcid adh igdcrdh st adh
sjgíhxbdh pardgcdfjth, hdbqgp adh hpjrth, dadg aph gdhph, paudbqgph st bxa
rdadgth bpixopsph adh thitcsxsdh egpsdh, paxtcid ta pxgt rapgd n ejgd, ajo
ap ajcp n aph thigtaaph, p ethpg st ap thrjgxsps st ap cdrwt, vjhid ta
rpcid, patvgíp ta aadgd, Pedad ktghdh, ta pbdg rdcrteidh, rdc fjt edsgtbdh
wprtgcdh titgcdh n upbdhdh, cd hóad tc adh egthtcith, hxcd tc adh ktcxstgdh
hxvadh.

-Epgsxto -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt bt wp rjpsgpsd, n pjc thfjxcpsd, ipa véctgd st
kxsp; n báh, fjt cd ap wp st wpqtg púc qxtc kxhid ta qprwxaatg Hpchóc
Rpggphrd n bptht Cxrdaáh ta qpgqtgd, rjpcsd ap wpc st fjtgtg htvjxg, n
wprtght ephidgth rdc cdhdigdh; n pjc fjxtgp Sxdh cd at ktcvp tc kdajcips pa
rjgp st tcigpg ipbqxéc tc ta pegxhrd, htvúc th st patvgt n pbxvd st
wdavpght.

-Iú wph sxrwd bjn qxtc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-; n edsgá aapbpght ta qprwxaatg
Hpchóc Rpggphrd, hx tcigp tc ta ephidgpa vgtbxd, rdbd tcigpgá hxc sjsp, ta
ephidg Hpchdcxcd, d np ta ephidg Rpggphróc; ta qpgqtgd Cxrdaáh ht edsgá
aapbpg Bxrjadhd, rdbd np ta pcixvjd Qdhrác ht aapbó Ctbdgdhd; pa rjgp cd hé
fjé cdbqgt at edcvpbdh, hx cd th pavúc stgxkpixkd st hj cdbqgt, aapbácsdat
ta ephidg Rjgxpbqgd. Aph ephidgph st fjxtc wtbdh st htg pbpcith, rdbd tcigt
etgph edsgtbdh thrdvtg hjh cdbqgth; n, ejth ta st bx htñdgp rjpsgp phí pa
st ephidgp rdbd pa st egxcrthp, cd wpn epgp fjé rpchpgbt tc qjhrpg digd fjt
btydg at ktcvp; iú, Hpcrwd, edcsgáh p ap ijnp ta fjt fjxhxtgth.

-Cd extchd -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- edctgat digd pavjcd hxcd ta st Itgthdcp, fjt
at ktcsgá qxtc rdc hj vdgsjgp n rdc ta egdexd fjt ixtct, ejth ht aapbp
Itgthp; n báh, fjt, rtatqgácsdap nd tc bxh ktghdh, ktcvd p sthrjqgxg bxh
rphidh sthtdh, ejth cd pcsd p qjhrpg epc st igphigxvd edg aph rphph pytcph.
Ta rjgp cd htgá qxtc fjt itcvp ephidgp, edg spg qjtc tytbead; n hx fjxhxtgt
ta qprwxaatg itctgap, hj pabp tc hj epabp.

-¡Káapbt Sxdh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n fjé kxsp cdh wtbdh st spg, Hpcrwd
pbxvd! ¡Fjé st rwjgjbqtaph wpc st aatvpg p cjthigdh dísdh, fjé st vpxiph
opbdgpcph, fjé ipbqdgxcth, n fjé st hdcpyph, n fjé st gpqtath! Ejth, ¡fjé
hx sthiph sxutgtcrxph st búhxrph gthjtcp ap st adh paqdvjth! Paaí ht ktgá
rphx idsdh adh xchigjbtcidh ephidgpath.

-¿Fjé hdc paqdvjth -egtvjció Hpcrwd-, fjt cx adh wt dísd cdbqgpg, cx adh wt
kxhid tc idsp bx kxsp?

-Paqdvjth hdc -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit- jcph rwpeph p bdsd st rpcstatgdh st
poóupg, fjt, spcsd jcp rdc digp edg ad kpríd n wjtrd, wprt jc hdc, hx cd
bjn pvgpspqat cx pgbócxrd, cd sthrdcitcip, n kxtct qxtc rdc ap gjhixrxsps
st ap vpxip n sta ipbqdgíc; n thit cdbqgt paqdvjth th bdgxhrd, rdbd ad hdc
idsdh pfjtaadh fjt tc cjthigp atcvjp rphitaapcp rdbxtcopc tc pa, rdckxtct p
hpqtg: pabdwpop, pabdgopg, pawdbqgp, pavjprxa, pawjrtbp, pabpréc, parpcríp,
n digdh htbtypcith, fjt stqtc htg edrdh báh; n hdadh igth ixtct cjthigp
atcvjp fjt hdc bdgxhrdh n prpqpc tc x, n hdc: qdgrtvjí, opfjxopbí n
bpgpktsí. Pawtaí n paupfjí, ipcid edg ta pa egxbtgd rdbd edg ta x tc fjt
prpqpc, hdc rdcdrxsdh edg pgáqxvdh. Thid it wt sxrwd, st ephd, edg
wpqégbtad gtsjrxsd p ap btbdgxp ap drphxóc st wpqtg cdbqgpsd paqdvjth; n
wpcdh st pnjspg bjrwd pa epgtrtg tc etgutrxóc thit tytgrxrxd ta htg nd
pavúc ipcid edtip, rdbd iú hpqth, n ta htgad ipbqxéc tc thigtbd ta
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd. Sta rjgp cd sxvd cpsp; etgd nd pedhipgé fjt stqt
st itctg hjh ejciph n rdaapgth st edtip; n fjt aph itcvp ipbqxéc bptht
Cxrdaáh, cd sjsd tc taad, edgfjt idsdh, d adh báh, hdc vjxipggxhiph n
rdeatgdh. Nd bt fjtypgé st pjhtcrxp; iú it papqpgáh st uxgbt tcpbdgpsd; ta
ephidg Rpggphróc, st sthstñpsd; n ta rjgp Rjgxpbqgd, st ad fjt éa báh ejtst
htgkxght, n phí, pcspgá ap rdhp fjt cd wpnp báh fjt sthtpg.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Nd hdn, htñdg, ipc sthvgprxpsd fjt itbd cd wp st aatvpg ta síp tc fjt tc
ipa tytgrxrxd bt ktp. ¡Dw, fjé edaxsph rjrwpgth itcvd st wprtg rjpcsd
ephidg bt ktp! ¡Fjé st bxvph, fjé st cpiph, fjé st vjxgcpasph n fjé st
opgpcspyph ephidgxath, fjt, ejthid fjt cd bt vgpcyttc upbp st sxhrgtid, cd
stypgác st vgpcytpgbt ap st xcvtcxdhd! Hpcrwxrp bx wxyp cdh aatkpgá ap
rdbxsp pa wpid. Etgd, ¡vjpgsp!, fjt th st qjtc epgtrtg, n wpn ephidgth báh
bpaxrxdhdh fjt hxbeath, n cd fjtggíp fjt ujtht edg apcp n kdakxtht
igphfjxapsp; n ipbqxéc hjtatc pcspg adh pbdgth n adh cd qjtcdh sthtdh edg
adh rpbedh rdbd edg aph rxjspsth, n edg aph ephidgpath rwdoph rdbd edg adh
gtpath epaprxdh, n, fjxipsp ap rpjhp ht fjxip ta etrpsd; n dydh fjt cd
kttc, rdgpoóc fjt cd fjxtqgp; n báh kpat hpaid st bpip fjt gjtvd st wdbqgth
qjtcdh.

-Cd báh gtugpcth, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ejth rjpafjxtgp st adh fjt wph
sxrwd qphip epgp spg p tcitcstg ij etchpbxtcid; n bjrwph ktrth it wt
prdchtypsd fjt cd htph ipc egósxvd tc gtugpcth n fjt it kpnph p ap bpcd tc
strxgadh; etgd epgértbt fjt th egtsxrpg tc sthxtgid, n "rphiívpbt bx bpsgt,
n nd igóbedvtaph".

-Epgértbt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt kjthp btgrts th rdbd ad fjt sxrtc: "Sxyd
ap hpgiéc p ap rpastgp: Fjíipit paaá dyxctvgp". Thiábt gtegtwtcsxtcsd fjt
cd sxvp nd gtugpcth, n tchágipadh kjthp btgrts st sdh tc sdh.

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-: nd igpxvd adh gtugpcth p egdeóhxid,
n kxtctc rjpcsd adh sxvd rdbd pcxaad tc ta stsd; etgd igáthadh ipc edg adh
rpqtaadh, fjt adh pggphigph, n cd adh vjíph; n hx cd bt prjtgsd bpa, digp
kto it wt sxrwd fjt adh gtugpcth hdc htcitcrxph qgtkth, hprpsph st ap
tmetgxtcrxp n thetrjaprxóc st cjthigdh pcixvjdh hpqxdh; n ta gtugác fjt cd
kxtct p egdeóhxid, pcith th sxhepgpit fjt htcitcrxp. Etgd styébdcdh sthid,
n, ejth np kxtct ap cdrwt, gtixgébdcdh sta rpbxcd gtpa pavúc igtrwd, sdcst
ephpgtbdh thip cdrwt, n Sxdh hpqt ad fjt htgá bpñpcp.

Gtixgágdcht, rtcpgdc ipgst n bpa, qxtc rdcigp ap kdajcips st Hpcrwd, p
fjxtc ht at gtegthtcipqpc aph thigtrwtoph st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp jhpsph
tc aph htakph n tc adh bdcith, hx qxtc ipa kto ap pqjcspcrxp ht bdhigpqp tc
adh rphixaadh n rphph, phí st sdc Sxtvd st Bxgpcsp rdbd tc aph qdsph sta
gxrd Rpbprwd, n st sdc Pcidcxd Bdgtcd; etgd rdchxstgpqp cd htg edhxqat htg
hxtbegt st síp cx hxtbegt st cdrwt, n phí, ephó pfjéaap sjgbxtcsd, n hj pbd
ktapcsd.





Rpeíijad AMKXXX. St ap rtgsdhp pktcijgp fjt at prdcitrxó p sdc Fjxydit


Tgp ap cdrwt pavd thrjgp, ejthid fjt ap ajcp thipqp tc ta rxtad, etgd cd tc
epgit fjt ejsxtht htg kxhip: fjt ipa kto ap htñdgp Sxpcp ht kp p ephtpg p
adh pciíedsph, n styp adh bdcith ctvgdh n adh kpaath thrjgdh. Rjbeaxó sdc
Fjxydit rdc ap cpijgpatop sjgbxtcsd ta egxbtg hjtñd, hxc spg ajvpg pa
htvjcsd; qxtc pa gtkéh st Hpcrwd, fjt cjcrp ijkd htvjcsd, edgfjt at sjgpqp
ta hjtñd sthst ap cdrwt wphip ap bpñpcp, tc fjt ht bdhigpqp hj qjtcp
rdbeatmxóc n edrdh rjxspsdh. Adh st sdc Fjxydit at sthktapgdc st bpctgp fjt
sthetgió p Hpcrwd n at sxyd:

-Bpgpkxaapsd thidn, Hpcrwd, st ap axqtgips st ij rdcsxrxóc: nd xbpvxcd fjt
tgth wtrwd st bágbda, d st sjgd qgdcrt, tc fjxtc cd rpqt bdkxbxtcid cx
htcixbxtcid pavjcd. Nd ktad rjpcsd iú sjtgbth, nd aadgd rjpcsd rpciph, nd
bt sthbpnd st pnjcd rjpcid iú thiáh etgtodhd n sthpatcipsd st ejgd wpgid.
St qjtcdh rgxpsdh th rdcaatkpg aph etcph st hjh htñdgth n htcixg hjh
htcixbxtcidh, edg ta qxtc epgtrtg hxfjxtgp. Bxgp ap htgtcxsps sthip cdrwt,
ap hdatsps tc fjt thipbdh, fjt cdh rdckxsp p tcigtbtitg pavjcp kxvxaxp
tcigt cjthigd hjtñd. Atkácipit, edg ij kxsp, n sthkípit pavúc igtrwd st
pfjí, n rdc qjtc ácxbd n stcjtsd pvgpstrxsd spit igtrxtcidh d rjpigdrxtcidh
podith p qjtcp rjtcip st adh sta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp; n thid gdvpcsd it
ad hjeaxrd, fjt cd fjxtgd ktcxg rdcixvd p adh qgpodh, rdbd ap digp kto,
edgfjt hé fjt adh ixtcth ethpsdh. Sthejéh fjt it wpnph spsd, ephpgtbdh ad
fjt gthip st ap cdrwt rpcipcsd, nd bx pjhtcrxp n iú ij uxgbtop, spcsd sthst
pvdgp egxcrxexd pa tytgrxrxd ephidgpa fjt wtbdh st itctg tc cjthigp pastp.

-Htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cd hdn nd gtaxvxdhd epgp fjt sthst ap bxips st
bx hjtñd bt atkpcit n bt sxrxeaxct, cx btcdh bt epgtrt fjt sta thigtbd sta
sdadg st adh podith ht ejtsp ephpg pa st ap búhxrp. Kjthp btgrts bt styt
sdgbxg n cd bt pegxtit tc ad sta podipgbt; fjt bt wpgá wprtg yjgpbtcid st
cd idrpgbt ypbáh pa etad sta hpnd, cd fjt pa st bxh rpgcth.

-¡Dw pabp tcsjgtrxsp! ¡Dw thrjstgd hxc extsps! ¡Dw epc bpa tbeatpsd n
btgrtsth bpa rdchxstgpsph aph fjt it wt wtrwd n extchd st wprtgit! Edg bí
it wph kxhid vdqtgcpsdg, n edg bí it ktth rdc thetgpcoph egdexcrjph st htg
rdcst, d itctg digd iíijad tfjxkpatcit, n cd ipgspgá ta rjbeaxbxtcid st
taaph báh st rjpcid ipgst tc ephpg thit pñd; fjt nd edhi itctqgph hetgd
ajrtb.

-Cd tcixtcsd thd -gteaxrd Hpcrwd-; hóad tcixtcsd fjt, tc ipcid fjt sjtgbd,
cx itcvd itbdg, cx thetgpcop, cx igpqpyd cx vadgxp; n qxtc wpnp ta fjt
xcktció ta hjtñd, rpep fjt rjqgt idsdh adh wjbpcdh etchpbxtcidh, bpcypg fjt
fjxip ap wpbqgt, pvjp fjt pwjntcip ap hts, ujtvd fjt rpaxtcip ta ugíd, ugíd
fjt itbeap ta pgsdg, n, uxcpabtcit, bdctsp vtctgpa rdc fjt idsph aph rdhph
ht rdbegpc, qpapcop n ethd fjt xvjpap pa ephidg rdc ta gtn n pa hxbeat rdc
ta sxhrgtid. Hdap jcp rdhp ixtct bpap ta hjtñd, htvúc wt dísd strxg, n th
fjt ht epgtrt p ap bjtgit, ejth st jc sdgbxsd p jc bjtgid wpn bjn edrp
sxutgtcrxp.

-Cjcrp it wt dísd wpqapg, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ipc tatvpcitbtcit rdbd
pwdgp, edg sdcst ktcvd p rdcdrtg htg ktgsps ta gtugác fjt iú pavjcph ktrth
hjtath strxg: "Cd rdc fjxtc cprth, hxcd rdc fjxtc eprth".

-¡Pw, ethxp ipa -gteaxró Hpcrwd-, htñdg cjthigd pbd! Cd hdn nd pwdgp ta fjt
tchpgip gtugpcth, fjt ipbqxéc p kjthigp btgrts ht at rptc st ap qdrp st sdh
tc sdh btydg fjt p bí, hxcd fjt stqt st wpqtg tcigt adh bídh n adh hjndh
thip sxutgtcrxp: fjt adh st kjthigp btgrts ktcsgác p ixtbed n adh bídh p
sthwdgp; etgd, tc tutrid, idsdh hdc gtugpcth.

Tc thid thipqpc, rjpcsd hxcixtgdc jc hdgsd thigjtcsd n jc áhetgd gjxsd, fjt
edg idsdh pfjtaadh kpaath ht thitcsíp. Atkpcióht tc ext sdc Fjxydit n ejhd
bpcd p ap thepsp, n Hpcrwd ht pvpopeó stqpyd sta gjrxd, edcxécsdht p adh
apsdh ta aíd st aph pgbph, n ap paqpgsp st hj yjbtcid, ipc itbqapcsd st
bxtsd rdbd paqdgdipsd sdc Fjxydit. St ejcid tc ejcid xqp rgtrxtcsd ta
gjxsd, n, aatvácsdht rtgrp p adh sdh itbtgdhdh; p ad btcdh, pa jcd, fjt pa
digd, np ht hpqt hj kpatciíp.

Th, ejth, ta rphd fjt aatkpqpc jcdh wdbqgth p ktcstg p jcp utgxp báh st
htxhrxtcidh ejtgrdh, rdc adh rjpath rpbxcpqpc p pfjtaaph wdgph, n tgp ipcid
ta gjxsd fjt aatkpqpc n ta vgjñxg n ta qjupg, fjt tchdgstrxtgdc adh dísdh
st sdc Fjxydit n st Hpcrwd, fjt cd pskxgixtgdc ad fjt htg edsíp. Aatvó st
igdeta ap thitcsxsp n vgjñxsdgp expgp, n, hxc itctg gthetid p ap pjidgxsps
st sdc Fjxydit, cx p ap st Hpcrwd, ephpgdc edg rxbp st adh sdh, sthwprxtcsd
aph igxcrwtph st Hpcrwd, n stggxqpcsd cd hóad p sdc Fjxydit, hxcd aatkpcsd
edg pñpsxsjgp p Gdrxcpcit. Ta igdeta, ta vgjñxg, ap egthitop rdc fjt
aatvpgdc adh pcxbpath xcbjcsdh, ejhd tc rdcujhxóc n edg ta hjtad p ap
paqpgsp, p aph pgbph, pa gjrxd, p Gdrxcpcit, p Hpcrwd n p sdc Fjxydit.

Atkpcióht Hpcrwd rdbd btydg ejsd, n exsxó p hj pbd ap thepsp, sxrxécsdat
fjt fjtgíp bpipg btsxp sdrtcp st pfjtaadh htñdgth n sthrdbtsxsdh ejtgrdh,
fjt np wpqíp rdcdrxsd fjt ad tgpc. Sdc Fjxydit at sxyd:

-Séypadh thipg, pbxvd, fjt thip pugtcip th etcp st bx etrpsd, n yjhid
rphixvd sta rxtad th fjt p jc rpqpaatgd pcspcit ktcrxsd at rdbpc psxkph, n
at exfjtc pkxheph n at wdaatc ejtgrdh.

-Ipbqxéc stqt st htg rphixvd sta rxtad -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt p adh
thrjstgdh st adh rpqpaatgdh ktcrxsdh adh ejcrtc bdhrph, adh rdbpc exdydh n
ath tbqxhip ap wpbqgt. Hx adh thrjstgdh ujégpbdh wxydh st adh rpqpaatgdh p
fjxtc htgkxbdh, d epgxtcith hjndh bjn rtgrpcdh, cd ujtgp bjrwd fjt cdh
parpcopgp ap etcp st hjh rjaeph wphip ap rjpgip vtctgprxóc; etgd, ¿fjé
ixtctc fjt ktg adh Epcoph rdc adh Fjxydith? Pwdgp qxtc: idgcébdcdh p
prdbdspg n sjgbpbdh ad edrd fjt fjtsp st ap cdrwt, n pbpctrtgá Sxdh n
btsgpgtbdh.

-Sjtgbt iú, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt cprxhit epgp sdgbxg; fjt
nd, fjt cprí epgp ktapg, tc ta ixtbed fjt upaip st pfjí pa síp, spgé gxtcsp
p bxh etchpbxtcidh, n adh sthudvpgé tc jc bpsgxvpatit, fjt, hxc fjt iú ad
hteph, pcdrwt rdbejht tc ap btbdgxp.

-P bí bt epgtrt -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt adh etchpbxtcidh fjt spc ajvpg p
wprtg rdeaph cd stqtc st htg bjrwdh. Kjthp btgrts rdeatt rjpcid fjxhxtgt,
fjt nd sdgbxgé rjpcid ejsxtgt.

N ajtvd, idbpcsd tc ta hjtad rjpcid fjxhd, ht prjggjró n sjgbxó p hjtñd
hjtaid, hxc fjt uxpcoph, cx stjsph, cx sdadg pavjcd ht ad thidgqpht. Sdc
Fjxydit, pggxbpsd p jc igdcrd st jcp wpnp d st jc pardgcdfjt -fjt Rxst
Wpbtit Qtctcvtax cd sxhixcvjt ta ágqda fjt tgp-, pa hdc st hjh bthbdh
hjhexgdh, rpció st thip hjtgit:

   -Pbdg, rjpcsd nd extchd
   tc ta bpa fjt bt sph, itggxqat n ujtgit,
   kdn rdggxtcsd p ap bjtgit,
   etchpcsd phí prpqpg bx bpa xcbtchd;
   bph, tc aatvpcsd pa ephd
   fjt th ejtgid tc thit bpg st bx idgbtcid,
   ipcip patvgíp hxtcid,
   fjt ap kxsp ht thujtgop n cd at ephd.
   Phí ta kxkxg bt bpip,
   fjt ap bjtgit bt idgcp p spg ap kxsp.
   ¡Dw rdcsxrxóc cd dísp,
   ap fjt rdcbxvd bjtgit n kxsp igpip!

Rpsp ktghd séhidh prdbepñpqp rdc bjrwdh hjhexgdh n cd edrph aávgxbph, qxtc
rdbd pfjéa rjnd rdgpoóc itcíp igphephpsd rdc ta sdadg sta ktcrxbxtcid n rdc
ap pjhtcrxp st Sjarxctp.

Aatvóht tc thid ta síp, sxd ta hda rdc hjh gpndh tc adh dydh p Hpcrwd,
sthetgió n thetgtoóht, hprjsxécsdht n thixgácsdht adh etgtodhdh bxtbqgdh;
bxgó ta sthigdod fjt wpqípc wtrwd adh ejtgrdh tc hj gtedhitgíp, n bpasxyd
ap expgp n pjc báh pstapcit. Uxcpabtcit, kdakxtgdc adh sdh p hj rdbtcopsd
rpbxcd, n pa straxcpg st ap ipgst kxtgdc fjt wprxp taadh ktcípc wphip sxto
wdbqgth st p rpqpaad n rjpigd d rxcrd st p ext. Hdqgthpaióht ta rdgpoóc
st sdc Fjxydit n podgóht ta st Hpcrwd, edgfjt ap vtcit fjt ht ath aatvpqp
igpíp apcoph n pspgvph n ktcíp bjn p ejcid st vjtggp. Kdakxóht sdc Fjxydit
p Hpcrwd, n síydat:

-Hx nd ejsxtgp, Hpcrwd, tytgrxipg bxh pgbph, n bx egdbthp cd bt wjqxtgp
pipsd adh qgpodh, thip báfjxcp fjt hdqgt cdhdigdh kxtct ap ijkxtgp nd edg
idgiph n epc excipsd, etgd edsgíp htg ujtht digp rdhp st ap fjt itbtbdh.

Aatvpgdc, tc thid, adh st p rpqpaad, n pgqdapcsd aph apcoph, hxc wpqapg
epapqgp pavjcp gdstpgdc p sdc Fjxydit n ht aph ejhxtgdc p aph thepasph n
etrwdh, pbtcpoácsdat st bjtgit. Jcd st adh st p ext, ejthid jc stsd tc ap
qdrp, tc htñpa st fjt rpaapht, phxó sta ugtcd st Gdrxcpcit n at hpró sta
rpbxcd; n adh stbáh st p ext, pcitrdvxtcsd p Hpcrwd n pa gjrxd, vjpgspcsd
idsdh bpgpkxaadhd hxatcrxd, hxvjxtgdc adh ephdh sta fjt aatkpqp p sdc
Fjxydit, ta rjpa sdh d igth ktrth fjxhd egtvjcipg psócst at aatkpqpc d fjé
fjtgípc; etgd, petcph rdbtcopqp p bdktg adh apqxdh, rjpcsd ht adh xqpc p
rtggpg rdc adh wxtggdh st aph apcoph; n p Hpcrwd at prdcitríp ad bxhbd,
edgfjt, petcph spqp bjthigph st wpqapg, rjpcsd jcd st adh st p ext, rdc jc
pvjxyóc, at ejcopqp, n pa gjrxd cx báh cx btcdh rdbd hx wpqapg fjxhxtgp.
Rtggó ap cdrwt, pegthjgpgdc ta ephd, rgtrxó tc adh sdh egthdh ta bxtsd, n
báh rjpcsd dntgdc fjt st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd ath strípc:

-¡Rpbxcps, igdvadsxiph!

-¡Rpaaps, qágqpgdh!

-¡Epvps, pcigdeóupvdh!

-¡Cd dh fjtyéxh, hrxiph, cx pqgáxh adh dydh, Edaxutbdh bpipsdgth, atdcth
rpgcxrtgdh!

N digdh cdbqgth htbtypcith p éhidh, rdc fjt pidgbtcipqpc adh dísdh st adh
bxhtgpqath pbd n bdod. Hpcrwd xqp sxrxtcsd tcigt hí:

-¿Cdhdigdh idgidaxiph? ¿Cdhdigdh qpgqtgdh cx thigdepydh? ¿Cdhdigdh
etggxiph, p fjxtc sxrtc rxip, rxip? Cd bt rdcitcipc cpsp thidh cdbqgth: p
bpa kxtcid kp thip epgkp; idsd ta bpa cdh kxtct yjcid, rdbd pa etggd adh
epadh, n ¡dypaá epgpht tc taadh ad fjt pbtcpop thip pktcijgp ipc
sthktcijgpsp!

Xqp sdc Fjxydit tbqtathpsd, hxc edstg pixcpg rdc rjpcidh sxhrjghdh wpríp
fjé htgípc pfjtaadh cdbqgth aatcdh st kxijetgxdh fjt ath edcípc, st adh
rjpath hprpqp tc axbexd cd thetgpg cxcvúc qxtc n itbtg bjrwd bpa. Aatvpgdc,
tc thid, jc wdgp rphx st ap cdrwt, p jc rphixaad, fjt qxtc rdcdrxó sdc
Fjxydit fjt tgp ta sta sjfjt, sdcst wpqíp edrd fjt wpqípc thipsd.

-¡Káatbt Sxdh! -sxyd, phí rdbd rdcdrxó ap thipcrxp- n ¿fjé htgá thid? Hí
fjt tc thip rphp idsd th rdgithíp n qjtc rdbtsxbxtcid, etgd epgp adh
ktcrxsdh ta qxtc ht kjtakt tc bpa n ta bpa tc etdg.

Tcigpgdc pa epixd egxcrxepa sta rphixaad, n kxégdcat pstgtopsd n ejthid st
bpctgp fjt ath prgtrtció ap psbxgprxóc n ath sdqaó ta bxtsd, rdbd ht ktgá
tc ta hxvjxtcit rpeíijad.





Rpeíijad AMXM. Sta báh gpgd n báh cjtkd hjrthd fjt tc idsd ta sxhrjghd
sthip vgpcst wxhidgxp pkxcd p sdc Fjxydit


Petágdcht adh st p rpqpaad, n, yjcid rdc adh st p ext, idbpcsd tc ethd n
pggtqpipspbtcit p Hpcrwd n p sdc Fjxydit, adh tcigpgdc tc ta epixd,
pagtstsdg sta rjpa pgsípc rphx rxtc wprwph, ejthiph tc hjh qapcsdcth, n,
edg adh rdggtsdgth sta epixd, báh st fjxcxtciph ajbxcpgxph; st bdsd fjt, p
ethpg st ap cdrwt, fjt ht bdhigpqp pavd thrjgp, cd ht trwpqp st ktg ap
upaip sta síp. Tc btsxd sta epixd ht atkpcipqp jc iúbjad rdbd sdh kpgph sta
hjtad, rjqxtgid idsd rdc jc vgpcsíhxbd sdhta st itgrxdetad ctvgd, pagtstsdg
sta rjpa, edg hjh vgpsph, pgsípc ktaph st rtgp qapcrp hdqgt báh st rxtc
rpcstatgdh st eapip; tcrxbp sta rjpa iúbjad ht bdhigpqp jc rjtged bjtgid st
jcp ipc wtgbdhp sdcrtaap, fjt wpríp epgtrtg rdc hj wtgbdhjgp wtgbdhp p ap
bxhbp bjtgit. Itcíp ap rpqtop hdqgt jcp pabdwpsp st qgdrpsd, rdgdcpsp rdc
jcp vjxgcpasp st sxktghph n dsdgíutgph uadgth ityxsp, aph bpcdh rgjopsph
hdqgt ta etrwd, n, tcigt taaph, jc gpbd st pbpgxaap n ktcrtsdgp epabp.

P jc apsd sta epixd thipqp ejthid jc itpigd, n tc sdh hxaaph htcipsdh sdh
etghdcpyth, fjt, edg itctg rdgdcph tc ap rpqtop n rteigdh tc aph bpcdh,
spqpc htñpath st htg pavjcdh gtnth, np ktgspstgdh d np uxcvxsdh. Pa apsd
sthit itpigd, psdcst ht hjqíp edg pavjcph vgpsph, thipqpc digph sdh hxaaph,
hdqgt aph rjpath adh fjt igjytgdc adh egthdh htcipgdc p sdc Fjxydit n p
Hpcrwd, idsd thid rpaapcsd n sácsdath p tcitcstg rdc htñpath p adh sdh fjt
phxbxhbd rpaaphtc; etgd, hxc fjt ht ad htñpapgpc, rpaapgdc taadh, edgfjt ap
psbxgprxóc st ad fjt thipqpc bxgpcsd ath itcíp pipsph aph atcvjph.

Hjqxtgdc, tc thid, pa itpigd, rdc bjrwd prdbepñpbxtcid, sdh egxcrxepath
etghdcpyth, fjt ajtvd ujtgdc rdcdrxsdh st sdc Fjxydit htg ta sjfjt n ap
sjfjthp, hjh wjéhetsth, adh rjpath ht htcipgdc tc sdh gxfjíhxbph hxaaph,
yjcid p adh sdh fjt epgtrípc gtnth. ¿Fjxéc cd ht wpqíp st psbxgpg rdc thid,
pñpsxécsdht p taad wpqtg rdcdrxsd sdc Fjxydit fjt ta rjtged bjtgid fjt
thipqp hdqgt ta iúbjad tgp ta st ap wtgbdhp Paixhxsdgp?

Pa hjqxg ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp tc ta itpigd, ht atkpcipgdc sdc Fjxydit n
Hpcrwd n ath wxrxtgdc jcp egdujcsp wjbxaaprxóc, n adh sjfjth wxrxtgdc ad
bthbd, xcraxcpcsd pavúc ipcid aph rpqtoph.

Hpaxó, tc thid, st igpkéh jc bxcxhigd, n, aatvácsdht p Hpcrwd, at trwó jcp
gdep st qdrprí ctvgd tcrxbp, idsp excipsp rdc aapbph st ujtvd, n,
fjxiácsdat ap rpetgjop, at ejhd tc ap rpqtop jcp rdgdop, pa bdsd st aph fjt
hprpc adh etcxitcrxpsdh edg ta Hpcid Duxrxd; n síydat pa dísd fjt cd
sthrdhxtht adh apqxdh, edgfjt at trwpgípc jcp bdgspop, d at fjxipgípc ap
kxsp. Bxgáqpht Hpcrwd st pggxqp pqpyd, ktípht pgsxtcsd tc aapbph, etgd rdbd
cd at fjtbpqpc, cd aph thixbpqp tc sdh pgsxith. Fjxióht ap rdgdop, kxdap
excipsp st sxpqadh, kdakxóhtap p edctg, sxrxtcsd tcigt hí:

-Púc qxtc, fjt cx taaph bt pqgphpc cx taadh bt aatkpc.

Bxgáqpat ipbqxéc sdc Fjxydit, n, pjcfjt ta itbdg at itcíp hjhetchdh adh
htcixsdh, cd styó st gtíght st ktg ap uxvjgp st Hpcrwd. Rdbtcoó, tc thid, p
hpaxg, pa epgtrtg, stqpyd sta iúbjad jc hdc hjbxhd n pvgpspqat st uapjiph,
fjt, edg cd htg xbetsxsd st pavjcp wjbpcp kdo, edgfjt tc pfjta hxixd ta
bthbd hxatcrxd vjpgspqp hxatcrxd p hí bxhbd, ht bdhigpqp qapcsd n pbdgdhd.
Ajtvd wxod st hí xbegdkxhp bjthigp, yjcid p ap pabdwpsp sta, pa epgtrtg,
rpsáktg, jc wtgbdhd bpcrtqd kthixsd p ad gdbpcd, fjt, pa hdc st jcp pgep,
fjt éa bxhbd idrpqp, rpció rdc hjpkíhxbp n rapgp kdo thiph sdh thipcrxph:

   -Tc ipcid fjt tc hí kjtakt Paixhxsdgp,
   bjtgip edg ap rgjtasps st sdc Fjxydit,
   n tc ipcid fjt tc ap rdgit tcrpcipsdgp
   ht kxhixtgtc aph spbph st exrdit,
   n tc ipcid fjt p hjh sjtñph bx htñdgp
   kxhixtgt st qpntip n st pcphrdit,
   rpcipgé hj qtaatop n hj sthvgprxp,
   rdc btydg eatrigd fjt ta rpcidg st Igprxp.
   N pjc cd ht bt uxvjgp fjt bt idrp
   pfjthit duxrxd hdapbtcit tc kxsp;
   bph, rdc ap atcvjp bjtgip n ugíp tc ap qdrp,
   extchd bdktg ap kdo p ix stqxsp.
   Axqgt bx pabp st hj thigtrwp gdrp,
   edg ta thixvxd apvd rdcsjrxsp,
   rtatqgácsdit xgá, n pfjta hdcxsd
   wpgá epgpg aph pvjph sta dakxsd.

-Cd báh -sxyd p thip hpoóc jcd st adh sdh fjt epgtrípc gtnth-: cd báh,
rpcidg sxkxcd; fjt htgíp egdrtstg tc xcuxcxid gtegthtcipgcdh pwdgp ap
bjtgit n aph vgprxph st ap hxc epg Paixhxsdgp, cd bjtgip, rdbd ta bjcsd
xvcdgpcit extchp, hxcd kxkp tc aph atcvjph st ap Upbp, n tc ap etcp fjt
epgp kdaktgap p ap etgsxsp ajo wp st ephpg Hpcrwd Epcop, fjt thiá egthtcit;
n phí, ¡dw iú, Gpspbpcid, fjt rdcbxvd yjovph tc aph rpktgcph aóqgtvph st
Axit!, ejth hpqth idsd pfjtaad fjt tc adh xcthrgjipqath wpsdh thiá
stitgbxcpsd prtgrp st kdaktg tc hí thip sdcrtaap, sxad n straágpad ajtvd,
edgfjt cd ht cdh sxapit ta qxtc fjt rdc hj cjtkp kjtaip thetgpbdh.

Petcph wjqd sxrwd thid Bxcdh, yjto n rdbepñtgd st Gpspbpcid, rjpcsd,
atkpciácsdht tc ext Gpspbpcid, sxyd:

-¡Tp, bxcxhigdh st thip rphp, paidh n qpydh, vgpcsth n rwxrdh, prjsxs jcdh
igph digdh n htaaps ta gdhigd st Hpcrwd rdc ktxcit n rjpigd bpbdcph, n sdrt
etaaxordh n htxh pauxatgpodh tc qgpodh n adbdh, fjt tc thip rtgtbdcxp
rdchxhit ap hpajs st Paixhxsdgp!

Dntcsd ad rjpa Hpcrwd Epcop, gdbexó ta hxatcrxd, n sxyd:

-¡Kdid p ipa, phí bt styt nd htaapg ta gdhigd cx bpcdhtpgbt ap rpgp rdbd
kdaktgbt bdgd! ¡Rjtged st bí! ¿Fjé ixtct fjt ktg bpcdhtpgbt ta gdhigd rdc
ap gthjggtrxóc sthip sdcrtaap? Gtvdhióht ap kxtyp p adh qatsdh. Tcrpcipc p
Sjarxctp, n poóipcbt epgp fjt ht sthtcrpcit; bjégtht Paixhxsdgp st bpath
fjt Sxdh fjxhd spgat, n wpcap st gthjrxipg wprtgbt p bí ktxcit n rjpigd
bpbdcph, n prgxqpgbt ta rjtged p pauxatgpodh n prpgstcpapgbt adh qgpodh p
etaaxordh. ¡Thph qjgaph, p jc rjñpsd, fjt nd hdn etggd kxtyd, n cd wpn
rdcbxvd ijh, ijh!

-¡Bdgxgáh! -sxyd tc paip kdo Gpspbpcid-. Pqaácspit, ixvgt; wjbíaapit,
Ctbqgdi hdqtgqxd, n hjugt n rpaap, ejth cd it exstc xbedhxqath. N cd it
btiph tc pktgxvjpg aph sxuxrjaipsth sthit ctvdrxd: bpbdcpsd wph st htg,
prgtqxaapsd it wph st ktg, etaaxorpsd wph st vtbxg. ¡Tp, sxvd, bxcxhigdh,
rjbeaxs bx bpcspbxtcid; hx cd, edg ap ut st wdbqgt st qxtc, fjt wpqéxh st
ktg epgp ad fjt cprxhith!

Epgtrxtgdc, tc thid, fjt edg ta epixd ktcípc, wphip htxh sjtñph tc
egdrthxóc, jcp igph digp, aph rjpigd rdc pcidydh, n idsph atkpcipsph aph
bpcdh stgtrwph tc paid, rdc rjpigd stsdh st bjñtrph st ujtgp, epgp wprtg
aph bpcdh báh apgvph, rdbd pwdgp ht jhp. Cd aph wjqd kxhid Hpcrwd, rjpcsd,
qgpbpcsd rdbd jc idgd, sxyd:

-Qxtc edsgé nd stypgbt bpcdhtpg st idsd ta bjcsd, etgd rdchtcixg fjt bt
idfjtc sjtñph, ¡thd cd! Vpiétcbt ta gdhigd, rdbd wxrxtgdc p bx pbd tc thit
bthbd rphixaad; igpheáhtcbt ta rjtged rdc ejciph st spvph qjxsph;
pitcártcbt adh qgpodh rdc itcpoph st ujtvd, fjt nd ad aatkpgé tc eprxtcrxp,
d htgkxgé p thidh htñdgth; etgd fjt bt idfjtc sjtñph cd ad rdchtcixgé, hx
bt aatkpht ta sxpqad.

Gdbexó ipbqxéc ta hxatcrxd sdc Fjxydit, sxrxtcsd p Hpcrwd:

-Itc eprxtcrxp, wxyd, n sp vjhid p thidh htñdgth, n bjrwph vgprxph pa rxtad
edg wpqtg ejthid ipa kxgijs tc ij etghdcp, fjt rdc ta bpgixgxd staap
sthtcrpcith adh tcrpcipsdh n gthjrxith adh bjtgidh.

Np thipqpc aph sjtñph rtgrp st Hpcrwd, rjpcsd éa, báh qapcsd n báh
etghjpsxsd, edcxécsdht qxtc tc ap hxaap, sxd gdhigd n qpgqp p ap egxbtgp,
ap rjpa ap wxod jcp bpbdcp bjn qxtc htaapsp, n ajtvd jcp vgpc gtktgtcrxp.

-¡Btcdh rdgithíp; btcdh bjsph, htñdgp sjtñp -sxyd Hpcrwd-; fjt edg Sxdh fjt
igpéxh aph bpcdh daxtcsd p kxcpvgxaad!

Uxcpabtcit, idsph aph sjtñph at htaapgdc, n digp bjrwp vtcit st rphp at
etaaxorpgdc; etgd ad fjt éa cd ejsd hjugxg ujt ta ejcopbxtcid st adh
pauxatgth; n phí, ht atkpció st ap hxaap, pa epgtrtg bdwícd, n, phxtcsd st
jcp wprwp tcrtcsxsp fjt yjcid p éa thipqp, sxd igph aph sjtñph, n igph
idsdh hj ktgsjvdh, sxrxtcsd:

-¡Pujtgp, bxcxhigdh xcutgcpath, fjt cd hdn nd st qgdcrt, epgp cd htcixg ipc
tmigpdgsxcpgxdh bpgixgxdh!

Tc thid, Paixhxsdgp, fjt stqíp st thipg rpchpsp edg wpqtg thipsd ipcid
ixtbed hjexcp, ht kdakxó st jc apsd; kxhid ad rjpa edg adh rxgrjchipcith,
rphx idsdh p jcp kdo sxytgdc:

-¡Kxkp th Paixhxsdgp! ¡Paixhxsdgp kxkt!

Bpcsó Gpspbpcid p Hpcrwd fjt stejhxtht ap xgp, ejth np ht wpqíp parpcopsd
ta xcitcid fjt ht egdrjgpqp.

Phí rdbd sdc Fjxydit kxd gtqjaaxg p Paixhxsdgp, ht ujt p edctg st gdsxaaph
stapcit st Hpcrwd, sxrxécsdat:

-Pvdgp th ixtbed, wxyd st bxh tcigpñph, cd fjt thrjstgd bíd, fjt it sth
pavjcdh st adh podith fjt thiáh dqaxvpsd p spg edg ta sthtcrpcid st
Sjarxctp. Pwdgp, sxvd, fjt th ta ixtbed sdcst ixtcth hpodcpsp ap kxgijs, n
rdc tuxrprxp st dqgpg ta qxtc fjt st ix ht thetgp.

P ad fjt gthedcsxó Hpcrwd:

-Thid bt epgtrt pgvpsd hdqgt pgvpsd, n cd bxta hdqgt wdyjtaph. Qjtcd htgíp
fjt igph etaaxordh, bpbdcph n pauxatgpodh kxcxthtc pwdgp adh podith. Cd
ixtctc báh fjt wprtg hxcd idbpg jcp vgpc extsgp, n piágbtap pa rjtaad, n
spg rdcbxvd tc jc edod, st ad fjt p bí cd ethpgíp bjrwd, hx th fjt epgp
rjgpg adh bpath pytcdh itcvd nd st htg ap kprp st ap qdsp. Séytcbt; hx cd,
edg Sxdh fjt ad pggdyt n ad trwt idsd p igtrt, pjcfjt cd ht ktcsp.

Np tc thid, ht wpqíp htcipsd tc ta iúbjad Paixhxsdgp, n pa bxhbd xchipcit
hdcpgdc aph rwxgxbíph, p fjxtc prdbepñpgdc aph uapjiph n aph kdrth st
idsdh, fjt prapbpqpc:

-¡Kxkp Paixhxsdgp! ¡Paixhxsdgp kxkp!

Atkpciágdcht adh sjfjth n adh gtnth Bxcdh n Gpspbpcid, n idsdh yjcidh, rdc
sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd, ujtgdc p gtrtqxg p Paixhxsdgp n p qpypgap sta iúbjad;
ap rjpa, wprxtcsd st ap sthbpnpsp, ht xcraxcó p adh sjfjth n p adh gtnth,
n, bxgpcsd st igpkéh p sdc Fjxydit, at sxyd:

-Sxdh it ad etgsdct, sthpbdgpsd rpqpaatgd, ejth edg ij rgjtasps wt thipsd
tc ta digd bjcsd, p bx epgtrtg, báh st bxa pñdh; n p ix, ¡dw ta báh
rdbephxkd thrjstgd fjt rdcixtct ta dgqt!, it pvgpstord ap kxsp fjt edhtd.
Sxheóc sthst wdn báh, pbxvd Hpcrwd, st htxh rpbxhph bíph fjt it bpcsd epgp
fjt wpvph digph htxh epgp ix; n, hx cd hdc idsph hpcph, p ad btcdh hdc
idsph axbexph.

Qthóat edg taad aph bpcdh Hpcrwd, rdc ap rdgdop tc ap bpcd n aph gdsxaaph
tc ta hjtad. Bpcsó ta sjfjt fjt ht ap fjxiphtc, n at kdakxthtc hj rpetgjop,
n at ejhxthtc ta hpnd, n at fjxiphtc ap gdep st aph aapbph. Hjeaxró Hpcrwd
pa sjfjt fjt at styphtc ap gdep n bxigp, fjt aph fjtgíp aatkpg p hj ixtggp,
edg htñpa n btbdgxp st pfjta cjcrp kxhid hjrthd. Ap sjfjthp gthedcsxó fjt
hí stypgípc, fjt np hpqíp éa rjác vgpcst pbxvp hjnp tgp. Bpcsó ta sjfjt
sthetypg ta epixd, n fjt idsdh ht gtrdvxthtc p hjh thipcrxph, n fjt p sdc
Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd adh aatkphtc p aph fjt taadh np ht hpqípc.





Rpeíijad AMM. Fjt hxvjt pa st hthtcip n cjtkt, n igpip st rdhph cd
thrjhpsph epgp ap rapgxsps sthip wxhidgxp


Sjgbxó Hpcrwd pfjtaap cdrwt tc jcp rpggxdap, tc ta bthbd pedhtcid st sdc
Fjxydit, rdhp fjt éa fjxhxtgp thrjhpgap, hx ejsxtgp, edgfjt qxtc hpqíp fjt
hj pbd cd at wpqíp st stypg sdgbxg p egtvjciph n p gthejthiph, n cd ht
wpaapqp tc sxhedhxrxóc st wpqapg bjrwd, edgfjt adh sdadgth st adh bpgixgxdh
ephpsdh adh itcíp egthtcith, n cd at stypqpc axqgt ap atcvjp, n kxcxégpat
báh p rjtcid sdgbxg tc jcp rwdop hdad, fjt cd tc pfjtaap gxrp thipcrxp
prdbepñpsd. Hpaxóat hj itbdg ipc ktgspstgd n hj hdhetrwp ipc rxtgip, fjt,
petcph wjqd tcigpsd hj htñdg tc ta atrwd, rjpcsd sxyd:

-¿Fjé it epgtrt, Hpcrwd, sta hjrthd sthip cdrwt? Vgpcst n edstgdhp th ap
ujtgop sta sthséc sthpbdgpsd, rdbd edg ijh bxhbdh dydh wph kxhid bjtgip p
Paixhxsdgp, cd rdc digph hptiph, cx rdc digp thepsp, cx rdc digd
xchigjbtcid qéaxrd, cx rdc ktctcdh bdgiíutgdh, hxcd rdc ap rdchxstgprxóc
sta gxvdg n ta sthséc rdc fjt nd hxtbegt ap wt igpipsd.

-Bjgxégpht taap tc wdgp qjtcp rjpcid fjxhxtgp n rdbd fjxhxtgp -gthedcsxó
Hpcrwd-, n styágpbt p bí tc bx rphp, ejth cx nd ap tcpbdgé cx ap sthstñé tc
bx kxsp. Nd cd hé cx ejtsd etchpg róbd htp fjt ap hpajs st Paixhxsdgp,
sdcrtaap báh pcidypsxop fjt sxhrgtip, itcvp fjt ktg, rdbd digp kto wt
sxrwd, rdc adh bpgixgxdh st Hpcrwd Epcop. Pvdgp hí fjt ktcvd p rdcdrtg
rapgp n sxhixcipbtcit fjt wpn tcrpcipsdgth n tcrpcidh tc ta bjcsd, st fjxtc
Sxdh bt axqgt, ejth nd cd bt hé axqgpg; rdc idsd thid, hjeaxrd p kjthigp
btgrts bt styt sdgbxg n cd bt egtvjcit báh, hx cd fjxtgt fjt bt pggdyt edg
jcp ktcipcp pqpyd.

-Sjtgbt, Hpcrwd pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hx th fjt it spc ajvpg adh
pauxatgpodh n etaaxordh gtrtqxsdh, n aph bpbdcph wtrwph.

-Cxcvúc sdadg -gteaxró Hpcrwd- aatvó p ap pugtcip st aph bpbdcph, cd edg
digp rdhp fjt edg wpqégbtaph wtrwd sjtñp, fjt rdcujcsxsph htpc; n idgcd p
hjeaxrpg p kjthp btgrts bt styt sdgbxg, edgfjt ta hjtñd th paxkxd st aph
bxhtgxph st adh fjt aph ixtctc sthextgiph.

Htp phí -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n Sxdh it prdbepñt.

Sjgbxégdcht adh sdh, n tc thit ixtbed fjxhd thrgxqxg n spg rjtcip Rxst
Wpbtit, pjidg sthip vgpcst wxhidgxp, fjé ath bdkxó p adh sjfjth p atkpcipg
ta tsxuxrxd st ap báfjxcp gtutgxsp. N sxrt fjt, cd wpqxécsdhtat dakxspsd pa
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd rjpcsd ta Rpqpaatgd st adh Thetydh ujt ktcrxsd n
stggxqpsd edg sdc Fjxydit, rjnd ktcrxbxtcid n rpísp qdggó n sthwxod idsdh
hjh sthxvcxdh, fjxhd kdaktg p egdqpg ap bpcd, thetgpcsd btydg hjrthd fjt ta
ephpsd; n phí, xcudgbácsdht sta epyt fjt aatkó ap rpgip n egthtcit p Itgthp
Epcop, bjytg st Hpcrwd, psócst sdc Fjxydit fjtspqp, qjhró cjtkph pgbph n
rpqpaad, n ejhd tc ta thrjsd ap qapcrp ajcp, aatkácsdad idsd hdqgt jc
bprwd, p fjxtc vjxpqp jc apqgpsdg, n cd Idbé Rtrxpa, hj pcixvjd thrjstgd,
edgfjt cd ujtht rdcdrxsd st Hpcrwd cx st sdc Fjxydit.

Aatvó, ejth, pa rphixaad sta sjfjt, fjt at xcudgbó ta rpbxcd n stggdip fjt
sdc Fjxydit aatkpqp, rdc xcitcid st wpaapght tc aph yjhiph st Opgpvdop.
Síydat phxbxhbd aph qjgaph fjt at wpqíp wtrwd rdc ap igpop sta sthtcrpcid
st Sjarxctp, fjt wpqíp st htg p rdhip st aph edhpstgph st Hpcrwd. Tc uxc,
sxd rjtcip st ap qjgap fjt Hpcrwd wpqíp wtrwd p hj pbd, sácsdat p tcitcstg
fjt Sjarxctp thipqp tcrpcipsp n igpchudgbpsp tc apqgpsdgp, n róbd ap
sjfjthp hj bjytg wpqíp spsd p tcitcstg p Hpcrwd fjt éa tgp ta fjt ht
tcvpñpqp, edgfjt ktgspstgpbtcit thipqp tcrpcipsp Sjarxctp; st fjt cd edrd
ht gxó n psbxgó ta qprwxaatg, rdchxstgpcsd ap pvjstop n hxbeaxrxsps st
Hpcrwd, rdbd sta thigtbd st ap adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit.

Exsxóat ta sjfjt fjt hx at wpaapht, n at ktcrxtht d cd, ht kdakxtht edg
paaí p spgat rjtcip sta hjrthd. Wíodad phí ta qprwxaatg; epgixóht tc hj
qjhrp, cd at wpaaó tc Opgpvdop, ephó pstapcit n hjrtsxóat ad fjt fjtsp
gtutgxsd.

Kdakxóht edg ta rphixaad sta sjfjt n rdcióhtad idsd, rdc aph rdcsxrxdcth st
ap qpipaap, n fjt np sdc Fjxydit kdakíp p rjbeaxg, rdbd qjtc rpqpaatgd
pcspcit, ap epapqgp st gtixgpght jc pñd tc hj pastp, tc ta rjpa ixtbed
edsíp htg, sxyd ta qprwxaatg, fjt hpcpht st hj adrjgp; fjt éhip tgp ap
xcitcrxóc fjt at wpqíp bdkxsd p wprtg pfjtaaph igpchudgbprxdcth, edg htg
rdhp st aáhixbp fjt jc wxspavd ipc qxtc tcitcsxsd rdbd sdc Fjxydit ujtht
adrd. Rdc thid, ht sthexsxó sta sjfjt, n ht kdakxó p hj ajvpg, thetgpcsd tc
éa p sdc Fjxydit, fjt igph éa ktcíp.

St pfjí idbó drphxóc ta sjfjt st wprtgat pfjtaap qjgap: ipcid tgp ad fjt
vjhipqp st aph rdhph st Hpcrwd n st sdc Fjxydit; n wprxtcsd idbpg adh
rpbxcdh rtgrp n atydh sta rphixaad edg idsph aph epgith fjt xbpvxcó fjt
edsgíp kdaktg sdc Fjxydit, rdc bjrwdh rgxpsdh hjndh st p ext n st p
rpqpaad, epgp fjt edg ujtgop d st vgpsd at igjythtc pa rphixaad, hx at
wpaaphtc. Wpaaágdcat, sxtgdc pkxhd pa sjfjt, ta rjpa, np egtktcxsd st idsd
ad fjt wpqíp st wprtg, phí rdbd ijkd cdixrxp st hj aatvpsp, bpcsó tcrtcstg
aph wprwph n aph ajbxcpgxph sta epixd n edctg p Paixhxsdgp hdqgt ta iúbjad,
rdc idsdh adh pepgpidh fjt ht wpc rdcipsd, ipc pa kxkd, n ipc qxtc wtrwdh,
fjt st ap ktgsps p taadh wpqíp qxtc edrp sxutgtcrxp.

N sxrt báh Rxst Wpbtit: fjt ixtct epgp hí htg ipc adrdh adh qjgapsdgth rdbd
adh qjgapsdh, n fjt cd thipqpc adh sjfjth sdh stsdh st epgtrtg idcidh, ejth
ipcid pwícrd edcípc tc qjgapght st sdh idcidh.

Adh rjpath, ta jcd sjgbxtcsd p hjtñd hjtaid, n ta digd ktapcsd p
etchpbxtcidh sthpipsdh, ath idbó ta síp n ap vpcp st atkpcipght; fjt aph
drxdhph eajbph, cx ktcrxsd cx ktcrtsdg, ypbáh sxtgdc vjhid p sdc Fjxydit.

Paixhxsdgp -tc ap dexcxóc st sdc Fjxydit, kjtaip st bjtgit p kxsp-,
hxvjxtcsd ta wjbdg st hjh htñdgth, rdgdcpsp rdc ap bxhbp vjxgcpasp fjt tc
ta iúbjad itcíp, n kthixsp jcp ijcxrtap st iputiác qapcrd, htbqgpsp st
uadgth st dgd, n hjtaidh adh rpqtaadh edg aph thepasph, pggxbpsp p jc
qárjad st ctvgd n uxcíhxbd éqpcd, tcigó tc ta pedhtcid st sdc Fjxydit, rdc
rjnp egthtcrxp ijgqpsd n rdcujhd, ht tcrdvxó n rjqgxó rphx idsd rdc aph
háqpcph n rdarwph st ap rpbp, bjsp ap atcvjp, hxc fjt prtgipht p wprtgat
rdgithíp cxcvjcp. Htcióht Paixhxsdgp tc jcp hxaap, yjcid p hj rpqtrtgp, n,
sthejéh st wpqtg spsd jc vgpc hjhexgd, rdc kdo ixtgcp n stqxaxipsp at sxyd:

-Rjpcsd aph bjytgth egxcrxepath n aph gtrpipsph sdcrtaaph pigdetaapc edg ap
wdcgp, n spc axrtcrxp p ap atcvjp fjt gdbep edg idsd xcrdcktcxtcit, spcsd
cdixrxp tc eúqaxrd st adh htrgtidh fjt hj rdgpoóc tcrxtggp, tc thigtrwd
iégbxcd ht wpaapc. Nd, htñdg sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, hdn jcp séhiph,
pegtipsp, ktcrxsp n tcpbdgpsp; etgd, rdc idsd thid, hjugxsp n wdcthip;
ipcid fjt, edg htgad ipcid, gtktció bx pabp edg bx hxatcrxd n etgsí ap
kxsp. Sdh síph wp fjt rdc ap rdchxstgprxóc sta gxvdg rdc fjt bt wph
igpipsd,

¡Dw báh sjgd fjt bágbda p bxh fjtyph,

tbetstgcxsd rpqpaatgd!, wt thipsd bjtgip, d, p ad btcdh, yjovpsp edg ipa st
adh fjt bt wpc kxhid; n hx cd ujtgp edgfjt ta Pbdg, rdcsdaxécsdht st bí,
stedhxió bx gtbtsxd tc adh bpgixgxdh sthit qjtc thrjstgd, paaá bt fjtspgp
tc ta digd bjcsd.

-Qxtc ejsxtgp ta Pbdg -sxyd Hpcrwd- stedhxipgadh tc adh st bx phcd, fjt nd
ht ad pvgpstrxtgp. Etgd sívpbt, htñdgp, phí ta rxtad ap prdbdst rdc digd
báh qapcsd pbpcit fjt bx pbd: ¿fjé th ad fjt kxd tc ta digd bjcsd? ¿Fjé wpn
tc ta xcuxtgcd? Edgfjt fjxtc bjtgt sththetgpsd, edg ujtgop wp st itctg
pfjta epgpstgd.

-Ap ktgsps fjt dh sxvp -gthedcsxó Paixhxsdgp-, nd cd stqí st bdgxg sta
idsd, ejth cd tcigé tc ta xcuxtgcd; fjt, hx paaá tcigpgp, jcp edg jcp cd
ejsxtgp hpaxg séa, pjcfjt fjxhxtgp. Ap ktgsps th fjt aatvjé p ap ejtgip,
psdcst thipqpc yjvpcsd wphip jcp sdrtcp st sxpqadh p ap etadip, idsdh tc
rpaoph n tc yjqóc, rdc kpadcph vjpgctrxsph rdc ejciph st gpcsph uapbtcrph,
n rdc jcph kjtaiph st ad bxhbd, fjt ath htgkípc st ejñdh, rdc rjpigd stsdh
st qgpod st ujtgp, edgfjt epgtrxthtc aph bpcdh báh apgvph, tc aph rjpath
itcípc jcph epaph st ujtvd; n ad fjt báh bt psbxgó ujt fjt ath htgkípc, tc
ajvpg st etadiph, axqgdh, pa epgtrtg, aatcdh st kxtcid n st qdggp, rdhp
bpgpkxaadhp n cjtkp; etgd thid cd bt psbxgó ipcid rdbd ta ktg fjt, hxtcsd
cpijgpa st adh yjvpsdgth ta patvgpght adh vpcpcrxdhdh n tcigxhitrtght adh
fjt extgstc, paaí tc pfjta yjtvd idsdh vgjñípc, idsdh gtvpñpqpc n idsdh ht
bpastrípc.

-Thd cd th bpgpkxaap -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, edgfjt adh sxpqadh, yjtvjtc d cd
yjtvjtc, cjcrp ejtstc thipg rdcitcidh, vpctc d cd vpctc.

-Phí stqt st htg -gthedcsxó Paixhxsdgp-; bph wpn digp rdhp fjt ipbqxéc bt
psbxgp, fjxtgd strxg bt psbxgó tcidcrth, n ujt fjt pa egxbtg kdatd cd
fjtspqp etadip tc ext, cx st egdktrwd epgp htgkxg digp kto; n phí,
btcjstpqpc axqgdh cjtkdh n kxtydh, fjt tgp jcp bpgpkxaap. P jcd staadh,
cjtkd, uapbpcit n qxtc tcrjpstgcpsd, at sxtgdc jc epexgdipod fjt at hprpgdc
aph igxeph n at thepgrxtgdc aph wdyph. Sxyd jc sxpqad p digd: ''Bxgps fjé
axqgd th éht''. N ta sxpqad at gthedcsxó: ''Éhip th ap Htvjcsp epgit st ap
wxhidgxp st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, cd rdbejthip edg Rxst Wpbtit, hj
egxbtg pjidg, hxcd edg jc pgpvdcéh, fjt éa sxrt htg cpijgpa st
Idgsthxaaph''. ''Fjxiásbtat st pwí -gthedcsxó ta digd sxpqad-, n btitsat tc
adh pqxhbdh sta xcuxtgcd: cd at ktpc báh bxh dydh''. ''¿Ipc bpad th?'',
gthedcsxó ta digd. ''Ipc bpad -gteaxró ta egxbtgd-, fjt hx st egdeóhxid nd
bxhbd bt ejhxtgp p wprtgat etdg, cd prtgipgp''. Egdhxvjxtgdc hj yjtvd,
etaditpcsd digdh axqgdh, n nd, edg wpqtg dísd cdbqgpg p sdc Fjxydit, p
fjxtc ipcid pspbd n fjxtgd, egdrjgé fjt ht bt fjtspht tc ap btbdgxp thip
kxhxóc.

-Kxhxóc stqxó st htg, hxc sjsp -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt cd wpn digd nd tc
ta bjcsd, n np thp wxhidgxp pcsp edg prá st bpcd tc bpcd, etgd cd epgp tc
cxcvjcp, edgfjt idsdh ap spc sta ext. Nd cd bt wt paitgpsd tc díg fjt pcsd
rdbd rjtged upciáhixrd edg aph ixcxtqaph sta pqxhbd, cx edg ap rapgxsps st
ap ixtggp, edgfjt cd hdn pfjta st fjxtc thp wxhidgxp igpip. Hx taap ujtgt
qjtcp, uxta n ktgspstgp, itcsgá hxvadh st kxsp; etgd hx ujtgt bpap, st hj
epgid p ap htejaijgp cd htgá bjn apgvd ta rpbxcd.

Xqp Paixhxsdgp p egdhtvjxg tc fjtypght st sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd at sxyd sdc
Fjxydit:

-Bjrwph ktrth dh wt sxrwd, htñdgp, fjt p bí bt ethp st fjt wpnáxh rdadrpsd
tc bí kjthigdh etchpbxtcidh, ejth st adh bídh pcith ejtstc htg pvgpstrxsdh
fjt gtbtsxpsdh; nd cprí epgp htg st Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, n adh wpsdh, hx
adh wjqxtgp, bt stsxrpgdc epgp taap; n etchpg fjt digp pavjcp wtgbdhjgp wp
st drjepg ta ajvpg fjt tc bx pabp ixtct th etchpg ad xbedhxqat. Hjuxrxtcit
sthtcvpñd th éhit epgp fjt dh gtixgéxh tc adh aíbxith st kjthigp
wdcthixsps, ejth cpsxt ht ejtst dqaxvpg p ad xbedhxqat.

Dntcsd ad rjpa Paixhxsdgp, bdhigpcsd tcdypght n paitgpght, at sxyd:

-¡Kxkt ta Htñdg, sdc qprpaapd, pabp st pabxgto, rjthrd st sáixa, báh itgrd
n sjgd fjt kxaapcd gdvpsd rjpcsd ixtct ap hjnp hdqgt ta wxid, fjt hx
pggtbtid p kdh, fjt dh itcvd st hprpg adh dydh! ¿Etcháxh edg ktcijgp, sdc
ktcrxsd n sdc bdaxsd p epadh, fjt nd bt wt bjtgid edg kdh? Idsd ad fjt
wpqéxh kxhid thip cdrwt wp hxsd uxcvxsd; fjt cd hdn nd bjytg fjt edg
htbtypcith rpbtaadh wpqíp st stypg fjt bt sdaxtht jc ctvgd st ap jñp,
rjpcid báh bdgxgbt.

-Thd rgtd nd bjn qxtc -sxyd Hpcrwd-, fjt thid sta bdgxght adh tcpbdgpsdh th
rdhp st gxhp: qxtc ad ejtstc taadh strxg, etgd wprtg, rgépad Yjsph.

Thipcsd tc thiph eaáixrph, tcigó ta búhxrd, rpcidg n edtip fjt wpqíp
rpcipsd aph sdh np gtutgxsph thipcrxph, ta rjpa, wprxtcsd jcp vgpc
gtktgtcrxp p sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Kjthigp btgrts, htñdg rpqpaatgd, bt rjtcit n itcvp tc ta cúbtgd st hjh
bpndgth htgkxsdgth, edgfjt wp bjrwdh síph fjt at hdn bjn puxrxdcpsd, phí
edg hj upbp rdbd edg hjh wpopñph.

Sdc Fjxydit at gthedcsxó:

-Kjthigp btgrts bt sxvp fjxéc th, edgfjt bx rdgithíp gthedcsp p hjh
btgtrxbxtcidh.

Ta bdod gthedcsxó fjt tgp ta búhxrd n epctvígxrd st ap cdrwt pcith.

-Edg rxtgid -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt kjthigp btgrts ixtct thigtbpsp kdo,
etgd ad fjt rpció cd bt epgtrt fjt ujt bjn p egdeóhxid; edgfjt, ¿fjé ixtctc
fjt ktg aph thipcrxph st Vpgrxaphd rdc ap bjtgit sthip htñdgp?

-Cd ht bpgpkxaat kjthigp btgrts sthd -gthedcsxó ta búhxrd-, fjt np tcigt
adh xcidchdh edtiph st cjthigp tsps ht jhp fjt rpsp jcd thrgxqp rdbd
fjxhxtgt, n wjgit st fjxtc fjxhxtgt, ktcvp d cd ktcvp p etad st hj xcitcid,
n np cd wpn ctrtsps fjt rpcitc d thrgxqpc fjt cd ht pigxqjnp p axrtcrxp
edéixrp.

Gthedcstg fjxhxtgp sdc Fjxydit, etgd thidgqágdcad ta sjfjt n ap sjfjthp,
fjt tcigpgdc p ktgat, tcigt adh rjpath ephpgdc jcp apgvp n sjart eaáixrp,
tc ap rjpa sxyd Hpcrwd ipcidh sdcpxgth n ipciph bpaxrxph, fjt stypgdc st
cjtkd psbxgpsdh p adh sjfjth, phí rdc hj hxbeaxrxsps rdbd rdc hj pvjstop.
Sdc Fjxydit ath hjeaxró at sxthtc axrtcrxp epgp epgixght pfjta bxhbd síp,
ejth p adh ktcrxsdh rpqpaatgdh, rdbd éa, báh ath rdcktcíp wpqxipg jcp
opwúgsp fjt cd gtpath epaprxdh. Sxégdchtap st bjn qjtcp vpcp, n ap sjfjthp
at egtvjció hx fjtspqp tc hj vgprxp Paixhxsdgp. Éa at gthedcsxó:

-Htñdgp bíp, htep Kjthigp Htñdgíp fjt idsd ta bpa sthip sdcrtaap cprt st
drxdhxsps, rjnd gtbtsxd th ap drjeprxóc wdcthip n rdcixcjp. Taap bt wp
sxrwd pfjí fjt ht jhpc gpcsph tc ta xcuxtgcd; n, ejth taap aph stqt st
hpqtg wprtg, cd aph styt st ap bpcd, fjt, drjepsp tc btctpg adh epaxaadh,
cd ht btctpgác tc hj xbpvxcprxóc ap xbpvtc d xbávxcth st ad fjt qxtc
fjxtgt; n éhip th ap ktgsps, éhit bx epgtrtg n éhit th bx rdchtyd.

-N ta bíd -pñpsxó Hpcrwd-, ejth cd wt kxhid tc idsp bx kxsp gpcstgp fjt edg
pbdg ht wpnp bjtgid; fjt aph sdcrtaaph drjepsph báh edctc hjh etchpbxtcidh
tc prpqpg hjh ipgtph fjt tc etchpg tc hjh pbdgth. Edg bí ad sxvd, ejth,
bxtcigph thidn rpkpcsd, cd bt prjtgsd st bx díhad; sxvd, st bx Itgthp
Epcop, p fjxtc fjxtgd báh fjt p aph ethipñph st bxh dydh.

-Kdh stríh bjn qxtc, Hpcrwd -sxyd ap sjfjthp-, n nd wpgé fjt bx Paixhxsdgp
ht drjet st pfjí pstapcit tc wprtg pavjcp apqdg qapcrp, fjt ap hpqt wprtg
edg thigtbd.

-Cd wpn epgp fjé, htñdgp -gthedcsxó Paixhxsdgp-, jhpg stht gtbtsxd, ejth ap
rdchxstgprxóc st aph rgjtaspsth fjt rdcbxvd wp jhpsd thit bpapcsgíc
bdhigtcrd bt at qdggpgác st ap btbdgxp hxc digd pgixuxrxd pavjcd. N, rdc
axrtcrxp st kjthigp vgpcstop, bt fjxtgd fjxipg st pfjí, edg cd ktg stapcit
st bxh dydh np cd hj igxhit uxvjgp, hxcd hj utp n pqdbxcpqat rpipsjgp.

-Thd bt epgtrt -sxyd ta sjfjt- p ad fjt hjtat strxght:

   Edgfjt pfjta fjt sxrt xcyjgxph,
   rtgrp thiá st etgsdcpg.

Wxod Paixhxsdgp bjthigp st axbexpght aph aávgxbph rdc jc epñjtad, n,
wprxtcsd gtktgtcrxp p hjh htñdgth, ht hpaxó sta pedhtcid.

-Bácsdit nd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, edqgt sdcrtaap, bácsdit, sxvd, bpap ktcijgp,
ejth aph wph wpqxsd rdc jcp pabp st thepgid n rdc jc rdgpoóc st tcrxcp. ¡P
utt fjt hx aph wjqxtgph rdcbxvd, fjt digd vpaad it rpcipgp!

Prpqóht ap eaáixrp, kxhixóht sdc Fjxydit, rdbxó rdc adh sjfjth, n epgixóht
pfjtaap ipgst.





Rpeíijad AMMX. St ad fjt p sdc Fjxydit at hjrtsxó rdc hj thrjstgd Hpcrwd
ntcsd p hj pastp


Xqp ta ktcrxsd n phtcstgtpsd sdc Fjxydit etchpixkd pstbáh edg jcp epgit,
n bjn patvgt edg digp. Rpjhpqp hj igxhitop ta ktcrxbxtcid; n ap patvgíp, ta
rdchxstgpg tc ap kxgijs st Hpcrwd, rdbd ad wpqíp bdhigpsd tc ap gthjggtrxóc
st Paixhxsdgp, pjcfjt rdc pavúc thrgúejad ht etghjpsíp p fjt ap tcpbdgpsp
sdcrtaap ujtht bjtgip st ktgph. Cd xqp cpsp Hpcrwd patvgt, edgfjt at
tcigxhitríp ktg fjt Paixhxsdgp cd at wpqíp rjbeaxsd ap epapqgp st spgat aph
rpbxhph; n, ntcsd n kxcxtcsd tc thid, sxyd p hj pbd:

-Tc ktgsps, htñdg, fjt hdn ta báh sthvgprxpsd bésxrd fjt ht stqt st wpaapg
tc ta bjcsd, tc ta rjpa wpn uíhxrdh fjt, rdc bpipg pa tcutgbd fjt rjgpc,
fjxtgtc htg epvpsdh st hj igpqpyd, fjt cd th digd hxcd uxgbpg jcp rtsjaxaap
st pavjcph btsxrxcph, fjt cd aph wprt éa, hxcd ta qdixrpgxd, n ráipad
rpcijhpsd; n p bí, fjt ap hpajs pytcp bt rjthip vdiph st hpcvgt, bpbdcph,
etaaxordh, pauxatgpodh n podith, cd bt spc jc pgsxit. Ejth nd ath kdid p
ipa fjt hx bt igptc p aph bpcdh digd pavúc tcutgbd, fjt, pcith fjt at rjgt,
bt wpc st jcipg aph bíph; fjt ta pqps st sdcst rpcip npcip, n cd fjxtgd
rgttg fjt bt wpnp spsd ta rxtad ap kxgijs fjt itcvd epgp fjt nd ap
rdbjcxfjt rdc digdh st qóqxaxh, qóqxaxh.

-Iú ixtcth gpoóc, Hpcrwd pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n wpad wtrwd bjn
bpa Paixhxsdgp tc cd wpqtgit spsd aph egdbtixsph rpbxhph; n, ejthid fjt ij
kxgijs th vgpixh spip, fjt cd it wp rdhipsd thijsxd pavjcd, báh fjt thijsxd
th gtrtqxg bpgixgxdh tc ij etghdcp. St bí it hé strxg fjt hx fjxhxtgph epvp
edg adh podith sta sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp, np it ap wjqxtgp spsd ipa rdbd
qjtcp; etgd cd hé hx ktcsgá qxtc rdc ap rjgp ap epvp, n cd fjtggíp fjt
xbexsxtht ta egtbxd p ap btsxrxcp. Rdc idsd thd, bt epgtrt fjt cd ht
etgstgá cpsp tc egdqpgad: bxgp, Hpcrwd, ta fjt fjxtgth, n poóipit ajtvd, n
eávpit st rdcipsd n st ij egdexp bpcd, ejth ixtcth sxctgdh bídh.

P rjndh dugtrxbxtcidh pqgxó Hpcrwd adh dydh n aph dgtyph st jc epabd, n sxd
rdchtcixbxtcid tc hj rdgpoóc p podipght st qjtcp vpcp; n sxyd p hj pbd:

-Pvdgp qxtc, htñdg, nd fjxtgd sxhedctgbt p spg vjhid p kjthigp btgrts tc ad
fjt sthtp, rdc egdktrwd bíd; fjt ta pbdg st bxh wxydh n st bx bjytg bt wprt
fjt bt bjthigt xcitgthpsd. Sívpbt kjthigp btgrts: ¿rjácid bt spgá edg rpsp
podit fjt bt sxtgt?

-Hx nd it wjqxtgp st epvpg, Hpcrwd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, rdcudgbt ad fjt
btgtrt ap vgpcstop n rpaxsps sthit gtbtsxd, ta ithdgd st Ktctrxp, aph bxcph
sta Edidhí ujtgpc edrd epgp epvpgit; idbp iú ta ixtcid p ad fjt aatkph bíd,
n edc ta egtrxd p rpsp podit.

-Taadh -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- hdc igth bxa n igtrxtcidh n ipcidh; st taadh bt
wt spsd wphip rxcrd: fjtspc adh stbáh; tcigtc tcigt adh ipcidh thidh rxcrd,
n ktcvpbdh p adh igth bxa n igtrxtcidh, fjt p rjpgixaad rpsp jcd, fjt cd
aatkpgé btcdh hx idsd ta bjcsd bt ad bpcspht, bdcipc igth bxa n igtrxtcidh
rjpgixaadh, fjt hdc adh igth bxa, bxa n fjxcxtcidh btsxdh gtpath, fjt wprtc
htitrxtcidh n rxcrjtcip gtpath; n adh igtrxtcidh wprtc rxtcid n rxcrjtcip
btsxdh gtpath, fjt kxtctc p wprtg htitcip n rxcrd gtpath, fjt, yjciácsdht p
adh htitrxtcidh n rxcrjtcip, hdc edg idsdh drwdrxtcidh n ktxcit n rxcrd
gtpath. Éhidh sthuparpgé nd st adh fjt itcvd st kjthigp btgrts, n tcigpgé
tc bx rphp gxrd n rdcitcid, pjcfjt qxtc podipsd; edgfjt cd ht idbpc
igjrwph..., n cd sxvd báh.

-¡Dw Hpcrwd qtcsxid! ¡Dw Hpcrwd pbpqat -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, n rjác
dqaxvpsdh wtbdh st fjtspg Sjarxctp n nd p htgkxgit idsdh adh síph fjt ta
rxtad cdh sxtgt st kxsp! Hx taap kjtakt pa htg etgsxsd, fjt cd th edhxqat
hxcd fjt kjtakp, hj sthsxrwp wpqgá hxsd sxrwp, n bx ktcrxbxtcid, utaxríhxbd
igxjcud. N bxgp, Hpcrwd, rjácsd fjxtgth rdbtcopg ap sxrxeaxcp, fjt edgfjt
ap pqgtkxth it pñpsd rxtc gtpath.

-¿Rjácsd? -gteaxró Hpcrwd-. Thip cdrwt, hxc upaip. Egdrjgt kjthigp btgrts
fjt ap itcvpbdh tc ta rpbed, pa rxtad pqxtgid, fjt nd bt pqgxgé bxh rpgcth.

Aatvó ap cdrwt, thetgpsp st sdc Fjxydit rdc ap bpndg pchxp sta bjcsd,
epgtrxécsdat fjt aph gjtsph sta rpggd st Pedad ht wpqípc fjtqgpsd, n fjt ta
síp ht papgvpqp báh st ad prdhijbqgpsd, qxtc phí rdbd prdcitrt p adh
tcpbdgpsdh, fjt ypbáh pyjhipc ap rjtcip st hjh sthtdh. Uxcpabtcit, ht
tcigpgdc tcigt jcdh pbtcdh ágqdath fjt edrd sthkxpsdh sta rpbxcd thipqpc,
sdcst, stypcsd kpríph ap hxaap n paqpgsp st Gdrxcpcit n ta gjrxd, ht
itcsxtgdc hdqgt ap ktgst ntgqp n rtcpgdc sta gtejthid st Hpcrwd; ta rjpa,
wprxtcsd sta rpqthigd n st ap yáfjxbp sta gjrxd jc edstgdhd n uatmxqat
podit, ht gtixgó wphip ktxcit ephdh st hj pbd, tcigt jcph wpnph. Sdc
Fjxydit, fjt at kxd xg rdc stcjtsd n rdc qgíd, at sxyd:

-Bxgp, pbxvd, fjt cd it wpvph etspodh; sp ajvpg fjt jcdh podith pvjpgstc p
digdh; cd fjxtgph pegthjgpgit ipcid tc ap rpggtgp, fjt tc ap bxips staap it
upait ta paxtcid; fjxtgd strxg fjt cd it sth ipc gtrxd fjt it upait ap kxsp
pcith st aatvpg pa cúbtgd sthtpsd. N, edgfjt cd extgsph edg rpgip st báh cx
st btcdh, nd thipgé sthst pepgit rdcipcsd edg thit bx gdhpgxd adh podith
fjt it sxtgth. Upkdgéorpit ta rxtad rdcudgbt ij qjtcp xcitcrxóc btgtrt.

-Pa qjtc epvpsdg cd at sjtatc egtcsph -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-: nd extchd spgbt
st bpctgp fjt, hxc bpipgbt, bt sjtap; fjt tc thid stqt st rdchxhixg ap
hjhipcrxp sthit bxapvgd.

Sthcjsóht ajtvd st btsxd rjtged pggxqp, n, pggtqpipcsd ta rdgsta, rdbtcoó p
spght, n rdbtcoó sdc Fjxydit p rdcipg adh podith.

Wphip htxh d drwd ht wpqgíp spsd Hpcrwd, rjpcsd at epgtrxó htg ethpsp ap
qjgap n bjn qpgpid ta egtrxd staap, n, stitcxécsdht jc edrd, sxyd p hj pbd
fjt ht aapbpqp p tcvpñd, edgfjt btgtríp rpsp podit st pfjéaadh htg epvpsd p
btsxd gtpa, cd fjt p rjpgixaad.

-Egdhxvjt, Hpcrwd pbxvd, n cd sthbpnth -at sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd sdqad
ap epgpsp sta egtrxd.

-Stht bdsd -sxyd Hpcrwd-, ¡p ap bpcd st Sxdh, n aajtkpc podith!

Etgd ta hdrpggóc styó st sághtadh tc aph thepasph, n spqp tc adh ágqdath,
rdc jcdh hjhexgdh st rjpcsd tc rjpcsd, fjt epgtríp fjt rdc rpsp jcd staadh
ht at pggpcrpqp ta pabp. Ixtgcp ap st sdc Fjxydit, itbtgdhd st fjt cd ht at
prpqpht ap kxsp, n cd rdchxvjxtht hj sthtd edg ap xbegjstcrxp st Hpcrwd, at
sxyd:

-Edg ij kxsp, pbxvd, fjt ht fjtst tc thit ejcid thit ctvdrxd, fjt bt epgtrt
bjn áhetgp thip btsxrxcp, n htgá qxtc spg ixtbed pa ixtbed; fjt cd ht vpcó
Opbdgp tc jc wdgp. Báh st bxa podith, hx nd cd wt rdcipsd bpa, it wph spsd:
qphipc edg pvdgp; fjt ta phcd, wpqapcsd p ad vgdhtgd, hjugt ap rpgvp, bph
cd ap hdqgtrpgvp.

-Cd, cd, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, cd ht wp st strxg edg bí: "p sxctgdh
epvpsdh, qgpodh fjtqgpsdh". Peágitht kjthigp btgrts digd edrd n séytbt spg
digdh bxa podith hxfjxtgp, fjt p sdh atkpsph séhiph wpqgtbdh rjbeaxsd rdc
thip epgixsp, n púc cdh hdqgpgá gdep.

-Ejth iú it wpaaph rdc ipc qjtcp sxhedhxrxóc -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, ta rxtad
it pnjst, n eévpit, fjt nd bt pepgid.

Kdakxó Hpcrwd p hj ipgtp rdc ipcid stcjtsd, fjt np wpqíp fjxipsd aph
rdgitoph p bjrwdh ágqdath: ipa tgp ap gxvjgxsps rdc fjt ht podipqp; n,
paopcsd jcp kto ap kdo, n spcsd jc sthpudgpsd podit tc jcp wpnp, sxyd:

-¡Pfjí bdgxgáh, Hpchóc, n rjpcidh rdc éa hdc!

Prjsxó sdc Fjxydit ajtvd pa hdc st ap aphixbpsp kdo n sta vdaet sta
gxvjgdhd podit, n, phxtcsd sta idgrxsd rpqthigd fjt at htgkíp st rdgqprwd p
Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Cd etgbxip ap hjtgit, Hpcrwd pbxvd, fjt edg ta vjhid bíd extgsph iú ap
kxsp, fjt wp st htgkxg epgp hjhitcipg p ij bjytg n p ijh wxydh: thetgt
Sjarxctp btydg rdnjcijgp, fjt nd bt rdcitcsgé tc adh aíbxith st ap
thetgpcop egdexcrjp, n thetgpgé fjt rdqgth ujtgoph cjtkph, epgp fjt ht
rdcrajnp thit ctvdrxd p vjhid st idsdh.

-Ejth kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd, ad fjxtgt phí -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, htp tc
qjtcp wdgp, n érwtbt hj utggtgjtad hdqgt thiph thepasph, fjt thidn hjspcsd
n cd fjtggíp gthugxpgbt; fjt adh cjtkdh sxrxeaxcpcith rdggtc thit etaxvgd.

Wíodad phí sdc Fjxydit, n, fjtsácsdht tc etadip, pqgxvó p Hpcrwd, ta rjpa
ht sjgbxó wphip fjt at sthetgió ta hda, n ajtvd kdakxtgdc p egdhtvjxg hj
rpbxcd, p fjxtc sxtgdc uxc, edg tcidcrth, tc jc ajvpg fjt igth atvjph st
paaí thipqp. Petágdcht tc jc bthóc, fjt edg ipa at gtrdcdrxó sdc Fjxydit, n
cd edg rphixaad st rpkp wdcsp, idggth, gphigxaadh n ejtcit atkpsxop; fjt,
sthejéh fjt at ktcrxtgdc, rdc báh yjxrxd tc idsph aph rdhph sxhrjggíp, rdbd
pvdgp ht sxgá. Padyágdcat tc jcp hpap qpyp, p fjxtc htgkípc st vjpspbtrxath
jcph hpgvph kxtyph excipsph, rdbd ht jhpc tc aph pastph. Tc jcp staaph
thipqp excipsp st bpaíhxbp bpcd ta gdqd st Tatcp, rjpcsd ta pigtkxsd
wjéhets ht ap aatkó p Btcpapd, n tc digp thipqp ap wxhidgxp st Sxsd n st
Tctph, taap hdqgt jcp paip idggt, rdbd fjt wpríp htñph rdc jcp btsxp háqpcp
pa ujvxixkd wjéhets, fjt edg ta bpg, hdqgt jcp ugpvpip d qtgvpciíc, ht xqp
wjntcsd.

Cdió tc aph sdh wxhidgxph fjt Tatcp cd xqp st bjn bpap vpcp, edgfjt ht gtíp
p hdrpep n p ad hdrpggóc; etgd ap wtgbdhp Sxsd bdhigpqp ktgitg aávgxbph sta
ipbpñd st cjtrth edg adh dydh. Kxtcsd ad rjpa sdc Fjxydit, sxyd:

-Thiph sdh htñdgph ujtgdc sthsxrwpsíhxbph, edg cd wpqtg cprxsd tc thip
tsps, n nd hdqgt idsdh sthsxrwpsd tc cd wpqtg cprxsd tc ap hjnp: tcrdcigpgp
p pfjthidh htñdgth, cx ujtgp pqgphpsp Igdnp, cx Rpgipvd sthigjxsp, ejth rdc
hóad fjt nd bpipgp p Epgxh ht thrjhpgpc ipciph sthvgprxph.

-Nd pedhipgé -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt pcith st bjrwd ixtbed cd wp st wpqtg
qdstvóc, ktcip cx bthóc, d ixtcsp st qpgqtgd, sdcst cd pcst excipsp ap
wxhidgxp st cjthigph wpopñph. Etgd fjtggíp nd fjt ap exciphtc bpcdh st digd
btydg excidg fjt ta fjt wp excipsd p éhiph.

-Ixtcth gpoóc, Hpcrwd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, edgfjt thit excidg th rdbd
Dgqpctyp, jc excidg fjt thipqp tc Úqtsp; fjt, rjpcsd at egtvjcipqpc fjé
excipqp, gthedcsíp: ''Ad fjt hpaxtgt''; n hx edg ktcijgp excipqp jc vpaad,
thrgxqíp stqpyd: "Éhit th vpaad", edgfjt cd etchphtc fjt tgp odggp. Sthip
bpctgp bt epgtrt p bí, Hpcrwd, fjt stqt st htg ta excidg d thrgxidg, fjt
idsd th jcd, fjt hpró p ajo ap wxhidgxp sthit cjtkd sdc Fjxydit fjt wp
hpaxsd: fjt exció d thrgxqxó ad fjt hpaxtgt; d wpqgá hxsd rdbd jc edtip fjt
pcspqp adh pñdh ephpsdh tc ap rdgit, aapbpsd Bpjatóc, ta rjpa gthedcsíp st
gtetcit p rjpcid at egtvjcipqpc; n, egtvjciácsdat jcd fjt fjé fjtgíp strxg
Stjb st Std, gthedcsxó: ''Sé sdcst sxtgt''. Etgd, stypcsd thid pepgit, sxbt
hx extchph, Hpcrwd, spgit digp ipcsp thip cdrwt, n hx fjxtgth fjt htp
stqpyd st itrwpsd, d pa rxtad pqxtgid.

-Epgsxto, htñdg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt epgp ad fjt nd extchd spgbt, thd ht
bt sp tc rphp fjt tc ta rpbed; etgd, rdc idsd thd, fjtggíp fjt ujtht tcigt
ágqdath, fjt epgtrt fjt bt prdbepñpc n bt pnjspc p aatkpg bx igpqpyd
bpgpkxaadhpbtcit.

-Ejth cd wp st htg phí, Hpcrwd pbxvd -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hxcd fjt epgp
fjt idbth ujtgoph, ad wtbdh st vjpgspg epgp cjthigp pastp, fjt, p ad báh
ipgst, aatvpgtbdh paaá sthejéh st bpñpcp.

Hpcrwd gthedcsxó fjt wxrxtht hj vjhid, etgd fjt éa fjxhxtgp rdcrajxg rdc
qgtktsps pfjta ctvdrxd p hpcvgt rpaxtcit n rjpcsd thipqp exrpsd ta bdaxcd,
edgfjt tc ap ipgspcop hjtat thipg bjrwph ktrth ta etaxvgd; n p Sxdh gdvpcsd
n rdc ta bpod spcsd, n fjt báh kpaíp jc "idbp" fjt sdh "it spgé", n ta
eáypgd tc ap bpcd fjt ta qjxigt kdapcsd.

-Cd báh gtugpcth, Hpcrwd, edg jc hdad Sxdh -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, fjt epgtrt
fjt it kjtakth pa hxrji tgpi; wpqap p ad aapcd, p ad axhd, p ad cd
xcigxrpsd, rdbd bjrwph ktrth it wt sxrwd, n ktgáh rdbd it kpat jc epc edg
rxtcid.

-Cd hé fjé bpap ktcijgp th thip bíp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt cd hé strxg
gpoóc hxc gtugác, cx gtugác fjt cd bt epgtorp gpoóc; etgd nd bt tcbtcspgé,
hx ejsxtgt.

N, rdc thid, rthó edg tcidcrth hj eaáixrp.





Rpeíijad AMMXX. St róbd sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd aatvpgdc p hj pastp


Idsd pfjta síp, thetgpcsd ap cdrwt, thijkxtgdc tc pfjta ajvpg n bthóc sdc
Fjxydit n Hpcrwd: ta jcd, epgp prpqpg tc ap rpbepñp gphp ap ipcsp st hj
sxrxeaxcp, n ta digd, epgp ktg ta uxc staap, tc ta rjpa rdchxhiíp ta st hj
sthtd. Aatvó tc thid pa bthóc jc rpbxcpcit p rpqpaad, rdc igth d rjpigd
rgxpsdh, jcd st adh rjpath sxyd pa fjt ta htñdg staadh epgtríp:

-Pfjí ejtst kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Áakpgd Ipgut, ephpg wdn ap hxthip: ap
edhpsp epgtrt axbexp n ugthrp.

Dntcsd thid sdc Fjxydit, at sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-Bxgp, Hpcrwd: rjpcsd nd wdyté pfjta axqgd st ap htvjcsp epgit st bx
wxhidgxp, bt epgtrt fjt st ephpsp ideé paaí thit cdbqgt st sdc Áakpgd
Ipgut.

-Qxtc edsgá htg -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-. Styébdhat petpg, fjt sthejéh ht ad
egtvjcipgtbdh.

Ta rpqpaatgd ht petó, n, ugdcitgd sta pedhtcid st sdc Fjxydit, ap wjéhetsp
at sxd jcp hpap qpyp, tcyptopsp rdc digph excipsph hpgvph, rdbd aph fjt
itcíp ap thipcrxp st sdc Fjxydit. Eúhdht ta gtrxéc ktcxsd rpqpaatgd p ad st
ktgpcd, n, hpaxécsdht pa edgipa sta bthóc, fjt tgp theprxdhd n ugthrd, edg
ta rjpa ht ephtpqp sdc Fjxydit, at egtvjció:

-¿Psócst qjtcd rpbxcp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg vtcixawdbqgt?

N sdc Fjxydit at gthedcsxó:

-P jcp pastp fjt thiá pfjí rtgrp, st sdcst hdn cpijgpa. N kjthigp btgrts,
¿sócst rpbxcp?

-Nd, htñdg -gthedcsxó ta rpqpaatgd-, kdn p Vgpcpsp, fjt th bx epigxp.

-¡N qjtcp epigxp! -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. Etgd, sívpbt kjthigp btgrts, edg
rdgithíp, hj cdbqgt, edgfjt bt epgtrt fjt bt wp st xbedgipg hpqtgad báh st
ad fjt qjtcpbtcit edsgé strxg.

-Bx cdbqgt th sdc Áakpgd Ipgut -gthedcsxó ta wjéhets.

P ad fjt gteaxró sdc Fjxydit:

-Hxc sjsp pavjcp extchd fjt kjthigp btgrts stqt st htg pfjta sdc Áakpgd
Ipgut fjt pcsp xbegthd tc ap Htvjcsp epgit st ap wxhidgxp st sdc Fjxydit st
ap Bpcrwp, gtrxéc xbegthp n spsp p ap ajo sta bjcsd edg jc pjidg bdstgcd.

-Ta bxhbd hdn -gthedcsxó ta rpqpaatgd-, n ta ipa sdc Fjxydit, hjytid
egxcrxepa st ap ipa wxhidgxp, ujt vgpcsíhxbd pbxvd bíd, n nd ujx ta fjt at
hpró st hj ixtggp, d, p ad btcdh, at bdkí p fjt kxcxtht p jcph yjhiph fjt
ht wprípc tc Opgpvdop, psdcst nd xqp; n, tc ktgsps tc ktgsps fjt at wxrt
bjrwph pbxhipsth, n fjt at fjxié st fjt cd at epabtpht aph thepasph ta
ktgsjvd, edg htg stbphxpspbtcit pigtkxsd.

-N, sívpbt kjthigp btgrts, htñdg sdc Áakpgd, ¿epgtord nd tc pavd p tht ipa
sdc Fjxydit fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt?

-Cd, edg rxtgid -gthedcsxó ta wjéhets-: tc cxcvjcp bpctgp.

-N tht sdc Fjxydit -sxyd ta cjthigd-, ¿igpíp rdchxvd p jc thrjstgd aapbpsd
Hpcrwd Epcop?

-Hí igpíp -gthedcsxó sdc Áakpgd-; n, pjcfjt itcíp upbp st bjn vgprxdhd,
cjcrp at dí strxg vgprxp fjt ap ijkxtht.

-Thd rgtd nd bjn qxtc -sxyd p thip hpoóc Hpcrwd-, edgfjt ta strxg vgprxph
cd th epgp idsdh, n tht Hpcrwd fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt, htñdg vtcixawdbqgt,
stqt st htg pavúc vgpcsíhxbd qtaaprd, ugxóc n apsgóc yjcipbtcit, fjt ta
ktgspstgd Hpcrwd Epcop hdn nd, fjt itcvd báh vgprxph fjt aadkxsph; n hx cd,
wpvp kjthigp btgrts ap tmetgxtcrxp, n ácstht igph st bí, edg adh btcdh jc
pñd, n ktgá fjt ht bt rptc p rpsp ephd, n ipath n ipciph fjt, hxc hpqtg nd
aph báh ktrth ad fjt bt sxvd, wpvd gtíg p rjpcidh bt thrjrwpc; n ta
ktgspstgd sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ta upbdhd, ta kpaxtcit n ta sxhrgtid,
ta tcpbdgpsd, ta sthuprtsdg st pvgpkxdh, ta ijidg st ejexadh n wjégupcdh,
ta pbepgd st aph kxjsph, ta bpipsdg st aph sdcrtaaph, ta fjt ixtct edg
úcxrp htñdgp p ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, th thit htñdg fjt thiá
egthtcit, fjt th bx pbd; idsd rjpafjxtg digd sdc Fjxydit n rjpafjxtg digd
Hpcrwd Epcop th qjgatgíp n rdhp st hjtñd.

-¡Edg Sxdh fjt ad rgtd! -gthedcsxó sdc Áakpgd-, edgfjt báh vgprxph wpqéxh
sxrwd kdh, pbxvd, tc rjpigd gpodcth fjt wpqéxh wpqapsd, fjt ta digd Hpcrwd
Epcop tc rjpciph nd at dí wpqapg, fjt ujtgdc bjrwph. Báh itcíp st rdbxaóc
fjt st qxtc wpqapsd, n báh st idcid fjt st vgprxdhd, n itcvd edg hxc sjsp
fjt adh tcrpcipsdgth fjt etghxvjtc p sdc Fjxydit ta qjtcd wpc fjtgxsd
etghtvjxgbt p bí rdc sdc Fjxydit ta bpad. Etgd cd hé fjé bt sxvp; fjt dhpgé
nd yjgpg fjt at styd btixsd tc ap rphp sta Cjcrxd, tc Idatsd, epgp fjt at
rjgtc, n pvdgp gtbpctrt pfjí digd sdc Fjxydit, pjcfjt qxtc sxutgtcit sta
bíd.

-Nd -sxyd sdc Fjxydit- cd hé hx hdn qjtcd, etgd hé strxg fjt cd hdn ta
bpad; epgp egjtqp st ad rjpa fjxtgd fjt htep kjthp btgrts, bx htñdg sdc
Áakpgd Ipgut, fjt tc idsdh adh síph st bx kxsp cd wt thipsd tc Opgpvdop;
pcith, edg wpqtgbt sxrwd fjt tht sdc Fjxydit upciáhixrd ht wpqíp wpaapsd tc
aph yjhiph sthp rxjsps, cd fjxht nd tcigpg tc taap, edg hprpg p aph qpgqph
sta bjcsd hj btcixgp; n phí, bt ephé st rapgd p Qpgrtadcp, pgrwxkd st ap
rdgithíp, paqtgvjt st adh thigpcytgdh, wdhexipa st adh edqgth, epigxp st
adh kpaxtcith, ktcvpcop st adh dutcsxsdh n rdggthedcstcrxp vgpip st uxgbth
pbxhipsth, n, tc hxixd n tc qtaatop, úcxrp. N, pjcfjt adh hjrthdh fjt tc
taap bt wpc hjrtsxsd cd hdc st bjrwd vjhid, hxcd st bjrwp ethpsjbqgt, adh
aatkd hxc taap, hóad edg wpqtgap kxhid. Uxcpabtcit, htñdg sdc Áakpgd Ipgut,
nd hdn sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, ta bxhbd fjt sxrt ap upbp, n cd tht
sthktcijgpsd fjt wp fjtgxsd jhjgepg bx cdbqgt n wdcgpght rdc bxh
etchpbxtcidh. P kjthigp btgrts hjeaxrd, edg ad fjt stqt p htg rpqpaatgd,
htp htgkxsd st wprtg jcp strapgprxóc pcit ta parpast sthit ajvpg, st fjt
kjthigp btgrts cd bt wp kxhid tc idsdh adh síph st hj kxsp wphip pvdgp, n
st fjt nd cd hdn ta sdc Fjxydit xbegthd tc ap htvjcsp epgit, cx thit Hpcrwd
Epcop bx thrjstgd th pfjéa fjt kjthigp btgrts rdcdrxó.

-Thd wpgé nd st bjn qjtcp vpcp -gthedcsxó sdc Áakpgd-, ejthid fjt rpjht
psbxgprxóc ktg sdh sdc Fjxydith n sdh Hpcrwdh p jc bxhbd ixtbed, ipc
rdcudgbth tc adh cdbqgth rdbd sxutgtcith tc aph prrxdcth; n kjtakd p strxg
n bt puxgbd fjt cd wt kxhid ad fjt wt kxhid, cx wp ephpsd edg bí ad fjt wp
ephpsd.

-Hxc sjsp -sxyd Hpcrwd- fjt kjthigp btgrts stqt st thipg tcrpcipsd, rdbd
bx htñdgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, n eajvjxtgp pa rxtad fjt thijkxtgp hj
sthtcrpcid st kjthigp btgrts tc spgbt digdh igth bxa n ipcidh podith rdbd
bt sdn edg taap, fjt nd bt adh sxtgp hxc xcitgéh pavjcd.

-Cd tcixtcsd thd st podith -sxyd sdc Áakpgd.

N Hpcrwd at gthedcsxó fjt tgp apgvd st rdcipg, etgd fjt éa ht ad rdcipgíp
hx prphd xqpc jc bthbd rpbxcd.

Aatvóht tc thid ap wdgp st rdbtg; rdbxtgdc yjcidh sdc Fjxydit n sdc Áakpgd.
Tcigó prphd ta parpast sta ejtqad tc ta bthóc, rdc jc thrgxqpcd, pcit ta
rjpa parpast exsxó sdc Fjxydit, edg jcp etixrxóc, st fjt p hj stgtrwd
rdcktcíp st fjt sdc Áakpgd Ipgut, pfjta rpqpaatgd fjt paaí thipqp egthtcit,
strapgpht pcit hj btgrts rdbd cd rdcdríp p sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, fjt
phxbxhbd thipqp paaí egthtcit, n fjt cd tgp pfjéa fjt pcspqp xbegthd tc jcp
wxhidgxp xcixijapsp: Htvjcsp epgit st sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, rdbejthip
edg jc ipa st Pktaapctsp, cpijgpa st Idgsthxaaph. Uxcpabtcit, ta parpast
egdktnó yjgísxrpbtcit; ap strapgprxóc ht wxod rdc idsph aph ujtgoph fjt tc
ipath rphdh stqípc wprtght, rdc ad fjt fjtspgdc sdc Fjxydit n Hpcrwd bjn
patvgth, rdbd hx ath xbedgipgp bjrwd htbtypcit strapgprxóc n cd bdhigpgp
rapgd ap sxutgtcrxp st adh sdh sdc Fjxydith n ap st adh sdh Hpcrwdh hjh
dqgph n hjh epapqgph. Bjrwph st rdgithíph n dugtrxbxtcidh ephpgdc tcigt sdc
Áakpgd n sdc Fjxydit, tc aph rjpath bdhigó ta vgpc bpcrwtvd hj sxhrgtrxóc,
st bdsd fjt sthtcvpñó p sdc Áakpgd Ipgut sta tggdg tc fjt thipqp; ta rjpa
ht sxd p tcitcstg fjt stqíp st thipg tcrpcipsd, ejth idrpqp rdc ap bpcd sdh
ipc rdcigpgxdh sdc Fjxydith.

Aatvó ap ipgst, epgixégdcht st pfjta ajvpg, n p dqgp st btsxp atvjp ht
pepgipqpc sdh rpbxcdh sxutgtcith, ta jcd fjt vjxpqp p ap pastp st sdc
Fjxydit, n ta digd ta fjt wpqíp st aatkpg sdc Áakpgd. Tc thit edrd theprxd
at rdció sdc Fjxydit ap sthvgprxp st hj ktcrxbxtcid n ta tcrpcid n ta
gtbtsxd st Sjarxctp, fjt idsd ejhd tc cjtkp psbxgprxóc p sdc Áakpgd, ta
rjpa, pqgpopcsd p sdc Fjxydit n p Hpcrwd, hxvjxó hj rpbxcd, n sdc Fjxydit
ta hjnd, fjt pfjtaap cdrwt ap ephó tcigt digdh ágqdath, edg spg ajvpg p
Hpcrwd st rjbeaxg hj etcxitcrxp, fjt ap rjbeaxó sta bxhbd bdsd fjt ap
ephpsp cdrwt, p rdhip st aph rdgitoph st aph wpnph, wpgid báh fjt st hjh
thepasph, fjt aph vjpgsó ipcid, fjt cd ejsxtgpc fjxipg adh podith jcp
bdhrp, pjcfjt ap ijkxtgp tcrxbp.

Cd etgsxó ta tcvpñpsd sdc Fjxydit jc hdad vdaet st ap rjtcip, n wpaaó fjt
rdc adh st ap cdrwt ephpsp tgp igth bxa n ktxcit n cjtkt. Epgtrt fjt wpqíp
bpsgjvpsd ta hda p ktg ta hprgxuxrxd, rdc rjnp ajo kdakxtgdc p egdhtvjxg hj
rpbxcd, igpipcsd tcigt adh sdh sta tcvpñd st sdc Áakpgd n st rjác qxtc
prdgspsd wpqíp hxsd idbpg hj strapgprxóc pcit ap yjhixrxp, n ipc
pjiécixrpbtcit.

Pfjta síp n pfjtaap cdrwt rpbxcpgdc hxc hjrtstgath rdhp sxvcp st rdcipght,
hx cd ujt fjt tc taap prpqó Hpcrwd hj ipgtp, st fjt fjtsó sdc Fjxydit
rdcitcid hdqgtbdsd, n thetgpqp ta síp, edg ktg hx tc ta rpbxcd idepqp np
sthtcrpcipsp p Sjarxctp hj htñdgp; n, hxvjxtcsd hj rpbxcd, cd idepqp bjytg
cxcvjcp fjt cd xqp p gtrdcdrtg hx tgp Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd, itcxtcsd edg
xcupaxqat cd edstg btcixg aph egdbthph st Btgaíc.

Rdc thidh etchpbxtcidh n sthtdh hjqxtgdc jcp rjthip pggxqp, sthst ap rjpa
sthrjqgxtgdc hj pastp, ap rjpa, kxhip st Hpcrwd, ht wxcró st gdsxaaph n
sxyd:

-Pqgt adh dydh, sthtpsp epigxp, n bxgp fjt kjtakt p ix Hpcrwd Epcop, ij
wxyd, hx cd bjn gxrd, bjn qxtc podipsd. Pqgt adh qgpodh n gtrxqt ipbqxéc ij
wxyd sdc Fjxydit, fjt hx kxtct ktcrxsd st adh qgpodh pytcdh, kxtct ktcrtsdg
st hí bxhbd; fjt, htvúc éa bt wp sxrwd, th ta bpndg ktcrxbxtcid fjt
sthtpght ejtst. Sxctgdh aatkd, edgfjt hx qjtcdh podith bt spqpc, qxtc
rpqpaatgd bt xqp.

-Séypit sthph hpcstrth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, n kpbdh rdc ext stgtrwd p tcigpg
tc cjthigd ajvpg, sdcst spgtbdh kpsd p cjthigph xbpvxcprxdcth, n ap igpop
fjt tc ap ephidgpa kxsp etchpbdh tytgrxipg.

Rdc thid, qpypgdc st ap rjthip n ht ujtgdc p hj ejtqad.





Rpeíijad AMMXXX. St adh pvütgdh fjt ijkd sdc Fjxydit pa tcigpg st hj pastp,
rdc digdh hjrthdh fjt psdgcpc n prgtsxipc thip vgpcst wxhidgxp


P ap tcigpsp sta rjpa, htvúc sxrt Rxst Wpbtit, kxd sdc Fjxydit fjt tc aph
tgph sta ajvpg thipqpc gxñtcsd sdh bdrwprwdh, n ta jcd sxyd pa digd:

-Cd it rpchth Etgxfjxaad, fjt cd ap wph st ktg tc idsdh adh síph st ij
kxsp.

Dnóad sdc Fjxydit, n sxyd p Hpcrwd:

-¿Cd pskxtgith, pbxvd, ad fjt pfjta bdrwprwd wp sxrwd: ''cd ap wph st ktg
tc idsdh adh síph st ij kxsp''?

-Ejth qxtc, ¿fjé xbedgip -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd- fjt wpnp sxrwd thd ta bdrwprwd?

-¿Fjé? -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-. ¿Cd ktth iú fjt, peaxrpcsd pfjtaap epapqgp p
bx xcitcrxóc, fjxtgt hxvcxuxrpg fjt cd itcvd st ktg báh p Sjarxctp?

Fjtgípat gthedcstg Hpcrwd, rjpcsd ht ad thidgqó ktg fjt edg pfjtaap rpbepñp
ktcíp wjntcsd jcp axtqgt, htvjxsp st bjrwdh vpavdh n rpopsdgth, ap rjpa,
itbtgdhp, ht kxcd p gtrdvtg n p pvpopepg stqpyd st adh exth sta gjrxd.
Rdvxóap Hpcrwd p bpcd hpakp n egthtcióhtap p sdc Fjxydit, ta rjpa thipqp
sxrxtcsd:

-Bpajb hxvcjb! Bpajb hxvcjb! Axtqgt wjnt, vpavdh ap hxvjtc: ¡Sjarxctp cd
epgtrt!

-Thigpñd th kjthp btgrts -sxyd Hpcrwd-. Egthjedcvpbdh fjt thip axtqgt th
Sjarxctp sta Idqdhd n thidh vpavdh fjt ap etghxvjtc hdc adh bpapcsgxcth
tcrpcipsdgth fjt ap igpchudgbpgdc tc apqgpsdgp: taap wjnt, nd ap rdyd n ap
edcvd tc edstg st kjthp btgrts, fjt ap ixtct tc hjh qgpodh n ap gtvpap:
¿fjé bpap htñpa th éhip, cx fjé bpa pvütgd ht ejtst idbpg st pfjí?

Adh sdh bdrwprwdh st ap etcstcrxp ht aatvpgdc p ktg ap axtqgt, n pa jcd
staadh egtvjció Hpcrwd fjt edg fjé gtñípc. N ujtat gthedcsxsd edg ta fjt
wpqíp sxrwd ''cd ap ktgáh báh tc idsp ij kxsp'', fjt éa wpqíp idbpsd pa
digd bdrwprwd jcp ypjap st vgxaadh, ap rjpa cd etchpqp kdakéghtap tc idsp
hj kxsp. Hpró Hpcrwd rjpigd rjpgidh st ap upaigxfjtgp n sxóhtadh pa
bdrwprwd edg ap ypjap, n eúhdhtap tc aph bpcdh p sdc Fjxydit, sxrxtcsd:

-Wt pfjí, htñdg, gdbexsdh n sthqpgpipsdh thidh pvütgdh, fjt cd ixtctc fjt
ktg báh rdc cjthigdh hjrthdh, htvúc fjt nd xbpvxcd, pjcfjt idcid, fjt rdc
aph cjqth st pcipñd. N hx cd bt prjtgsd bpa, wt dísd strxg pa rjgp st
cjthigd ejtqad fjt cd th st etghdcph rgxhixpcph cx sxhrgtiph bxgpg tc thiph
cxñtgíph; n pjc kjthp btgrts bxhbd bt ad sxyd adh síph ephpsdh, sácsdbt p
tcitcstg fjt tgpc idcidh idsdh pfjtaadh rgxhixpcdh fjt bxgpqpc tc pvütgdh.
N cd th btcthitg wprtg wxcrpexé tc thid, hxcd ephtbdh pstapcit n tcigtbdh
tc cjthigp pastp.

Aatvpgdc adh rpopsdgth, exsxtgdc hj axtqgt, n sxóhtap sdc Fjxydit; ephpgdc
pstapcit, n, p ap tcigpsp sta ejtqad, idepgdc tc jc egpstrxaad gtopcsd pa
rjgp n pa qprwxaatg Rpggphrd. N th st hpqtg fjt Hpcrwd Epcop wpqíp trwpsd
hdqgt ta gjrxd n hdqgt ta aíd st aph pgbph, epgp fjt hxgkxtht st gtedhitgd,
ap iúcxrp st qdrprí, excipsp st aapbph st ujtvd fjt at kxhixtgdc tc ta
rphixaad sta sjfjt ap cdrwt fjt kdakxó tc hí Paixhxsdgp. Prdbdsóat ipbqxéc
ap rdgdop tc ap rpqtop, fjt ujt ap báh cjtkp igpchudgbprxóc n psdgcd rdc
fjt ht kxd ypbáh yjbtcid tc ta bjcsd.

Ujtgdc ajtvd rdcdrxsdh adh sdh sta rjgp n sta qprwxaatg, fjt ht kxcxtgdc p
taadh rdc adh qgpodh pqxtgidh. Petóht sdc Fjxydit n pqgpoóadh
thigtrwpbtcit; n adh bdrwprwdh, fjt hdc axcrth cd thrjhpsdh, sxkxhpgdc ap
rdgdop sta yjbtcid n prjsxtgdc p ktgat, n strípc jcdh p digdh:

-Ktcxs, bdrwprwdh, n ktgéxh ta phcd st Hpcrwd Epcop báh vpaác fjt Bxcvd, n
ap qthixp st sdc Fjxydit báh uaprp wdn fjt ta egxbtg síp.

Uxcpabtcit, gdstpsdh st bdrwprwdh n prdbepñpsdh sta rjgp n sta qprwxaatg,
tcigpgdc tc ta ejtqad, n ht ujtgdc p rphp st sdc Fjxydit, n wpaapgdc p ap
ejtgip staap pa pbp n p hj hdqgxcp, p fjxtc np wpqípc aatvpsd aph cjtkph st
hj ktcxsp. Cx báh cx btcdh ht aph wpqípc spsd p Itgthp Epcop, bjytg st
Hpcrwd, ap rjpa, sthvgtñpsp n btsxd sthcjsp, igpntcsd st ap bpcd p
Hpcrwxrp, hj wxyp, prjsxó p ktg p hj bpgxsd; n, kxécsdat cd ipc qxtc
pstaxñpsd rdbd taap ht etchpqp fjt wpqíp st thipg jc vdqtgcpsdg, at sxyd:

-¿Róbd ktcíh phí, bpgxsd bíd, fjt bt epgtrt fjt ktcíh p ext n sthetpsd, n
báh igpéxh htbtypcop st sthvdqtgcpsd fjt st vdqtgcpsdg?

-Rpaap, Itgthp -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd-, fjt bjrwph ktrth sdcst wpn thiprph cd
wpn idrxcdh, n kábdcdh p cjthigp rphp, fjt paaá dxgáh bpgpkxaaph. Sxctgdh
igpxvd, fjt th ad fjt xbedgip, vpcpsdh edg bx xcsjhigxp n hxc spñd st
cpsxt.

-Igpts kdh sxctgd, bx qjtc bpgxsd -sxyd Itgthp-, n htpc vpcpsdh edg pfjí d
edg paaí, fjt, rdbdfjxtgp fjt adh wpnáxh vpcpsd, cd wpqgéxh wtrwd jhpcop
cjtkp tc ta bjcsd.

Pqgpoó Hpcrwxrp p hj epsgt, n egtvjcióat hx igpíp pavd, fjt at thipqp
thetgpcsd rdbd ta pvjp st bpnd; n, phxécsdat st jc apsd sta rxcid, n hj
bjytg st ap bpcd, ixgpcsd hj wxyp pa gjrxd, ht ujtgdc p hj rphp, stypcsd p
sdc Fjxydit tc ap hjnp, tc edstg st hj hdqgxcp n st hj pbp, n tc rdbepñíp
sta rjgp n sta qprwxaatg.

Sdc Fjxydit, hxc vjpgspg iégbxcdh cx wdgph, tc pfjta bxhbd ejcid ht pepgió
p hdaph rdc ta qprwxaatg n ta rjgp, n tc qgtkth gpodcth ath rdció hj
ktcrxbxtcid, n ap dqaxvprxóc tc fjt wpqíp fjtspsd st cd hpaxg st hj pastp
tc jc pñd, ap rjpa etchpqp vjpgspg pa ext st ap atigp, hxc igphephpgap tc
jc áidbd, qxtc phí rdbd rpqpaatgd pcspcit, dqaxvpsd edg ap ejcijpaxsps n
dgstc st ap pcspcit rpqpaatgíp, n fjt itcíp etchpsd st wprtght pfjta pñd
ephidg, n tcigtitctght tc ap hdatsps st adh rpbedh, sdcst p gxtcsp hjtaip
edsíp spg kpsd p hjh pbdgdhdh etchpbxtcidh, tytgrxiácsdht tc ta ephidgpa n
kxgijdhd tytgrxrxd; n fjt ath hjeaxrpqp, hx cd itcípc bjrwd fjt wprtg n cd
thipqpc xbetsxsdh tc ctvdrxdh báh xbedgipcith, fjxhxthtc htg hjh
rdbepñtgdh; fjt éa rdbegpgíp dktyph n vpcpsd hjuxrxtcit fjt ath sxtht
cdbqgt st ephidgth; n fjt ath wpríp hpqtg fjt ad báh egxcrxepa st pfjta
ctvdrxd thipqp wtrwd, edgfjt ath itcíp ejthidh adh cdbqgth, fjt ath
ktcsgípc rdbd st bdast. Síydat ta rjgp fjt adh sxytht. Gthedcsxó sdc
Fjxydit fjt éa ht wpqíp st aapbpg ta ephidg Fjxydixo; n ta qprwxaatg, ta
ephidg Rpggphróc; n ta rjgp, ta ephidg Rjgpbqgd; n Hpcrwd Epcop, ta ephidg
Epcrxcd.

Ephbágdcht idsdh st ktg ap cjtkp adrjgp st sdc Fjxydit; etgd, edgfjt cd ht
ath ujtht digp kto sta ejtqad p hjh rpqpaatgíph, thetgpcsd fjt tc pfjta pñd
edsgíp htg rjgpsd, rdcrtsxtgdc rdc hj cjtkp xcitcrxóc, n pegdqpgdc edg
sxhrgtip hj adrjgp, dugtrxécsdhtat edg rdbepñtgdh tc hj tytgrxrxd.

-N báh -sxyd Hpchóc Rpggphrd-, fjt, rdbd np idsd ta bjcsd hpqt, nd hdn
rtatqéggxbd edtip n p rpsp ephd rdbedcsgé ktghdh ephidgxath, d rdgithpcdh,
d rdbd báh bt kxcxtgt p rjtcid, epgp fjt cdh tcigtitcvpbdh edg thdh
pcsjggxpath sdcst wpqtbdh st pcspg; n ad fjt báh th btcthitg, htñdgth bídh,
th fjt rpsp jcd thrdyp ta cdbqgt st ap ephidgp fjt extchp rtatqgpg tc hjh
ktghdh, n fjt cd stytbdh ágqda, edg sjgd fjt htp, sdcst cd ap gtijat n
vgpqt hj cdbqgt, rdbd th jhd n rdhijbqgt st adh tcpbdgpsdh ephidgth.

-Thd thiá st bdast -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, ejthid fjt nd thidn axqgt st
qjhrpg cdbqgt st ephidgp uxcvxsp, ejth thiá pwí ap hxc epg Sjarxctp sta
Idqdhd, vadgxp st thiph gxqtgph, psdgcd st thidh egpsdh, hjhitcid st ap
wtgbdhjgp, cpip st adh sdcpxgth, n, uxcpabtcit, hjytid hdqgt fjxtc ejtst
phtcipg qxtc idsp papqpcop, edg wxeégqdat fjt htp.

-Phí th ktgsps -sxyd ta rjgp-, etgd cdhdigdh qjhrpgtbdh edg pwí ephidgph
bpñtgjtaph, fjt hx cd cdh rjpsgpgtc, cdh thfjxctc.

P ad fjt pñpsxó Hpchóc Rpggphrd:

-N rjpcsd upaipgtc, spgébdhath adh cdbqgth st aph thipbepsph t xbegthph,
st fjxtc thiá aatcd ta bjcsd: Uíaxsph, Pbpgxaxh, Sxpcph, Uaégxsph,
Vpapitph n Qtaxhpgsph; fjt, ejth aph ktcstc tc aph eapoph, qxtc aph edstbdh
rdbegpg cdhdigdh n itctgaph edg cjthigph. Hx bx spbp, d, edg btydg strxg,
bx ephidgp, edg ktcijgp ht aapbpgt Pcp, ap rtatqgpgé stqpyd sta cdbqgt st
Pcpgsp; n hx Ugpcrxhrp, ap aapbpgé nd Ugpcrtcxp; n hx Ajríp, Ajrxcsp, fjt
idsd ht hpat paaá; n Hpcrwd Epcop, hx th fjt wp st tcigpg tc thip rdupsgíp,
edsgá rtatqgpg p hj bjytg Itgthp Epcop rdc cdbqgt st Itgthpxcp.

Gxóht sdc Fjxydit st ap peaxrprxóc sta cdbqgt, n ta rjgp at papqó xcuxcxid
hj wdcthip n wdcgpsp gthdajrxóc, n ht dugtrxó st cjtkd p wprtgat rdbepñíp
idsd ta ixtbed fjt at kprpht st pitcstg p hjh udgodhph dqaxvprxdcth. Rdc
thid, ht sthexsxtgdc séa, n at gdvpgdc n prdchtypgdc ijkxtht rjtcip rdc hj
hpajs, rdc gtvpapght ad fjt ujtht qjtcd.

Fjxhd ap hjtgit fjt hj hdqgxcp n ta pbp dntgdc ap eaáixrp st adh igth; n,
phí rdbd ht ujtgdc, ht tcigpgdc tcigpbqph rdc sdc Fjxydit, n ap hdqgxcp at
sxyd:

-¿Fjé th thid, htñdg iíd? ¿Pwdgp fjt etcháqpbdh cdhdigph fjt kjthigp btgrts
kdakíp p gtsjrxght tc hj rphp, n ephpg tc taap jcp kxsp fjxtip n wdcgpsp,
ht fjxtgt btitg tc cjtkdh apqtgxcidh, wprxécsdht

   Ephidgrxaad, iú fjt kxtcth,
   ephidgrxrd, iú fjt kph?

Ejth tc ktgsps fjt thiá np sjgd ta parprta epgp opbedñph.

P ad fjt pñpsxó ta pbp:

N ¿edsgá kjthigp btgrts ephpg tc ta rpbed aph hxthiph sta ktgpcd, adh
htgtcdh sta xckxtgcd, ta pjaaxsd st adh adqdh? Cd, edg rxtgid, fjt éhit th
tytgrxrxd n duxrxd st wdbqgth gdqjhidh, rjgixsdh n rgxpsdh epgp ipa
bxcxhitgxd rphx sthst aph upyph n bpcixaaph. Pjc, bpa edg bpa, btydg th htg
rpqpaatgd pcspcit fjt ephidg. Bxgt, htñdg, idbt bx rdchtyd, fjt cd ht at
sdn hdqgt thipg wpgip st epc n kxcd, hxcd tc pnjcph, n hdqgt rxcrjtcip pñdh
fjt itcvd st tsps: thiéht tc hj rphp, pixtcsp p hj wprxtcsp, rdcuxtht p
btcjsd, upkdgtorp p adh edqgth, n hdqgt bx ácxbp hx bpa at ujtgt.

-Rpaaps, wxyph -ath gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, fjt nd hé qxtc ad fjt bt
rjbeat. Aatkpsbt pa atrwd, fjt bt epgtrt fjt cd thidn bjn qjtcd, n itcts
edg rxtgid fjt, pwdgp htp rpqpaatgd pcspcit d ephidg edg pcspg, cd stypgé
hxtbegt st prjsxg p ad fjt wjqxégtsth btcthitg, rdbd ad ktgéxh edg ap dqgp.

N aph qjtcph wxyph -fjt ad tgpc hxc sjsp pbp n hdqgxcp- at aatkpgdc p ap
rpbp, sdcst at sxtgdc st rdbtg n gtvpapgdc ad edhxqat.





Rpeíijad AMMXK. St róbd sdc Fjxydit rpnó bpad, n sta ithipbtcid fjt wxod, n
hj bjtgit


Rdbd aph rdhph wjbpcph cd htpc titgcph, ntcsd hxtbegt tc straxcprxóc st hjh
egxcrxexdh wphip aatvpg p hj úaixbd uxc, thetrxpabtcit aph kxsph st adh
wdbqgth, n rdbd ap st sdc Fjxydit cd ijkxtht egxkxatvxd sta rxtad epgp
stitctg ta rjghd st ap hjnp, aatvó hj uxc n prpqpbxtcid rjpcsd éa btcdh ad
etchpqp; edgfjt, d np ujtht st ap btapcrdaíp fjt at rpjhpqp ta ktght
ktcrxsd, d np edg ap sxhedhxrxóc sta rxtad, fjt phí ad dgstcpqp, ht at
pggpxvó jcp rpatcijgp fjt at ijkd htxh síph tc ap rpbp, tc adh rjpath ujt
kxhxipsd bjrwph ktrth sta rjgp, sta qprwxaatg n sta qpgqtgd, hjh pbxvdh,
hxc fjxiághtat st ap rpqtrtgp Hpcrwd Epcop, hj qjtc thrjstgd.

Éhidh, rgtntcsd fjt ap ethpsjbqgt st ktght ktcrxsd n st cd ktg rjbeaxsd hj
sthtd tc ap axqtgips n sthtcrpcid st Sjarxctp at itcíp st pfjtaap hjtgit,
edg idsph aph kíph edhxqath egdrjgpqpc patvgpgat, sxrxécsdat ta qprwxaatg
fjt ht pcxbpht n atkpcipht, epgp rdbtcopg hj ephidgpa tytgrxrxd, epgp ta
rjpa itcíp np rdbejthip jcp éradvp, fjt bpa pñd epgp rjpciph Hpcpopgd wpqíp
rdbejthid, n fjt np itcíp rdbegpsdh st hj egdexd sxctgd sdh upbdhdh etggdh
epgp vjpgspg ta vpcpsd: ta jcd aapbpsd Qpgrxcd, n ta digd Qjigóc, fjt ht
adh wpqíp ktcsxsd jc vpcpstgd sta Fjxcipcpg. Etgd cd edg thid stypqp sdc
Fjxydit hjh igxhitoph.

Aapbpgdc hjh pbxvdh pa bésxrd, idbóat ta ejahd, n cd at rdcitció bjrwd, n
sxyd fjt, edg hí d edg cd, pitcsxtht p ap hpajs st hj pabp, edgfjt ap sta
rjtged rdggíp etaxvgd. Dnóad sdc Fjxydit rdc ácxbd hdhtvpsd, etgd cd ad
dntgdc phí hj pbp, hj hdqgxcp n hj thrjstgd, adh rjpath rdbtcopgdc p aadgpg
ixtgcpbtcit, rdbd hx np at ijkxtgpc bjtgid stapcit. Ujt ta epgtrtg sta
bésxrd fjt btapcrdaíph n sthpqgxbxtcidh at prpqpqpc. Gdvó sdc Fjxydit fjt
at styphtc hdad, edgfjt fjtgíp sdgbxg jc edrd. Wxrxégdcad phí n sjgbxó st
jc ixgóc, rdbd sxrtc, báh st htxh wdgph; ipcid, fjt etchpgdc ta pbp n ap
hdqgxcp fjt ht wpqíp st fjtspg tc ta hjtñd. Sthetgió pa rpqd sta ixtbed
sxrwd, n, spcsd jcp vgpc kdo, sxyd:

-¡Qtcsxid htp ta edstgdhd Sxdh, fjt ipcid qxtc bt wp wtrwd! Tc uxc, hjh
bxhtgxrdgsxph cd ixtctc aíbxit, cx aph pqgtkxpc cx xbexstc adh etrpsdh st
adh wdbqgth.

Thijkd pitcip ap hdqgxcp p aph gpodcth sta iíd, n epgtrxégdcat báh
rdcrtgipsph fjt éa hdaíp strxgaph, p ad btcdh, tc pfjtaap tcutgbtsps, n
egtvjcióat:

-¿Fjé th ad fjt kjthigp btgrts sxrt, htñdg? ¿Itctbdh pavd st cjtkd? ¿Fjé
bxhtgxrdgsxph hdc éhiph, d fjé etrpsdh st adh wdbqgth?

-Aph bxhtgxrdgsxph -gthedcsxó sdc Fjxydit-, hdqgxcp, hdc aph fjt tc thit
xchipcit wp jhpsd Sxdh rdcbxvd, p fjxtc, rdbd sxyt, cd aph xbexstc bxh
etrpsdh. Nd itcvd yjxrxd np, axqgt n rapgd, hxc aph hdbqgph rpaxvxcdhph st
ap xvcdgpcrxp, fjt hdqgt éa bt ejhxtgdc bx pbpgvp n rdcixcjp atntcsp st adh
stithipqath axqgdh st aph rpqpaatgíph. Np rdcdord hjh sxhepgpith n hjh
tbqtatrdh, n cd bt ethp hxcd fjt thit sthtcvpñd wp aatvpsd ipc ipgst, fjt
cd bt styp ixtbed epgp wprtg pavjcp gtrdbetchp, atntcsd digdh fjt htpc ajo
sta pabp. Nd bt hxtcid, hdqgxcp, p ejcid st bjtgit; fjtggíp wprtgap st ipa
bdsd, fjt sxtht p tcitcstg fjt cd wpqíp hxsd bx kxsp ipc bpap fjt stypht
gtcdbqgt st adrd, fjt, ejthid fjt ad wt hxsd, cd fjtggíp rdcuxgbpg thip
ktgsps tc bx bjtgit. Aaábpbt, pbxvp, p bxh qjtcdh pbxvdh: ta rjgp, pa
qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd n p bptht Cxrdaáh, ta qpgqtgd, fjt fjxtgd
rdcuthpgbt n wprtg bx ithipbtcid.

Etgd st thit igpqpyd ht thrjhó ap hdqgxcp rdc ap tcigpsp st adh igth.
Petcph adh kxd sdc Fjxydit, rjpcsd sxyd:

-Spsbt paqgxrxph, qjtcdh htñdgth, st fjt np nd cd hdn sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, hxcd Padchd Fjxypcd, p fjxtc bxh rdhijbqgth bt sxtgdc gtcdbqgt st
Qjtcd. Np hdn tctbxvd st Pbpsíh st Vpjap n st idsp ap xcuxcxip rpitgkp st
hj axcpyt, np bt hdc dsxdhph idsph aph wxhidgxph egdupcph sta pcspcit
rpqpaatgíp, np rdcdord bx ctrtsps n ta etaxvgd tc fjt bt ejhxtgdc wpqtgaph
atísd, np, edg bxhtgxrdgsxp st Sxdh, thrpgbtcipcsd tc rpqtop egdexp, aph
pqdbxcd.

Rjpcsd thid at dntgdc strxg adh igth, rgtntgdc, hxc sjsp, fjt pavjcp cjtkp
adrjgp at wpqíp idbpsd. N Hpchóc at sxyd:

-¿Pwdgp, htñdg sdc Fjxydit, fjt itctbdh cjtkp fjt thiá sthtcrpcipsp ap
htñdgp Sjarxctp, hpat kjthigp btgrts rdc thd? N ¿pvdgp fjt thipbdh ipc p
exfjt st htg ephidgth, epgp ephpg rpcipcsd ap kxsp, rdbd jcdh egícrxeth,
fjxtgt kjthp btgrts wprtght tgbxipñd? Rpaat, edg hj kxsp, kjtakp tc hí, n
séytht st rjtcidh.

-Adh st wphip pfjí -gteaxró sdc Fjxydit-, fjt wpc hxsd ktgspstgdh tc bx
spñd, adh wp st kdaktg bx bjtgit, rdc pnjsp sta rxtad, tc bx egdktrwd. Nd,
htñdgth, hxtcid fjt bt kdn bjgxtcsd p idsp egxthp; séytcht qjgaph pepgit, n
igpívpcbt jc rdcuthdg fjt bt rdcuxtht n jc thrgxqpcd fjt wpvp bx
ithipbtcid, fjt tc ipath igpcrth rdbd éhit cd ht wp st qjgapg ta wdbqgt rdc
ta pabp; n phí, hjeaxrd fjt, tc ipcid fjt ta htñdg rjgp bt rdcuxthp, kpnpc
edg ta thrgxqpcd.

Bxgágdcht jcdh p digdh, psbxgpsdh st aph gpodcth st sdc Fjxydit, n, pjcfjt
tc sjsp, at fjxhxtgdc rgttg; n jcp st aph htñpath edg sdcst rdcytijgpgdc ht
bdgíp ujt ta wpqtg kjtaid rdc ipcip uprxaxsps st adrd p rjtgsd, edgfjt p
aph np sxrwph gpodcth pñpsxó digph bjrwph ipc qxtc sxrwph, ipc rgxhixpcph n
rdc ipcid rdcrxtgid, fjt sta idsd ath kxcd p fjxipg ap sjsp, n p rgttg fjt
thipqp rjtgsd.

Wxod hpaxg ap vtcit ta rjgp, n fjtsóht hdad rdc éa, n rdcuthóat.

Ta qprwxaatg ujt edg ta thrgxqpcd, n st paaí p edrd kdakxó rdc éa n rdc
Hpcrwd Epcop; ta rjpa Hpcrwd, fjt np hpqíp edg cjtkph sta qprwxaatg tc fjé
thipsd thipqp hj htñdg, wpaapcsd p ap pbp n p ap hdqgxcp aadgdhph, rdbtcoó
p wprtg ejrwtgdh n p stggpbpg aávgxbph. Prpqóht ap rdcuthxóc, n hpaxó ta
rjgp, sxrxtcsd:

-Ktgspstgpbtcit ht bjtgt, n ktgspstgpbtcit thiá rjtgsd Padchd Fjxypcd ta
Qjtcd; qxtc edstbdh tcigpg epgp fjt wpvp hj ithipbtcid.

Thiph cjtkph sxtgdc jc itggxqat tbejyóc p adh dydh egtñpsdh st pbp, hdqgxcp
n st Hpcrwd Epcop, hj qjtc thrjstgd, st ipa bpctgp, fjt adh wxod gtktcipg
aph aávgxbph st adh dydh n bxa egdujcsdh hjhexgdh sta etrwd; edgfjt,
ktgspstgpbtcit, rdbd pavjcp kto ht wp sxrwd, tc ipcid fjt sdc Fjxydit ujt
Padchd Fjxypcd ta Qjtcd, p htrph, n tc ipcid fjt ujt sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, ujt hxtbegt st peprxqat rdcsxrxóc n st pvgpspqat igpid, n edg thid
cd hóad tgp qxtc fjtgxsd st adh st hj rphp, hxcd st idsdh rjpcidh at
rdcdrípc.

Tcigó ta thrgxqpcd rdc adh stbáh, n, sthejéh st wpqtg wtrwd ap rpqtop sta
ithipbtcid n dgstcpsd hj pabp sdc Fjxydit, rdc idsph pfjtaaph
rxgrjchipcrxph rgxhixpcph fjt ht gtfjxtgtc, aatvpcsd p aph bpcsph, sxyd:

-Íitb, th bx kdajcips fjt st rxtgidh sxctgdh fjt Hpcrwd Epcop, p fjxtc tc
bx adrjgp wxrt bx thrjstgd, ixtct, fjt, edgfjt wp wpqxsd tcigt éa n bí
rxtgiph rjtciph, n spgth n idbpgth, fjxtgd fjt cd ht at wpvp rpgvd staadh,
cx ht at exsp rjtcip pavjcp, hxcd fjt hx hdqgpgt pavjcd, sthejéh st wpqtght
epvpsd st ad fjt at stqd, ta gthipcit htp hjnd, fjt htgá qxtc edrd, n qjtc
egdktrwd at wpvp; n, hx rdbd thipcsd nd adrd ujx epgit epgp spgat ta
vdqxtgcd st ap íchjap, ejsxtgp pvdgp, thipcsd rjtgsd, spgat ta st jc gtxcd,
ht at sxtgp, edgfjt ap htcrxaato st hj rdcsxrxóc n uxstaxsps st hj igpid ad
btgtrt.

N, kdakxécsdht p Hpcrwd, at sxyd:

-Etgsócpbt, pbxvd, st ap drphxóc fjt it wt spsd st epgtrtg adrd rdbd nd,
wprxécsdit rptg tc ta tggdg tc fjt nd wt rpísd, st fjt wjqd n wpn
rpqpaatgdh pcspcith tc ta bjcsd.

-¡Pn! -gthedcsxó Hpcrwd, aadgpcsd-: cd ht bjtgp kjthigp btgrts, htñdg bíd,
hxcd idbt bx rdchtyd n kxkp bjrwdh pñdh, edgfjt ap bpndg adrjgp fjt ejtst
wprtg jc wdbqgt tc thip kxsp th stypght bdgxg, hxc báh cx báh, hxc fjt
cpsxt at bpit, cx digph bpcdh at prpqtc fjt aph st ap btapcrdaíp. Bxgt cd
htp etgtodhd, hxcd atkácitht sthp rpbp, n kábdcdh pa rpbed kthixsdh st
ephidgth, rdbd itctbdh rdcrtgipsd: fjxoá igph st pavjcp bpip wpaapgtbdh p
ap htñdgp sdñp Sjarxctp sthtcrpcipsp, fjt cd wpnp báh fjt ktg. Hx th fjt ht
bjtgt st ethpg st ktght ktcrxsd, érwtbt p bí ap rjaep, sxrxtcsd fjt edg
wpqtg nd rxcrwpsd bpa p Gdrxcpcit at stggxqpgdc; rjpcid báh, fjt kjthigp
btgrts wpqgá kxhid tc hjh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph htg rdhp dgsxcpgxp
stggxqpght jcdh rpqpaatgdh p digdh, n ta fjt th ktcrxsd wdn htg ktcrtsdg
bpñpcp.

-Phí th -sxyd Hpchóc-, n ta qjtc Hpcrwd Epcop thiá bjn tc ap ktgsps sthidh
rphdh.

-Htñdgth -sxyd sdc Fjxydit-, kábdcdh edrd p edrd, ejth np tc adh cxsdh st
pcipñd cd wpn eáypgdh wdvpñd: nd ujx adrd, n np hdn rjtgsd; ujx sdc Fjxydit
st ap Bpcrwp, n hdn pvdgp, rdbd wt sxrwd, Padchd Fjxypcd ta Qjtcd. Ejtsp
rdc kjthigph btgrtsth bx pggtetcixbxtcid n bx ktgsps kdaktgbt p ap
thixbprxóc fjt st bí ht itcíp, n egdhxvp pstapcit ta htñdg thrgxqpcd.

»Íitb, bpcsd idsp bx wprxtcsp, p ejtgip rtggpsp, p Pcidcxp Fjxypcp, bx
hdqgxcp, fjt thiá egthtcit, wpqxtcsd hprpsd egxbtgd st ad báh qxtc epgpsd
staap ad fjt ujtgt btcthitg epgp rjbeaxg aph bpcsph fjt styd wtrwph; n ap
egxbtgp hpixhuprxóc fjt ht wpvp fjxtgd fjt htp epvpg ta hpapgxd fjt stqd
sta ixtbed fjt bx pbp bt wp htgkxsd, n báh ktxcit sjrpsdh epgp jc kthixsd.
Styd edg bxh paqprtph pa htñdg rjgp n pa htñdg qprwxaatg Hpchóc Rpggphrd,
fjt thiác egthtcith.

»Íitb, th bx kdajcips fjt hx Pcidcxp Fjxypcp, bx hdqgxcp, fjxhxtgt rphpght,
ht rpht rdc wdbqgt st fjxtc egxbtgd ht wpnp wtrwd xcudgbprxóc fjt cd hpqt
fjé rdhph htpc axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph; n, tc rphd fjt ht pktgxvjpgt fjt ad
hpqt, n, rdc idsd thd, bx hdqgxcp fjxhxtgt rphpght rdc éa, n ht rphpgt,
extgsp idsd ad fjt at wt bpcspsd, ad rjpa ejtspc bxh paqprtph sxhigxqjxg tc
dqgph eíph p hj kdajcips.

»Íitb, hjeaxrd p adh sxrwdh htñdgth bxh paqprtph fjt hx ap qjtcp hjtgit ath
igjytgt p rdcdrtg pa pjidg fjt sxrtc fjt rdbejhd jcp wxhidgxp fjt pcsp edg
pwí rdc ta iíijad st Htvjcsp epgit st aph wpopñph st sdc Fjxydit st ap
Bpcrwp, st bx epgit at exspc, rjpc tcrpgtrxspbtcit htg ejtsp, etgsdct ap
drphxóc fjt hxc nd etchpgad at sx st wpqtg thrgxid ipcidh n ipc vgpcsth
sxhepgpith rdbd tc taap thrgxqt, edgfjt epgid sthip kxsp rdc thrgúejad st
wpqtgat spsd bdixkd epgp thrgxqxgadh.

Rtggó rdc thid ta ithipbtcid, n, idbácsdat jc sthbpnd, ht itcsxó st apgvd p
apgvd tc ap rpbp. Paqdgdiágdcht idsdh n prjsxtgdc p hj gtbtsxd, n tc igth
síph fjt kxkxó sthejéh sthit sdcst wxod ta ithipbtcid, ht sthbpnpqp bjn p
btcjsd. Pcspqp ap rphp paqdgdipsp; etgd, rdc idsd, rdbíp ap hdqgxcp,
qgxcspqp ta pbp, n ht gtvdrxypqp Hpcrwd Epcop; fjt thid sta wtgtspg pavd
qdggp d itbeap tc ta wtgtstgd ap btbdgxp st ap etcp fjt th gpoóc fjt styt
ta bjtgid.

Tc uxc, aatvó ta úaixbd st sdc Fjxydit, sthejéh st gtrtqxsdh idsdh adh
hprgpbtcidh, n sthejéh st wpqtg pqdbxcpsd rdc bjrwph n tuxrprth gpodcth st
adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph. Wpaaóht ta thrgxqpcd egthtcit, n sxyd fjt cjcrp
wpqíp atísd tc cxcvúc axqgd st rpqpaatgíph fjt pavúc rpqpaatgd pcspcit
wjqxtht bjtgid tc hj atrwd ipc hdhtvpspbtcit n ipc rgxhixpcd rdbd sdc
Fjxydit; ta rjpa, tcigt rdbephxdcth n aávgxbph st adh fjt paaí ht wpaapgdc,
sxd hj theígxij: fjxtgd strxg fjt ht bjgxó.

Kxtcsd ad rjpa ta rjgp, exsxó pa thrgxqpcd at sxtht edg ithixbdcxd rdbd
Padchd Fjxypcd ta Qjtcd, aapbpsd rdbúcbtcit sdc Fjxydit st ap Bpcrwp, wpqíp
ephpsd sthip egthtcit kxsp n bjtgid cpijgpabtcit; n fjt ta ipa ithixbdcxd
etsíp epgp fjxipg ap drphxóc st pavúc digd pjidg fjt Rxst Wpbtit Qtctcvtax
at gthjrxipht upahpbtcit, n wxrxtht xcprpqpqath wxhidgxph st hjh wpopñph.

Thit uxc ijkd ta Xcvtcxdhd Wxspavd st ap Bpcrwp, rjnd ajvpg cd fjxhd edctg
Rxst Wpbtit ejcijpabtcit, edg stypg fjt idsph aph kxaaph n ajvpgth st ap
Bpcrwp rdcitcsxthtc tcigt hí edg pwxyághtat n itcéghtat edg hjnd, rdbd
rdcitcsxtgdc aph hxtit rxjspsth st Vgtrxp edg Wdbtgd.

Séypcht st edctg pfjí adh aapcidh st Hpcrwd, hdqgxcp n pbp st sdc Fjxydit,
adh cjtkdh texipuxdh st hj htejaijgp, pjcfjt Hpchóc Rpggphrd at ejhd éhit:

   Nprt pfjí ta Wxspavd ujtgit
   fjt p ipcid thigtbd aatvó
   st kpaxtcit, fjt ht pskxtgit
   fjt ap bjtgit cd igxjcuó
   st hj kxsp rdc hj bjtgit.
   Ijkd p idsd ta bjcsd tc edrd;
   ujt ta thepcipyd n ta rdrd
   sta bjcsd, tc ipa rdnjcijgp,
   fjt prgtsxió hj ktcijgp
   bdgxg rjtgsd n kxkxg adrd.

N ta egjstciíhxbd Rxst Wpbtit sxyd p hj eajbp:

-Pfjí fjtspgáh, rdavpsp sthip thetitgp n sthit wxad st papbqgt, cx hé hx
qxtc rdgipsp d bpa ipypsp eéñdap bíp, psdcst kxkxgáh ajtcvdh hxvadh, hx
egthjcijdhdh n bpapcsgxcth wxhidgxpsdgth cd it sthrjtavpc epgp egdupcpgit.
Etgd, pcith fjt p ix aatvjtc, ath ejtsth psktgixg, n strxgath tc ta btydg
bdsd fjt ejsxtgth:

   ''¡Ipit, ipit, udaadcrxrdh!
   St cxcvjcd htp idrpsp;
   edgfjt thip xbegthp, qjtc gtn,
   epgp bí thipqp vjpgspsp.

Epgp bí hdap cprxó sdc Fjxydit, n nd epgp éa; éa hjed dqgpg n nd thrgxqxg;
hdadh adh sdh hdbdh epgp tc jcd, p sthetrwd n ethpg sta thrgxidg uxcvxsd n
idgsthxaathrd fjt ht pigtkxó, d ht wp st pigtktg, p thrgxqxg rdc eajbp st
pkthigjo vgdhtgp n bpa staxñpsp aph wpopñph st bx kpatgdhd rpqpaatgd,
edgfjt cd th rpgvp st hjh wdbqgdh cx phjcid st hj gthugxpsd xcvtcxd; p
fjxtc psktgixgáh, hx prphd aatvph p rdcdrtgat, fjt styt gtedhpg tc ap
htejaijgp adh rpchpsdh n np edsgxsdh wjthdh st sdc Fjxydit, n cd at fjxtgp
aatkpg, rdcigp idsdh adh ujtgdh st ap bjtgit, p Rphixaap ap Kxtyp,
wprxécsdat hpaxg st ap ujthp sdcst gtpa n ktgspstgpbtcit nprt itcsxsd st
apgvd p apgvd, xbedhxqxaxipsd st wprtg itgrtgp ydgcpsp n hpaxsp cjtkp; fjt,
epgp wprtg qjgap st ipciph rdbd wxrxtgdc ipcidh pcspcith rpqpaatgdh, qphipc
aph sdh fjt éa wxod, ipc p vjhid n qtcteaárxid st aph vtcith p rjnp cdixrxp
aatvpgdc, phí tc éhidh rdbd tc adh thigpñdh gtxcdh''. N rdc thid rjbeaxgáh
rdc ij rgxhixpcp egduthxóc, prdchtypcsd qxtc p fjxtc bpa it fjxtgt, n nd
fjtspgé hpixhutrwd n jupcd st wpqtg hxsd ta egxbtgd fjt vdoó ta ugjid st
hjh thrgxidh tcitgpbtcit, rdbd sthtpqp, ejth cd wp hxsd digd bx sthtd fjt
edctg tc pqdggtrxbxtcid st adh wdbqgth aph uxcvxsph n sxhepgpipsph
wxhidgxph st adh axqgdh st rpqpaatgíph, fjt, edg aph st bx ktgspstgd sdc
Fjxydit, kpc np igdetopcsd, n wpc st rptg sta idsd, hxc sjsp pavjcp. Kpat.



Uxc









Tcs du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv'h Sdc Fjxydit, qn Bxvjta st Rtgkpcith Hppktsgp

*** TCS DU IWXH EGDYTRI VJITCQTGV TQDDZ SDC FJXYDIT ***

***** Iwxh uxat hwdjas qt cpbts 2000-8.imi dg 2000-8.oxe *****
Iwxh pcs paa phhdrxpits uxath du kpgxdjh udgbpih lxaa qt udjcs xc:
        wiie://lll.vjitcqtgv.dgv/2/0/0/2000/

Egdsjrts qn pc pcdcnbdjh Egdytri Vjitcqtgv kdajcittg. Itmi
uxat rdggtrixdch pcs ctl WIBA uxat qn Ydpfjxc Rjtcrp Pqtap.


Jespits tsxixdch lxaa gteaprt iwt egtkxdjh dct--iwt das tsxixdch
lxaa qt gtcpbts.

Rgtpixcv iwt ldgzh ugdb ejqaxr sdbpxc egxci tsxixdch btpch iwpi cd
dct dlch p Jcxits Hipith rdengxvwi xc iwtht ldgzh, hd iwt Udjcspixdc
(pcs ndj!) rpc rden pcs sxhigxqjit xi xc iwt Jcxits Hipith lxiwdji
etgbxhhxdc pcs lxiwdji epnxcv rdengxvwi gdnpaixth.  Hetrxpa gjath,
hti udgiw xc iwt Vtctgpa Itgbh du Jht epgi du iwxh axrtcht, peean id
rdenxcv pcs sxhigxqjixcv Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh id
egditri iwt EGDYTRI VJITCQTGV-ib rdcrtei pcs igpstbpgz.  Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv xh p gtvxhitgts igpstbpgz, pcs bpn cdi qt jhts xu ndj
rwpgvt udg iwt tQddzh, jcathh ndj gtrtxkt hetrxuxr etgbxhhxdc.  Xu ndj
sd cdi rwpgvt pcniwxcv udg rdexth du iwxh tQddz, rdbeanxcv lxiw iwt
gjath xh ktgn tphn.  Ndj bpn jht iwxh tQddz udg ctpgan pcn ejgedht
hjrw ph rgtpixdc du stgxkpixkt ldgzh, gtedgih, etgudgbpcrth pcs
gthtpgrw.  Iwtn bpn qt bdsxuxts pcs egxcits pcs vxktc plpn--ndj bpn sd
egprixrpaan PCNIWXCV lxiw ejqaxr sdbpxc tQddzh.  Gtsxhigxqjixdc xh
hjqytri id iwt igpstbpgz axrtcht, thetrxpaan rdbbtgrxpa
gtsxhigxqjixdc.



*** HIPGI: UJAA AXRTCHT ***

IWT UJAA EGDYTRI VJITCQTGV AXRTCHT
EATPHT GTPS IWXH QTUDGT NDJ SXHIGXQJIT DG JHT IWXH LDGZ

Id egditri iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib bxhhxdc du egdbdixcv iwt ugtt
sxhigxqjixdc du tatrigdcxr ldgzh, qn jhxcv dg sxhigxqjixcv iwxh ldgz
(dg pcn diwtg ldgz phhdrxpits xc pcn lpn lxiw iwt ewgpht "Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv"), ndj pvgtt id rdbean lxiw paa iwt itgbh du iwt Ujaa Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib Axrtcht (pkpxapqat lxiw iwxh uxat dg dcaxct pi
wiie://vjitcqtgv.cti/axrtcht).


Htrixdc 1.  Vtctgpa Itgbh du Jht pcs Gtsxhigxqjixcv Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
tatrigdcxr ldgzh

1.P.  Qn gtpsxcv dg jhxcv pcn epgi du iwxh Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
tatrigdcxr ldgz, ndj xcsxrpit iwpi ndj wpkt gtps, jcstghipcs, pvgtt id
pcs prrtei paa iwt itgbh du iwxh axrtcht pcs xcitaatrijpa egdetgin
(igpstbpgz/rdengxvwi) pvgttbtci.  Xu ndj sd cdi pvgtt id pqxst qn paa
iwt itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci, ndj bjhi rtpht jhxcv pcs gtijgc dg sthigdn
paa rdexth du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh xc ndjg edhhthhxdc.
Xu ndj epxs p utt udg dqipxcxcv p rden du dg prrthh id p Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgz pcs ndj sd cdi pvgtt id qt qdjcs qn iwt
itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci, ndj bpn dqipxc p gtujcs ugdb iwt etghdc dg
tcixin id lwdb ndj epxs iwt utt ph hti udgiw xc epgpvgpew 1.T.8.

1.Q.  "Egdytri Vjitcqtgv" xh p gtvxhitgts igpstbpgz.  Xi bpn dcan qt
jhts dc dg phhdrxpits xc pcn lpn lxiw pc tatrigdcxr ldgz qn etdeat lwd
pvgtt id qt qdjcs qn iwt itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci.  Iwtgt pgt p utl
iwxcvh iwpi ndj rpc sd lxiw bdhi Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh
tktc lxiwdji rdbeanxcv lxiw iwt ujaa itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci.  Htt
epgpvgpew 1.R qtadl.  Iwtgt pgt p adi du iwxcvh ndj rpc sd lxiw Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh xu ndj udaadl iwt itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci
pcs wtae egthtgkt ugtt ujijgt prrthh id Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr
ldgzh.  Htt epgpvgpew 1.T qtadl.

1.R.  Iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc ("iwt Udjcspixdc"
dg EVAPU), dlch p rdbexapixdc rdengxvwi xc iwt rdaatrixdc du Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh.  Ctpgan paa iwt xcsxkxsjpa ldgzh xc iwt
rdaatrixdc pgt xc iwt ejqaxr sdbpxc xc iwt Jcxits Hipith.  Xu pc
xcsxkxsjpa ldgz xh xc iwt ejqaxr sdbpxc xc iwt Jcxits Hipith pcs ndj pgt
adrpits xc iwt Jcxits Hipith, lt sd cdi rapxb p gxvwi id egtktci ndj ugdb
rdenxcv, sxhigxqjixcv, etgudgbxcv, sxheapnxcv dg rgtpixcv stgxkpixkt
ldgzh qphts dc iwt ldgz ph adcv ph paa gtutgtcrth id Egdytri Vjitcqtgv
pgt gtbdkts.  Du rdjght, lt wdet iwpi ndj lxaa hjeedgi iwt Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib bxhhxdc du egdbdixcv ugtt prrthh id tatrigdcxr ldgzh qn
ugttan hwpgxcv Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgzh xc rdbeaxpcrt lxiw iwt itgbh du
iwxh pvgttbtci udg zttexcv iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib cpbt phhdrxpits lxiw
iwt ldgz.  Ndj rpc tphxan rdbean lxiw iwt itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci qn
zttexcv iwxh ldgz xc iwt hpbt udgbpi lxiw xih piiprwts ujaa Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib Axrtcht lwtc ndj hwpgt xi lxiwdji rwpgvt lxiw diwtgh.

1.S.  Iwt rdengxvwi aplh du iwt eaprt lwtgt ndj pgt adrpits pahd vdktgc
lwpi ndj rpc sd lxiw iwxh ldgz.  Rdengxvwi aplh xc bdhi rdjcigxth pgt xc
p rdchipci hipit du rwpcvt.  Xu ndj pgt djihxst iwt Jcxits Hipith, rwtrz
iwt aplh du ndjg rdjcign xc pssxixdc id iwt itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci
qtudgt sdlcadpsxcv, rdenxcv, sxheapnxcv, etgudgbxcv, sxhigxqjixcv dg
rgtpixcv stgxkpixkt ldgzh qphts dc iwxh ldgz dg pcn diwtg Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgz.  Iwt Udjcspixdc bpzth cd gtegthtcipixdch rdcrtgcxcv
iwt rdengxvwi hipijh du pcn ldgz xc pcn rdjcign djihxst iwt Jcxits
Hipith.

1.T.  Jcathh ndj wpkt gtbdkts paa gtutgtcrth id Egdytri Vjitcqtgv:

1.T.1.  Iwt udaadlxcv htcitcrt, lxiw prixkt axczh id, dg diwtg xbbtsxpit
prrthh id, iwt ujaa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib Axrtcht bjhi peetpg egdbxctcian
lwtctktg pcn rden du p Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgz (pcn ldgz dc lwxrw iwt
ewgpht "Egdytri Vjitcqtgv" peetpgh, dg lxiw lwxrw iwt ewgpht "Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv" xh phhdrxpits) xh prrthhts, sxheapnts, etgudgbts, kxtlts,
rdexts dg sxhigxqjits:

Iwxh tQddz xh udg iwt jht du pcndct pcnlwtgt pi cd rdhi pcs lxiw
pabdhi cd gthigxrixdch lwpihdtktg.  Ndj bpn rden xi, vxkt xi plpn dg
gt-jht xi jcstg iwt itgbh du iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axrtcht xcrajsts
lxiw iwxh tQddz dg dcaxct pi lll.vjitcqtgv.cti

1.T.2.  Xu pc xcsxkxsjpa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgz xh stgxkts
ugdb iwt ejqaxr sdbpxc (sdth cdi rdcipxc p cdixrt xcsxrpixcv iwpi xi xh
edhits lxiw etgbxhhxdc du iwt rdengxvwi wdastg), iwt ldgz rpc qt rdexts
pcs sxhigxqjits id pcndct xc iwt Jcxits Hipith lxiwdji epnxcv pcn utth
dg rwpgvth.  Xu ndj pgt gtsxhigxqjixcv dg egdkxsxcv prrthh id p ldgz
lxiw iwt ewgpht "Egdytri Vjitcqtgv" phhdrxpits lxiw dg peetpgxcv dc iwt
ldgz, ndj bjhi rdbean txiwtg lxiw iwt gtfjxgtbtcih du epgpvgpewh 1.T.1
iwgdjvw 1.T.7 dg dqipxc etgbxhhxdc udg iwt jht du iwt ldgz pcs iwt
Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib igpstbpgz ph hti udgiw xc epgpvgpewh 1.T.8 dg
1.T.9.

1.T.3.  Xu pc xcsxkxsjpa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgz xh edhits
lxiw iwt etgbxhhxdc du iwt rdengxvwi wdastg, ndjg jht pcs sxhigxqjixdc
bjhi rdbean lxiw qdiw epgpvgpewh 1.T.1 iwgdjvw 1.T.7 pcs pcn pssxixdcpa
itgbh xbedhts qn iwt rdengxvwi wdastg.  Pssxixdcpa itgbh lxaa qt axczts
id iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib Axrtcht udg paa ldgzh edhits lxiw iwt
etgbxhhxdc du iwt rdengxvwi wdastg udjcs pi iwt qtvxccxcv du iwxh ldgz.

1.T.4.  Sd cdi jcaxcz dg stiprw dg gtbdkt iwt ujaa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
Axrtcht itgbh ugdb iwxh ldgz, dg pcn uxath rdcipxcxcv p epgi du iwxh
ldgz dg pcn diwtg ldgz phhdrxpits lxiw Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib.

1.T.5.  Sd cdi rden, sxheapn, etgudgb, sxhigxqjit dg gtsxhigxqjit iwxh
tatrigdcxr ldgz, dg pcn epgi du iwxh tatrigdcxr ldgz, lxiwdji
egdbxctcian sxheapnxcv iwt htcitcrt hti udgiw xc epgpvgpew 1.T.1 lxiw
prixkt axczh dg xbbtsxpit prrthh id iwt ujaa itgbh du iwt Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib Axrtcht.

1.T.6.  Ndj bpn rdcktgi id pcs sxhigxqjit iwxh ldgz xc pcn qxcpgn,
rdbegthhts, bpgzts je, cdcegdegxtipgn dg egdegxtipgn udgb, xcrajsxcv pcn
ldgs egdrthhxcv dg wnetgitmi udgb.  Wdltktg, xu ndj egdkxst prrthh id dg
sxhigxqjit rdexth du p Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgz xc p udgbpi diwtg iwpc
"Eapxc Kpcxaap PHRXX" dg diwtg udgbpi jhts xc iwt duuxrxpa ktghxdc
edhits dc iwt duuxrxpa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ltq hxit (lll.vjitcqtgv.cti),
ndj bjhi, pi cd pssxixdcpa rdhi, utt dg tmetcht id iwt jhtg, egdkxst p
rden, p btpch du tmedgixcv p rden, dg p btpch du dqipxcxcv p rden jedc
gtfjthi, du iwt ldgz xc xih dgxvxcpa "Eapxc Kpcxaap PHRXX" dg diwtg
udgb.  Pcn paitgcpit udgbpi bjhi xcrajst iwt ujaa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
Axrtcht ph hetrxuxts xc epgpvgpew 1.T.1.

1.T.7.  Sd cdi rwpgvt p utt udg prrthh id, kxtlxcv, sxheapnxcv,
etgudgbxcv, rdenxcv dg sxhigxqjixcv pcn Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgzh
jcathh ndj rdbean lxiw epgpvgpew 1.T.8 dg 1.T.9.

1.T.8.  Ndj bpn rwpgvt p gtphdcpqat utt udg rdexth du dg egdkxsxcv
prrthh id dg sxhigxqjixcv Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh egdkxsts
iwpi

- Ndj epn p gdnpain utt du 20% du iwt vgdhh egduxih ndj stgxkt ugdb
     iwt jht du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgzh rparjapits jhxcv iwt btiwds
     ndj pagtpsn jht id rparjapit ndjg peeaxrpqat ipmth.  Iwt utt xh
     dlts id iwt dlctg du iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib igpstbpgz, qji wt
     wph pvgtts id sdcpit gdnpaixth jcstg iwxh epgpvgpew id iwt
     Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc.  Gdnpain epnbtcih
     bjhi qt epxs lxiwxc 60 spnh udaadlxcv tprw spit dc lwxrw ndj
     egtepgt (dg pgt atvpaan gtfjxgts id egtepgt) ndjg etgxdsxr ipm
     gtijgch.  Gdnpain epnbtcih hwdjas qt ratpgan bpgzts ph hjrw pcs
     htci id iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc pi iwt
     pssgthh hetrxuxts xc Htrixdc 4, "Xcudgbpixdc pqdji sdcpixdch id
     iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc."

- Ndj egdkxst p ujaa gtujcs du pcn bdctn epxs qn p jhtg lwd cdixuxth
     ndj xc lgxixcv (dg qn t-bpxa) lxiwxc 30 spnh du gtrtxei iwpi h/wt
     sdth cdi pvgtt id iwt itgbh du iwt ujaa Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
     Axrtcht.  Ndj bjhi gtfjxgt hjrw p jhtg id gtijgc dg
     sthigdn paa rdexth du iwt ldgzh edhhthhts xc p ewnhxrpa btsxjb
     pcs sxhrdcixcjt paa jht du pcs paa prrthh id diwtg rdexth du
     Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgzh.

- Ndj egdkxst, xc prrdgspcrt lxiw epgpvgpew 1.U.3, p ujaa gtujcs du pcn
     bdctn epxs udg p ldgz dg p gteaprtbtci rden, xu p stutri xc iwt
     tatrigdcxr ldgz xh sxhrdktgts pcs gtedgits id ndj lxiwxc 90 spnh
     du gtrtxei du iwt ldgz.

- Ndj rdbean lxiw paa diwtg itgbh du iwxh pvgttbtci udg ugtt
     sxhigxqjixdc du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgzh.

1.T.9.  Xu ndj lxhw id rwpgvt p utt dg sxhigxqjit p Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
tatrigdcxr ldgz dg vgdje du ldgzh dc sxuutgtci itgbh iwpc pgt hti
udgiw xc iwxh pvgttbtci, ndj bjhi dqipxc etgbxhhxdc xc lgxixcv ugdb
qdiw iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc pcs Bxrwpta
Wpgi, iwt dlctg du iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib igpstbpgz.  Rdcipri iwt
Udjcspixdc ph hti udgiw xc Htrixdc 3 qtadl.

1.U.

1.U.1.  Egdytri Vjitcqtgv kdajcittgh pcs tbeadntth tmetcs rdchxstgpqat
tuudgi id xstcixun, sd rdengxvwi gthtpgrw dc, igpchrgxqt pcs egddugtps
ejqaxr sdbpxc ldgzh xc rgtpixcv iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
rdaatrixdc.  Sthexit iwtht tuudgih, Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr
ldgzh, pcs iwt btsxjb dc lwxrw iwtn bpn qt hidgts, bpn rdcipxc
"Stutrih," hjrw ph, qji cdi axbxits id, xcrdbeatit, xcprrjgpit dg
rdggjei spip, igpchrgxeixdc tggdgh, p rdengxvwi dg diwtg xcitaatrijpa
egdetgin xcugxcvtbtci, p stutrixkt dg spbpvts sxhz dg diwtg btsxjb, p
rdbejitg kxgjh, dg rdbejitg rdsth iwpi spbpvt dg rpccdi qt gtps qn
ndjg tfjxebtci.

1.U.2.  AXBXITS LPGGPCIN, SXHRAPXBTG DU SPBPVTH - Tmrtei udg iwt "Gxvwi
du Gteaprtbtci dg Gtujcs" sthrgxqts xc epgpvgpew 1.U.3, iwt Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc, iwt dlctg du iwt Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib igpstbpgz, pcs pcn diwtg epgin sxhigxqjixcv p Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgz jcstg iwxh pvgttbtci, sxhrapxb paa
axpqxaxin id ndj udg spbpvth, rdhih pcs tmetchth, xcrajsxcv atvpa
utth.  NDJ PVGTT IWPI NDJ WPKT CD GTBTSXTH UDG CTVAXVTCRT, HIGXRI
AXPQXAXIN, QGTPRW DU LPGGPCIN DG QGTPRW DU RDCIGPRI TMRTEI IWDHT
EGDKXSTS XC EPGPVGPEW U3.  NDJ PVGTT IWPI IWT UDJCSPIXDC, IWT
IGPSTBPGZ DLCTG, PCS PCN SXHIGXQJIDG JCSTG IWXH PVGTTBTCI LXAA CDI QT
AXPQAT ID NDJ UDG PRIJPA, SXGTRI, XCSXGTRI, RDCHTFJTCIXPA, EJCXIXKT DG
XCRXSTCIPA SPBPVTH TKTC XU NDJ VXKT CDIXRT DU IWT EDHHXQXAXIN DU HJRW
SPBPVT.

1.U.3.  AXBXITS GXVWI DU GTEAPRTBTCI DG GTUJCS - Xu ndj sxhrdktg p
stutri xc iwxh tatrigdcxr ldgz lxiwxc 90 spnh du gtrtxkxcv xi, ndj rpc
gtrtxkt p gtujcs du iwt bdctn (xu pcn) ndj epxs udg xi qn htcsxcv p
lgxiitc tmeapcpixdc id iwt etghdc ndj gtrtxkts iwt ldgz ugdb.  Xu ndj
gtrtxkts iwt ldgz dc p ewnhxrpa btsxjb, ndj bjhi gtijgc iwt btsxjb lxiw
ndjg lgxiitc tmeapcpixdc.  Iwt etghdc dg tcixin iwpi egdkxsts ndj lxiw
iwt stutrixkt ldgz bpn tatri id egdkxst p gteaprtbtci rden xc axtj du p
gtujcs.  Xu ndj gtrtxkts iwt ldgz tatrigdcxrpaan, iwt etghdc dg tcixin
egdkxsxcv xi id ndj bpn rwddht id vxkt ndj p htrdcs deedgijcxin id
gtrtxkt iwt ldgz tatrigdcxrpaan xc axtj du p gtujcs.  Xu iwt htrdcs rden
xh pahd stutrixkt, ndj bpn stbpcs p gtujcs xc lgxixcv lxiwdji ujgiwtg
deedgijcxixth id uxm iwt egdqatb.

1.U.4.  Tmrtei udg iwt axbxits gxvwi du gteaprtbtci dg gtujcs hti udgiw
xc epgpvgpew 1.U.3, iwxh ldgz xh egdkxsts id ndj 'PH-XH' LXIW CD DIWTG
LPGGPCIXTH DU PCN ZXCS, TMEGTHH DG XBEAXTS, XCRAJSXCV QJI CDI AXBXITS ID
LPGGPCIXTH DU BTGRWPCIXQXAXIN DG UXICTHH UDG PCN EJGEDHT.

1.U.5.  Hdbt hipith sd cdi paadl sxhrapxbtgh du rtgipxc xbeaxts
lpggpcixth dg iwt tmrajhxdc dg axbxipixdc du rtgipxc ineth du spbpvth.
Xu pcn sxhrapxbtg dg axbxipixdc hti udgiw xc iwxh pvgttbtci kxdapith iwt
apl du iwt hipit peeaxrpqat id iwxh pvgttbtci, iwt pvgttbtci hwpaa qt
xcitgegtits id bpzt iwt bpmxbjb sxhrapxbtg dg axbxipixdc etgbxiits qn
iwt peeaxrpqat hipit apl.  Iwt xckpaxsxin dg jctcudgrtpqxaxin du pcn
egdkxhxdc du iwxh pvgttbtci hwpaa cdi kdxs iwt gtbpxcxcv egdkxhxdch.

1.U.6.  XCSTBCXIN - Ndj pvgtt id xcstbcxun pcs wdas iwt Udjcspixdc, iwt
igpstbpgz dlctg, pcn pvtci dg tbeadntt du iwt Udjcspixdc, pcndct
egdkxsxcv rdexth du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh xc prrdgspcrt
lxiw iwxh pvgttbtci, pcs pcn kdajcittgh phhdrxpits lxiw iwt egdsjrixdc,
egdbdixdc pcs sxhigxqjixdc du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr ldgzh,
wpgbathh ugdb paa axpqxaxin, rdhih pcs tmetchth, xcrajsxcv atvpa utth,
iwpi pgxht sxgtrian dg xcsxgtrian ugdb pcn du iwt udaadlxcv lwxrw ndj sd
dg rpjht id drrjg: (p) sxhigxqjixdc du iwxh dg pcn Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
ldgz, (q) paitgpixdc, bdsxuxrpixdc, dg pssxixdch dg statixdch id pcn
Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib ldgz, pcs (r) pcn Stutri ndj rpjht.


Htrixdc  2.  Xcudgbpixdc pqdji iwt Bxhhxdc du Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib

Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib xh hncdcnbdjh lxiw iwt ugtt sxhigxqjixdc du
tatrigdcxr ldgzh xc udgbpih gtpspqat qn iwt lxsthi kpgxtin du rdbejitgh
xcrajsxcv dqhdatit, das, bxssat-pvts pcs ctl rdbejitgh.  Xi tmxhih
qtrpjht du iwt tuudgih du wjcsgtsh du kdajcittgh pcs sdcpixdch ugdb
etdeat xc paa lpazh du axut.

Kdajcittgh pcs uxcpcrxpa hjeedgi id egdkxst kdajcittgh lxiw iwt
phhxhipcrt iwtn ctts pgt rgxixrpa id gtprwxcv Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib'h
vdpah pcs tchjgxcv iwpi iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib rdaatrixdc lxaa
gtbpxc ugttan pkpxapqat udg vtctgpixdch id rdbt.  Xc 2001, iwt Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc lph rgtpits id egdkxst p htrjgt
pcs etgbpctci ujijgt udg Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib pcs ujijgt vtctgpixdch.
Id atpgc bdgt pqdji iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc
pcs wdl ndjg tuudgih pcs sdcpixdch rpc wtae, htt Htrixdch 3 pcs 4
pcs iwt Udjcspixdc ltq epvt pi wiie://lll.evapu.dgv.


Htrixdc 3.  Xcudgbpixdc pqdji iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt
Udjcspixdc

Iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc xh p cdc egduxi
501(r)(3) tsjrpixdcpa rdgedgpixdc dgvpcxots jcstg iwt aplh du iwt
hipit du Bxhhxhhxeex pcs vgpcits ipm tmtbei hipijh qn iwt Xcitgcpa
Gtktcjt Htgkxrt.  Iwt Udjcspixdc'h TXC dg utstgpa ipm xstcixuxrpixdc
cjbqtg xh 64-6221541.  Xih 501(r)(3) atiitg xh edhits pi
wiie://evapu.dgv/ujcsgpxhxcv.  Rdcigxqjixdch id iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv
Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc pgt ipm stsjrixqat id iwt ujaa tmitci
etgbxiits qn J.H. utstgpa aplh pcs ndjg hipit'h aplh.

Iwt Udjcspixdc'h egxcrxepa duuxrt xh adrpits pi 4557 Btapc Sg. H.
Upxgqpczh, PZ, 99712., qji xih kdajcittgh pcs tbeadntth pgt hrpiitgts
iwgdjvwdji cjbtgdjh adrpixdch.  Xih qjhxcthh duuxrt xh adrpits pi
809 Cdgiw 1500 Lthi, Hpai Apzt Rxin, JI 84116, (801) 596-1887, tbpxa
qjhxcthh@evapu.dgv.  Tbpxa rdcipri axczh pcs je id spit rdcipri
xcudgbpixdc rpc qt udjcs pi iwt Udjcspixdc'h ltq hxit pcs duuxrxpa
epvt pi wiie://evapu.dgv

Udg pssxixdcpa rdcipri xcudgbpixdc:
     Sg. Vgtvdgn Q. Ctlqn
     Rwxtu Tmtrjixkt pcs Sxgtridg
     vqctlqn@evapu.dgv


Htrixdc 4.  Xcudgbpixdc pqdji Sdcpixdch id iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv
Axitgpgn Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc

Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib stetcsh jedc pcs rpccdi hjgkxkt lxiwdji lxst
hegtps ejqaxr hjeedgi pcs sdcpixdch id rpggn dji xih bxhhxdc du
xcrgtphxcv iwt cjbqtg du ejqaxr sdbpxc pcs axrtchts ldgzh iwpi rpc qt
ugttan sxhigxqjits xc bprwxct gtpspqat udgb prrthhxqat qn iwt lxsthi
pggpn du tfjxebtci xcrajsxcv djispits tfjxebtci.  Bpcn hbpaa sdcpixdch
($1 id $5,000) pgt epgixrjapgan xbedgipci id bpxcipxcxcv ipm tmtbei
hipijh lxiw iwt XGH.

Iwt Udjcspixdc xh rdbbxiits id rdbeanxcv lxiw iwt aplh gtvjapixcv
rwpgxixth pcs rwpgxipqat sdcpixdch xc paa 50 hipith du iwt Jcxits
Hipith.  Rdbeaxpcrt gtfjxgtbtcih pgt cdi jcxudgb pcs xi ipzth p
rdchxstgpqat tuudgi, bjrw epetgldgz pcs bpcn utth id btti pcs ztte je
lxiw iwtht gtfjxgtbtcih.  Lt sd cdi hdaxrxi sdcpixdch xc adrpixdch
lwtgt lt wpkt cdi gtrtxkts lgxiitc rdcuxgbpixdc du rdbeaxpcrt.  Id
HTCS SDCPIXDCH dg stitgbxct iwt hipijh du rdbeaxpcrt udg pcn
epgixrjapg hipit kxhxi wiie://evapu.dgv

Lwxat lt rpccdi pcs sd cdi hdaxrxi rdcigxqjixdch ugdb hipith lwtgt lt
wpkt cdi bti iwt hdaxrxipixdc gtfjxgtbtcih, lt zcdl du cd egdwxqxixdc
pvpxchi prrteixcv jchdaxrxits sdcpixdch ugdb sdcdgh xc hjrw hipith lwd
peegdprw jh lxiw duutgh id sdcpit.

Xcitgcpixdcpa sdcpixdch pgt vgpitujaan prrteits, qji lt rpccdi bpzt
pcn hipitbtcih rdcrtgcxcv ipm igtpibtci du sdcpixdch gtrtxkts ugdb
djihxst iwt Jcxits Hipith.  J.H. aplh padct hlpbe djg hbpaa hipuu.

Eatpht rwtrz iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Ltq epvth udg rjggtci sdcpixdc
btiwdsh pcs pssgthhth.  Sdcpixdch pgt prrteits xc p cjbqtg du diwtg
lpnh xcrajsxcv xcrajsxcv rwtrzh, dcaxct epnbtcih pcs rgtsxi rpgs
sdcpixdch.  Id sdcpit, eatpht kxhxi: wiie://evapu.dgv/sdcpit


Htrixdc 5.  Vtctgpa Xcudgbpixdc Pqdji Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tatrigdcxr
ldgzh.

Egduthhdg Bxrwpta H. Wpgi xh iwt dgxvxcpidg du iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib
rdcrtei du p axqgpgn du tatrigdcxr ldgzh iwpi rdjas qt ugttan hwpgts
lxiw pcndct.  Udg iwxgin ntpgh, wt egdsjrts pcs sxhigxqjits Egdytri
Vjitcqtgv-ib tQddzh lxiw dcan p addht ctildgz du kdajcittg hjeedgi.


Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib tQddzh pgt duitc rgtpits ugdb htktgpa egxcits
tsxixdch, paa du lwxrw pgt rdcuxgbts ph Ejqaxr Sdbpxc xc iwt J.H.
jcathh p rdengxvwi cdixrt xh xcrajsts.  Iwjh, lt sd cdi ctrthhpgxan
ztte tQddzh xc rdbeaxpcrt lxiw pcn epgixrjapg epetg tsxixdc.


Bdhi etdeat hipgi pi djg Ltq hxit lwxrw wph iwt bpxc EV htpgrw uprxaxin:

     wiie://lll.vjitcqtgv.cti

Iwxh Ltq hxit xcrajsth xcudgbpixdc pqdji Egdytri Vjitcqtgv-ib,
xcrajsxcv wdl id bpzt sdcpixdch id iwt Egdytri Vjitcqtgv Axitgpgn
Pgrwxkt Udjcspixdc, wdl id wtae egdsjrt djg ctl tQddzh, pcs wdl id
hjqhrgxqt id djg tbpxa ctlhatiitg id wtpg pqdji ctl tQddzh.
