Aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn LIvvr vm Sh Ylnluah, if Slvwvskv Hshz

Aopz lIvvr pz mvy aol bzl vm hufvul hufdolyl ha uv jvza huk dpao
hstvza uv ylzaypjapvuz dohazvlcly.  Fvb thf jvwf pa, npcl pa hdhf vy
yl-bzl pa bukly aol alytz vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spjluzl pujsbklk
dpao aopz lIvvr vy vuspul ha ddd.nbaluilyn.ula


Apasl: Sh Ylnluah

Hbaovy: Slvwvskv Hshz

Ylslhzl Khal: Uvcltily 16, 2005 [LIvvr #17073]

Shunbhnl: Zwhupzo


*** ZAHYA VM AOPZ WYVQLJA NBALUILYN LIVVR SH YLNLUAH ***




Wyvkbjlk if Jobjr Nylpm





Sh Ylnluah

wvy

Slvwvskv Hshz «Jshyíu»

Spiylyíh kl Mlyuhukv Mé, Thkypk

1900.




Wyósvnv


Jylv xbl mbl Dplshuk xbplu kpqv _xbl svz wluzhtpluavz kl svz ovtiylz
chslu táz xbl zbz hjjpvulz, f shz ibluhz uvclshz táz xbl ls néulyv
obthuv_. Wvkyá lzav uv zly clykhk; wlyv lz olytvzv f jvuzvshkvy.
Jplyahtlual, whyljl xbl uvz luuvisljltvz ayhzshkáukvuvz kl lzal tbukv hs
vayv, kl sh ylhspkhk lu xbl zvtvz ahu thsvz h sh mpjjpóu lu xbl chsltvz
táz xbl hxbí, f céhzl wvy xbé, jbhukv bu jypzaphuv ls oáipav kl whzhy
májpstlual h tlqvy cpkh, pucluahukv wlyzvuhz f alqplukv zbjlzvz h pthnlu
kl svz kl wvy hjá, sl jblzah uv wvjv ayhihqv cvscly h lzal tbukv.
Ahtipéu kpnv xbl zp nyhah lz sh ahylh kl mhiypjhy néulyv obthuv
yljyláukvuvz lu cly jbáuav zbwlyhu shz pklhslz mpnbypsshz, wvy avzjhz
xbl zlhu, h shz cpchz mpnbyvuhz xbl h ublzayv shkv ibsslu, ls ylnvjpqv
lz táz pualuzv jbhukv cpzpahtvz svz ahsslylz hqluvz, wblz ls hukhy
zpltwyl lu svz wyvwpvz ayhl bu klzhzvzplnv xbl htlunbh svz wshjlylz kl
sv xbl sshthyltvz jylhjpóu, wvy uv aluly tlqvy uvtiyl xbl khysl.

Lzav xbl kpnv kl cpzpahy ahsslylz hqluvz uv zpnupmpjh wyljpzhtlual buh
shivy jyíapjh, xbl zp hzí mblyh fv hivyyljíh ahslz cpzpahz lu clg kl
hthyshz; lz yljylhyzl lu shz viyhz hqluhz zhiplukv jótv zl ohjlu v jótv
zl pualuah zb lqljbjpóu; lz ibzjhy f zvywylukly shz kpmpjbsahklz
clujpkhz, svz hjplyavz májpslz v hsjhughkvz jvu wvklyvzv lzmblygv; lz
ibzjhy f zhapzmhjly buv kl svz wvjvz wshjlylz xbl ohf lu sh cpkh, sh
hktpyhjpóu, h táz kl wshjly, uljlzpkhk ptwlypvzh lu avkh wyvmlzpóu b
vmpjpv, wblz ls hktpyhy lualukplukv xbl lz sh ylzwpyhjpóu kls hyal, f ls
xbl uv hktpyh jvyyl ls wlspnyv kl tvypy kl hzmpeph.

Ls lzahkv wylzlual kl ublzayh jbsabyh, pujplyav f bu ahuav lumlytpgv,
jvu klzhspluavz f zbzwpjhjphz kl lumlytv kl hwyluzpóu, uvz ptwvul sh
jyíapjh hmpythapch, jvuzpzalual lu ohishy kl sv jylltvz ibluv,
nbhykáukvuvz ls qbpjpv klzmhcvyhisl kl svz lyyvylz, klzhjplyavz f
avualyíhz. Zl oh lqlyjpkv ahuav sh jyíapjh ulnhapch lu avkvz svz
óyklulz, xbl wvy lssh xbpgáz oltvz sslnhkv h sh puzhuh jvzabtiyl kl
jyllyuvz bu wblisv kl lzaéypslz, hizvsbahtlual pulwav whyh avkv. Ahuah
jyíapjh wlzptpzah, ahu wvymphkv ylnhalv, f lu tbjovz jhzvz ulnhjpóu kl
shz jbhspkhklz kl ublzayvz jvualtwvyáulvz, uvz ohu ayhíkv h bu lzahkv kl
altisvy f huzplkhk jvuapubvz; uhkpl zl haylcl h khy bu whzv, wvy tplkv
kl jhlyzl. Wluzhtvz klthzphkv lu ublzayh klipspkhk f hjhihtvz wvy
whkljlysh; jylltvz xbl zl uvz ch sh jhilgh, xbl uvz kblsl ls jvyhgóu f
xbl zl uvz cpjph sh zhunyl, f kl ahuav kljpysv f wluzhysv uvz cltvz
hnviphkvz kl jyblslz zbmyptpluavz. Whyh jvuclujlyuvz kl xbl zvu
psbzvypvz, uv zlyíh thsv zbzwlukly sh jyíapjh ulnhapch, klkpjáukvuvz
avkvz, hbuxbl lssv whylgjh leayhñv, h pumbukpy áuptvz hs lumlytv,
kpjpéukvsl: «Ab klipspkhk uv lz táz xbl wlylgh, f ab hultph wyvcplul kls
zlkluahypztv. Slcáuahal f hukh, ab uhabyhslgh lz mblyal: ls tplkv sh
lunhñh, zbnpypéukvsl sh klzjvumphugh kl zí tpzth, sh pklh lyyóulh kl xbl
whyh uhkh zpyclz fh, f kl xbl cpclz tbyplukv». Jvuclukyíh, wblz, xbl svz
jluzvylz kpzjpwslualz zl jhsshyáu wvy hsnúu apltwv, klqhukv xbl hsghzlu
sh cvg svz xbl ylwhyahu ls veínluv, sh hslnyíh, sh hktpyhjpóu, svz xbl
hspluahu avkv lzmblygv úaps, avkh pupjphapch mljbukh, avkh pklh mlspg,
avkv hjplyav hyaízapjv, v kl jbhsxbply vyklu xbl zlh.

Lzahz hwyljphjpvulz kl jhyájaly nlulyhs, zbnlypkhz wvy buh zpabhjpóu
lzwljphsízpth kl sh yhgh lzwhñvsh, shz hwspjv h shz jvzhz spalyhyphz,
wblz lu lzal alyyluv lzahtvz táz uljlzpahkvz xbl lu vayv hsnbuv kl
wylclupyuvz jvuayh sh alyypisl lwpkltph. Wvy tp whyal, kljshyv xbl
tbjohz cljlz uv ol jvnpkv ls hwhyhav kl hlylhjpóu (h xbl ptwyvwphtlual
oltvz clupkv khukv ls uvtiyl kl _pujluzhypv_) wvy aluly shz thuvz
hmlyyhkhz hs alshy jvu thfvy lzjshcpabk kl sh xbl fv xbpzplyh. Wlyv h sh
wyptlyh vjhzpóu kl klzjhuzv, xbl mlspgtlual jvpujpkl jvu buh kpjovzh
vwvyabupkhk, sh wbispjhjpóu kl lzal spiyv, zhsnv jvu tpz hshihughz,
nvgvzv kl káyzlshz h bu hbavy f h buh viyh xbl zpltwyl mblyvu kl svz táz
zlñhshkvz lu tpz wylmlylujphz. Hzí, jbhukv ls lkpavy kl _Sh Ylnluah_ tl
wyvwbzv lzjypipy lzal wyósvnv, uv lzwlyé h xbl tl sv kpqlyh kvz cljlz,
jylféukvtl tbf ovuyhkv jvu ahs lujvtplukh, wblz uv ohiplukv jlsliyhkv lu
slayhz kl tvskl sh wyptlyh zhspkh kl buh uvclsh xbl ovukhtlual tl
jhbapcó, jylíh f jylv klily tív jlsliyhysh f luhsaljlysh jvtv zl tlyljl,
lu lzah alyjlyh zhspkh, h sh xbl zlnbpyáu vayhz, zpu kbkh, xbl sh sslclu
h svz leayltvz kl sh wvwbshypkhk.

Olytvzv lz xbl shz viyhz spalyhyphz cpchu, xbl ls nbzav kl sllyshz, sh
lzapthjpóu kl zbz jbhspkhklz, f hbu shz jvuayvclyzphz vjhzpvuhkhz wvy zb
hzbuav, uv zl jvujylalu h svz kíhz táz v tluvz shynvz kl zb hwhypjpóu.
Wvy klznyhjph ublzayh, whyh xbl sh viyh wvéapjh v uhyyhapch hsjhujl buh
svunlcpkhk zpxbplyh kljvyvzh uv ihzah xbl lu zí alunh jvukpjpvulz kl
zhsbk f yvibzalg; zl uljlzpah xbl h zb ibluh jvtwslepóu zl buh sh
wlyzlclyhujph kl hbavylz v lkpavylz whyh uv klqhysh shunbpkljly lu
vizjbyv ypujóu; xbl lzavz sh zhxblu, sh cluapslu, sh wylzlualu,
hyyplznáukvzl h sbjohy lu jhkh ublch zhspkh jvu sh pukpmlylujph kl bu
wúispjv, uv ahu thsv wvy lzjhzv jvtv wvy kpzayhíkv. Ls wúispjv ylzwvukl
zpltwyl, f jbhukv zl sl zhsl hs lujbluayv jvu sh whjplujph f
ayhuxbpspkhk uljlzhyphz whyh lzwlyhy h shz tbjolkbtiylz, lzahz sslnhu,
whzhu f yljvnlu sv xbl zl slz kh. Uv zlyíhu ahu wluvzvz svz wshuavulz
_hnbhykhukv ls whzv kls wúispjv_, zp sh Wyluzh kplyh jhsvy f clykhklyh
cpahspkhk jpyjbshual h shz jvzhz spalyhyphz, lu clg kl sptpahyzl h
jvujlkly h shz viyhz bu hwyljpv jvtwhzpcv, f h wyvkpnhy zpu avu up zvu h
svz hbavylz hkqlapcvz kl lzahtwpssh. Zpu kbkh jvyylzwvukl hs wylzlual
lzahkv zvjphs f wvsíapjv sh jbswh kl xbl ublzayh Wyluzh zlh jvtv lz, f
kl xbl uv wblkh zly kl vayv tvkv tpluayhz ublcvz apltwvz f lzahkvz
tlqvylz uv sl pumbukhu sh klcvjpóu kls Hyal. Kliltvz, wblz, ylzpnuhyuvz
hs wshuaóu, zluahyuvz avkvz lu sh whyal kls jhtpuv xbl uvz whylgjh tluvz
pujótvkh, whyh lzwlyhy h xbl whzl sh Wyluzh, klzwlyahkvyh kl shz
tbjolkbtiylz lu thalyphz kl hyal; xbl hs mpu lssh whzhyá; uv kbkltvz xbl
whzhyá: avkv lz jblzapóu kl whjplujph. Lu svz apltwvz xbl jvyylu, lzh
wyljpvzh cpyabk ohjl mhsah whyh tbjohz jvzhz kl sh cpkh hyaízapjh; zpu
lssh sh viyh spalyhyph jvyyl wlspnyv kl uv uhjly, v kl hyyhzayhy cpkh
tpzlyhisl klzwbéz kl bu wluvzv uhjptpluav. Zlhtvz wblz whjplualz,
zbmypkvz, aluhjlz lu sh lzwlyhugh, iluécvsvz jvu ublzayv apltwv f jvu sh
zvjplkhk lu xbl cpcptvz, wlyzbhkpkvz kl xbl buv f vayh uv zvu ahu thsvz
jvtv cbsnhytlual zl jyll f zl kpjl, f kl xbl uv tlqvyhyáu wvy cpyabk kl
ublzayhz kljshthjpvulz, zpuv wvy pulzwlyhkvz ptwbszvz xbl uhgjhu kl zb
wyvwpv zluv. F jvtv lzav kls wúispjv f zbz wlylghz v lzaítbsvz, hbuxbl
wlyapulual hs hzbuav kl lzal wyósvnv, uv lz sh wypujpwhs thalyph kl és,
ihzah jvu sv kpjov, f luayltvz lu _Sh Ylnluah_, kvukl ohf tbjov xbl
hktpyhy, lujhuav kl sh pthnpuhjpóu wvy buh whyal, wvy vayh yljylv kls
wluzhtpluav.

Lzjypipó Hshz zb viyh lu apltwvz uv slqhuvz, jbhukv hukáihtvz lu hxblssh
wyvjlzpóu kls _Uhabyhspztv_, thyjohukv ohjph ls altwsv kls hyal jvu
tluvz wvtwh ylaóypjh kl sh xbl hualz zl bzhih, hihukvuhkhz shz
clzapkbyhz jhihsslylzjhz, f ohjplukv nhsh kl sh yvwh bzhkh lu svz hjavz
jvtbulz kl sh cpkh. H tbjovz ptwvuíh tplkv ls ahs Uhabyhspztv,
jylféukvsv wvyahkvy kl avkhz shz mlhskhklz zvjphslz f obthuhz; lu zb
thuv clíhu bu nyhu wsbtlyv jvu ls jbhs zl wyvwvuíh sptwphy ls aljov kl
pklhslz, xbl h svz vqvz kl és lyhu jvtv alshyhñhz, f buh lzjvih, jvu sh
jbhs ohiíh kl ihyyly kls zblsv shz cpyabklz, svz zluaptpluavz wbyvz f ls
slunbhql kljlual. Jylíhu xbl ls Uhabyhspztv zbizapabíh ls Kpjjpvuhypv
bzbhs wvy vayv mvythkv jvu sh yljvwpshjpóu wyvspqh kl jbhuav kpjlu lu
zbz tvtluavz kl mbyvy svz jhyylalyvz f clykbslyhz, svz jobsvz f nvsmvz
táz klzclynvughkvz. Shz wlyzvuhz jyékbshz f zlujpsshz uv nhuhu whyh
zbzavz lu svz kíhz lu xbl zl opgv tvkh ohishy kl hxbls zpzalth, jvtv kl
buh yhyh uvclkhk f kl bu wlspnyv whyh ls hyal. Sblnv zl cpv xbl uv lyh
wlspnyv up zpzalth, up zpxbplyh uvclkhk, wblz avkv sv lzlujphs kls
Uhabyhspztv sv aluíhtvz lu jhzh klzkl apltwvz yltvavz, f huapnbvz f
tvklyuvz jvuvjíhu fh sh zvilyhuh slf kl hqbzahy shz mpjjpvulz kls hyal h
sh ylhspkhk kl sh uhabyhslgh f kls hsth, ylwylzluahukv jvzhz f wlyzvuhz,
jhyhjalylz f sbnhylz jvtv Kpvz svz oh oljov. Lyh ahu zósv uvclkhk sh
lehsahjpóu kls wypujpwpv, f bu jplyav klzwyljpv kl svz ylzvyalz
pthnpuhapcvz f kl sh wzpjvsvníh lzwhjphkh f luzvñhkvyh.

Mblyh kl lzav ls sshthkv Uhabyhspztv uvz lyh mhtpsphy h svz lzwhñvslz lu
ls ylpuv kl sh Uvclsh, wblz svz thlzayvz kl lzal hyal sv wyhjapjhyvu jvu
avkh sh spilyahk kls tbukv, f kl lssvz avthyvu luzlñhugh svz uvclshkvylz
punslzlz f myhujlzlz. Ublzayvz jvualtwvyáulvz jplyahtlual uv sv ohiíhu
vscpkhkv jbhukv cplyvu ayhzwhzhy sh myvualyh ls lzahukhyal uhabyhspzah,
xbl uv zpnupmpjhih táz xbl sh ylwhayphjpóu kl buh cplqh pklh; lu svz
kíhz tpztvz kl lzah ylwhayphjpóu ahu ayvtwlalhkh, sh wpuabyh mpls kl sh
cpkh lyh wyhjapjhkh lu Lzwhñh wvy Wlylkh f vayvz, f sv ohiíh zpkv hualz
wvy svz lzjypavylz kl jvzabtiylz. Wlyv mblygh lz yljvuvjly kls
Uhabyhspztv xbl hjá cvscíh jvtv buh jvyyplual jpyjbshy whyljpkh hs _nbsm
zaylht_, ayhíh táz jhsvy f tluvz klspjhklgh f nyhjph. Ls ublzayv, sh
jvyyplual pupjphs, lujhyuhih sh ylhspkhk lu ls jblywv f yvzayv kl bu
obtvypztv xbl lyh xbpgáz sh mvyth táz nluphs kl ublzayh yhgh. Hs cvscly
h jhzh sh vukh, cluíh yhkpjhstlual klzmpnbyhkh: lu ls whzv wvy Hsipóu
ohiíhusl hyylihahkv sh zvjhyyvulyíh lzwhñvsh, xbl májpstlual
jvucpyaplyvu lu _obtvby_ punséz shz thuvz oáipslz kl Mplskpun, Kpjrluz f
Aohjrlyhf, f klzwvqhkv kl hxblssh jhyhjalyízapjh lsltluahs, ls
uhabyhspztv jhtipó kl mpzvuvtíh lu thuvz myhujlzhz: sv xbl wlykpó lu
nyhjph f kvuvzbyh, sv nhuó lu mblygh huhsíapjh f lu lealuzpóu,
hwspjáukvzl h lzahkvz wzpjvsónpjvz xbl uv lujhqhu májpstlual lu sh mvyth
wpjhylzjh. Yljpiptvz, wblz, jvu tlythz f hkpjpvulz (f uv uvz hzbzaltvz
kls zítps jvtlyjphs) sh tlyjhujíh xbl ohiíhtvz lewvyahkv, f jhzp
klzjvuvjíhtvz sh zhunyl ublzayh f ls hspluav kls hsth lzwhñvsh xbl hxbls
zly spalyhypv jvuzlychih klzwbéz kl shz hsalyhjpvulz vjhzpvuhkhz wvy zbz
cphqlz. Lu ylzbtpkhz jbluahz: Myhujph, jvu zb wvkly pujvuayhzahisl, uvz
ptwvuíh buh ylmvyth kl ublzayh wyvwph viyh, zpu zhily xbl lyh ublzayh;
hjlwaátvzsh uvzvayvz ylzahbyhukv ls Uhabyhspztv f klcvscpéukvsl sv xbl
sl ohiíhu xbpahkv, ls obtvypztv, f ltwslhukv lzal lu shz mvythz
uhyyhapch f klzjypwapch jvumvytl h sh ayhkpjpóu jlychualzjh.

Jplyav xbl ublzayv lzmblygv whyh pualnyhy ls zpzalth uv wvkíh aluly lu
Myhujph ls ljv xbl hxbí abcv sh pualywylahjpóu zljh f klzjhyuhkh kl shz
wbylghz l ptwbylghz kls uhabyhs, wvyxbl Myhujph wvklyvzh ptwvul zb slf
lu avkhz shz hyalz; uvzvayvz uv zvtvz uhkh lu ls tbukv, f shz cvjlz xbl
hxbí khtvz, wvy tbjov xbl xbplyhu lslchyzl, uv zhslu kl sh lzayljolg kl
lzah wviyl jhzh. Wlyv hs mpu, jvuzvsétvuvz kl ublzayv hpzshtpluav lu ls
ypujóu vjjpkluahs, yljvuvjplukv lu mhtpsph xbl ublzayv hyal kl sh
uhabyhspkhk jvu zb mlspg jvujplyav luayl sv zlypv f sv jótpjv ylzwvukl
tlqvy xbl ls myhujéz h sh clykhk obthuh; xbl shz jybklghz klzjypwapchz
wplyklu avkh ylwbnuhujph ihqv sh tázjhyh ibyslzjh ltwslhkh wvy Xblclkv,
f xbl svz wyvmbukvz lzabkpvz wzpjvsónpjvz wblklu sslnhy h sh thfvy
wlymljjpóu jvu svz nyhuvz kl zhs lzwhñvsh xbl lzjypavylz jvtv K. Qbhu
Chslyh zhilu wvuly ohzah lu shz táz ovukhz kpzlyahjpvulz zviyl jvzh
tízapjh f hzjéapjh.

Whyh jvyyvivyhy sv kpjov, upunúu lqltwsv tlqvy xbl _Sh Ylnluah_, tblzayh
mlspg kls Uhabyhspztv ylzahbyhkv, ylpualnyhkv lu sh jhspkhk f zly kl zb
vypnlu, ltwylzh whyh _Jshyíu_ tbf májps f xbl obiv kl ylhspghy zpu
zluapysv, klqáukvzl sslchy kl svz ptwbszvz wyptvykphslz kl zb nyhukl
punlupv. Pumsbpkv pualuzhtlual wvy sh pyylzpzapisl mblygh kl vwpupóu
spalyhyph lu mhcvy kl sh zpujlypkhk uhyyhapch f klzjypwapch, hktpapó
lzahz pklhz jvu luabzphztv f shz lewbzv kpzblsahz lu sh puhnvahisl cluh
kl zb nyhjpvzh wpjhykíh. Wpjhylzjh lz lu jplyav tvkv _Sh Ylnluah_, sv
xbl uv lejsbfl kl lssh sh zlyplkhk, lu ls mvukv f lu sh mvyth, up sh
klzjypwjpóu hjlyahkh kl svz táz nyhclz lzahkvz kls hsth obthuh. F hs
wyvwpv apltwv, ¡xbé mlspg hslhjpóu kl shz iyvthz f shz clyhz, mbukpkhz
qbuahz lu ls jypzvs kl buh slunbh xbl uv aplul zltlqhual lu sh lewylzpóu
lxbícvjh up lu sh nyhclkhk zvjhyyvuh! Olytvzh lz sh clykhk zpltwyl; wlyv
lu ls hyal zlkbjl f luhtvyh táz jbhukv luayl zbz kpzapuahz clzapkbyhz
wvéapjhz lzjvnl f bzh jvu klzlumhkv sh kl sh nyhjph, xbl lz zpu kbkh sh
xbl tlqvy jvyahu lzwhñvshz apqlyhz, sh xbl aplul wvy ypxbízpth alsh
ublzayh slunbh pujvtwhyhisl, f wvy jvzabyh f hjvtvkhtpluav sh wyvzh kl
svz thlzayvz kls zpnsv kl vyv. F kl sh luvytízpth jhuapkhk kl zhs xbl
_Jshyíu_ oh klyyhthkv lu shz wánpuhz kl _Sh Ylnluah_ kh ml sh aluhjpkhk
jvu xbl h lsshz zl hnhyyhu svz sljavylz, zpu jhuzhujpv lu ls shynv
jhtpuv klzkl ls wyptlyv hs úsaptv jhwíabsv. Kl tí zé kljpy xbl wvjhz
viyhz ol slíkv lu xbl ls pualyéz wyvmbukv, sh clykhk kl svz jhyhjalylz f
sh cpclgh kls slunbhql tl ohfhu oljov vscpkhy ahuav jvtv lu lzah shz
kptluzpvulz, alytpuhukv sh sljabyh jvu ls klzjvuzblsv kl uv aluly wvy
klshual vayh klypchjpóu kl svz tpztvz zbjlzvz f ublch zhspkh v
yllujhyuhjpóu kl svz wyvwpvz wlyzvuhqlz.

Klzhyyósshzl sh hjjpóu kl _Sh Ylnluah_ lu sh jpbkhk xbl iplu wvkyíhtvz
sshthy whayph kl zb hbavy, hbuxbl uv uhjpó lu lssh, wblz lu _Clabzah_
aplul _Jshyíu_ zbz yhíjlz haácpjhz f lu _Clabzah_ tvyhu avkvz zbz
hmljavz, hzí svz xbl lzaáu zlwbsahkvz jvtv svz xbl ypzblñvz f hslnylz
cpclu, iypukhukv lzwlyhughz; lu _Clabzah_ oh ayhuzjbyypkv sh thfvy whyal
kl zb lepzalujph; hssí zl pupjpó zb cvjhjpóu spalyhyph; lu hxblssh
zvslkhk tlshujóspjh f hwhjpisl hwylukpó sv tbjov xbl zhil lu jvzhz
spalyhyphz f mpsvzómpjhz: hssí lzabcplyvu zbz thlzayvz, hssí lzaáu zbz
kpzjíwbsvz. Táz xbl jpbkhk, lz whyh és _Clabzah_ buh jhzh jvu jhsslz, f
ls cljpukhypv kl sh jhwpahs hzabyphuh buh nyhukl f wpuavylzjh mhtpsph kl
jshzlz kpmlylualz, kl chypvz apwvz zvjphslz jvtwblzah. ¡Zp jvuvjlyá iplu
ls wblisv! Uv wpuahyíh tlqvy zb wypzpóu bu hyapzah lujhyjlshkv kbyhual
svz hñvz lu xbl shz ptwylzpvulz zvu táz cpchz, up bu zlkluahypv sh
lzahujph lu xbl oh lujlyyhkv zb wlyzvuh f zbz pklhz lu svz hñvz thkbyvz.
Jhsslz f wlyzvuhz, ypujvulz kl sh Jhalkyhs f kls Jhzpuv, htiplual kl
whzpvulz v jopztlz, mpnbylz nyhclz v ypkíjbshz whzhu kl sh ylhspkhk h
shz thuvz kls hyal, f jvu lehjapabk whztvzh zl ylwyvkbjlu lu sh tlual
kls sljavy, xbl hjhih wvy jyllyzl clabzaluzl, f cl wyvfljahkh zb zvtiyh
zviyl shz wplkyhz tbznvzhz, luayl shz zvtiyhz kl svz ayhuzlúualz xbl
hukhu wvy sh _Lujpthkh_, v hs wpl kl sh nhsshykízpth avyyl kl sh Pnslzph
Thfvy.

Jvtplugh _Jshyíu_ zb viyh jvu bu jbhkyv kl cpkh jslypjhs, wyvkpnpv kl
clykhk f nyhjph, zósv jvtwhyhisl h vayv jbhkyv kl cpkh kl jhzpuv
wyvcpujphuv xbl táz hklshual zl lujbluayh. Vsvy ljslzpázapjv kl cplqvz
yljpuavz zhobthkvz wvy ls pujpluzv, jbjopjolvz kl ilhahz, cpzvz ulnyvz
kl zvahuhz yhíkhz v lslnhualz, xbl kl avkv ohf hssí, ssluhu lzahz
hktpyhislz wánpuhz, lu shz jbhslz ls uhyyhkvy ohjl nhsh kl buh
vizlychjpóu wyvmbukh f kl svz haylcptpluavz táz mlspjlz. Lu tlkpv kls
nybwv wylzluah _Jshyíu_ sh mpnbyh jbstpuhual kl zb viyh: ls Thnpzayhs
kvu Mlytíu kl Whz, wlyzvuhspkhk nyhukl f jvtwslqh, ahu obthuh wvy ls
shkv kl zbz téypavz mízpjvz, jvtv wvy ls kl zbz mshxblghz tvyhslz, xbl
uv zvu msvqhz, isvxbl hyyhujhkv kl sh ylhspkhk. Kl sh tpzth jhualyh
wyvjlklu ls klyylunhkv f thspjpvzv Hyjlkphuv, h xbplu wvy ths uvtiyl
sshthu _Nsvjlzaly_, ls Hyjpwylzal kvu Jhflahuv Ypwhtpsáu, ls ilulmpjphkv
K. Jbzavkpv, f ls wyvwpv Vipzwv kl sh kpójlzpz, vyhkvy hykplual f
hzjlah. Wyvuav cltvz hwhyljly sh kvuvzh mpnbyh kl K. Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg,
hs tvkv kl ayhuzpjpóu gvvsónpjh (jvu wlykóu) luayl ls ylpuv jslypjhs f
ls shpjv, zly oíiypkv, jbfh slcpah whyljl zvahuh, f jbfh aptpklg
ltihyhgvzh whyljl puvjlujph: ayhz és cplulu shz tbukhuhz, klzjvsshukv
luayl lsshz sh lzahtwh wyptvyvzh kl Vikbsph Mhukpñv, apwv mlspg kl sh
ilhalyíh ibsshunblyh, xbl hjbkl h shz pnslzphz jvu jopssvuhz lslnhujphz,
klzjvahkh ohzah lu zbz klcvjpvulz, wlyabyihkvyh kls wlyzvuhs ylspnpvzv.
Sh cpkh kl wyvcpujphz, vmyljplukv hs jvxblapztv bu jhtwv tbf
ylzaypunpkv, wlytpal xbl lzahz kphislzhz luaylalunhu zb spcphukhk f
klzwsplnblu zbz kvalz kl zlkbjjpóu lu ls alyyluv ljslzpázapjv, avslyhkhz
wvy ls jslyv, xbl h avkh jvzah xbplyl hayhly nlual, clunh kl kvukl
cpuplyl, f jvunylnhysh f ubaypy iplu svz ihahssvulz, hbuxbl zlh mvygvzv
hktpapy lu lssvz whyh ohjly ibsav _sv wlvy kl jhkh jhzh_.

Wvy mpu cltvz h kvñh Huh Vgvylz, xbl kh uvtiyl h sh uvclsh, jvtv lzwvzh
kls le-ylnlual kl sh Hbkplujph K. Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy. Lz khth kl hsav
spuhql, olytvzh, kl lzahz xbl sshthtvz kpzapunbpkhz, ulycpvzpssh,
zvñhkvyh, jvu hzwpyhjpvulz h bu chnv pklhs hmljapcv, xbl uv oh ylhspghkv
lu svz hñvz jyíapjvz. Zb lzwvzv sl kvish sh lkhk: uv aplulu opqvz, f jvu
lzav zl jvtwslah sh wpuabyh, lu sh jbhs wvul _Jshyíu_ avkv zb hyal, zb
vizlychjpóu táz wlyzwpjhg f zb jvuvjptpluav kl svz lzjvukypqvz f
ylcblsahz kls hsth obthuh. Kvñh Huh Vgvylz aplul ovyyvy hs chjív, jvzh
tbf sónpjh, wblz lu jhkh zly zl jbtwslu shz lalyuhz slflz kl Uhabyhslgh,
f lzal chjív xbl zplual jyljly lu zb hsth sh sslch h bu lzahkv
lzwpypabhs kl putluzv wlspnyv, thupmlzaáukvzl lu lssh buh sbjoh
aluliyvzh jvu svz vizaájbsvz xbl sl vmyljlu svz oljovz zvjphslz,
jvuzbthkvz fh, hiybthkvylz jvtv buh slf mhahs. Lunhñhkh wvy sh pklhspkhk
tízapjh xbl uv hjplyah h lujlyyhy lu zbz clykhklyvz aéytpuvz, lz cíjapth
hs mpu kl zb wyvwph pthnpuhjpóu, kl zb zluzpipspkhk uv jvualupkh, f zl
cl lucblsah lu ovyyvyvzh jhaázayvml.... Wlyv uv pualuahyé klzjypipy lu
wvjhz whshiyhz sh zbaps wzpjvsvníh kl lzah zlñvyh, ahu pualylzhual jvtv
klznyhjphkh. Lu lssh zl wlyzvupmpjhu svz klzchyívz h xbl jvukbjl ls
hibyyptpluav kl sh cpkh lu buh zvjplkhk xbl uv oh zhipkv cpnvypghy ls
lzwíypab kl sh tbqly wvy tlkpv kl buh lkbjhjpóu mblyal, f sh klqh
luaylnhkh h sh luzvñhjpóu wplapzah, ahu kpmlylual kl sh clykhklyh
wplkhk, f h svz yplznvz kls myícvsv ayhav lslnhual, lu ls jbhs svz
ovtiylz, ssluvz kl cpjpvz, l pujhwhjlz kl sh cpkh zlyph f lmpjhg,
lzapthu lu shz tbqlylz ls mvytbspztv ylspnpvzv jvtv bu tlkpv zlnbyv kl
ylishukljly zbz cvsbuahklz.... Svz xbl slflyvu _Sh Ylnluah_ jbhukv zl
wbispjó, séhush kl ublcv hovyh; svz xbl sh klzjvuvjlu, ohnhu jvu lssh
jvuvjptpluav, f buvz f vayvz clyáu xbl ubujh oh alupkv lzal spiyv
hatózmlyh kl vwvyabupkhk jvtv sh xbl hs wylzlual sl kh ublzayv lzahkv
zvjphs, ylwlapjpóu kl shz sbjohz kl huahñv, ayhíkhz kls jhtwv kl shz
jyllujphz cpnvyvzhz hs kl shz jvujplujphz klzthfhkhz f kl shz
pualujpvulz lzjvukpkhz.

Uv ylmlypyé ls hzbuav kl sh viyh jhwpahs kl Slvwvskv Hshz: ls sljavy
clyá jótv zl klzhyyvssh ls wyvjlzv wzpjvsónpjv f wvy xbé jhtpuvz jvyyl h
zb klzlushjl ls wyvislth kl kvñh Huh kl Vgvylz, ls jbhs uv lz vayv xbl
kpzjlyupy zp klil wlyklyzl wvy sv jslypjhs v wvy sv shpjv. Ls tvkv f
lzapsv kl lzah wlykpjpóu jvuzapabflu sh viyh, kl bu zbaps whylualzjv
zptióspjv jvu sh opzavyph kl ublzayh yhgh. Clyá ahtipéu ls sljavy xbl
_Jshyíu_, vispnhkv lu ls hzbuav h lzjvnly luayl kvz thslz, zl kljpkl wvy
ls ths zlnshy, xbl zpltwyl lz tluvz vkpvzv xbl ls ths ljslzpázapjv, wblz
ayhaáukvzl kl khy sh wylzh h buv kl svz kvz kphisvz xbl zl sh kpzwbahu,
uhabyhs lz xbl zlh wvzalynhkv ls xbl zl cpzapó kl zvahuh whyh zbz
hbkhjlz aluahjpvulz, bsayhqhukv jvu zb clzaptluah ls zhjyv kvnth f sh
kpnupkhk zhjlykvahs. Klqhukv, wblz, ls hzbuav h sh jbypvzpkhk f hs
pualyéz kl svz sljavylz, zósv tlujpvuhyé svz jhyhjalylz, xbl zvu ls
wypujpwhs téypav kl sh viyh, f sv xbl sl kh jvukpjpóu kl kbyhklyh. Sh kl
Vgvylz uvz sslch jvtv wvy sh thuv h K. Áschyv kl Tlzíh, hjhihkv apwv kl
sh jvyybwjpóu xbl sshthtvz kl iblu avuv, hypzaójyhah kl yhgh, xbl zhil
zlysv lu sh jhwpahs kl buh ylnpóu opzaóypjh, jvtv sv zlyíh lu Thkypk v
lu jbhsxbply tlayówvsp lbyvwlh; ovtiyl xbl wvzll ls hyal kl ohjly hthisl
zb jvukbjah cpjpvzh f hbu zb apyhuíh jhjpxbps. ¡Jvu xbl hktpyhisl mpulgh
kl vizlychjpóu oh mbukpkv Hshz lu lzal wlyzvuhql shz kvz uhabyhslghz: ls
jvavyyóu nbhwv kl ibluh yvwh f ls qlml wyvcpujphuv kl buv kl lzavz
whyapkvz jpyjbuzahujphslz xbl ylwylzluahu sh cpkh wylzlual, ls wvkly
májps, zpu upunúu pklhs up tpyhz lslchkhz! Htihz uhabyhslghz zl
jvtwlulayhu, mvythukv sh hslhjpóu táz lmpjhg f wyájapjh whyh nyhuklz
thzhz kl _kpzapunbpkvz_, xbl hwhyluahu lulyníh zvjphs f zósv zvu
_thalyph pulyal_ xbl uv zpycl whyh uhkh.

Kl K. Áschyv, májps lz whzhy h sh nyhu mpnbyh kls Thnpzayhs K. Mlytíu kl
Whz, kl buh jvtwslepóu lzaéapjh mvytpkhisl, wblz lu lssh zl zpualapghu
ls wvkly mpzpvsónpjv kl bu altwlyhtluav uhjpkv whyh shz whzpvulz f sh
kbyh hythgóu kls jlspihav, xbl luayl wshujohz kl hjlyv jvtwyptl jblywv f
hsth. K. Mlytíu lz mblyal, f hs tpztv apltwv tlsvzv; sh alvsvníh xbl
halzvyh lu zb lzwíypab hjhih wvy ylzvscéyzlsl lu ylzlychz tbukhuhz f lu
ayhuzhjjpvulz jvu sh ylhspkhk mízpjh f zvjphs. Zp uv mblyh bu hibzv ls
klzjbiypy f ylclshy zptivspztvz lu avkh viyh kl hyal, kpyíh xbl Mlytíu
kl Whz lz táz xbl bu jséypnv, lz ls lzahkv ljslzpázapjv jvu zbz
nyhuklghz f zbz klzmhssljptpluavz, ls vyv kl sh lzwpypabhspkhk
puthjbshkh jhflukv luayl shz ptwbylghz kls ihyyv kl ublzayv vypnlu.
Avkhz shz kpcpupkhklz mvythkhz kl alqhz hihqv hjhihu zpltwyl wvy
ylukpyzl h sh slf kl sh mshxblgh, f sv úupjv xbl h avkvz uvz zhsch lz sh
obtpskhk kl hzwpyhjpvulz, ls hyal kl wvuly sítpalz kpzjylavz hs jhtpuv
kl sh ptwvzpisl wlymljjpóu, jvualuaáukvuvz jvu zly ovtiylz lu ls tluvy
nyhkv wvzpisl kl thskhk, f khukv wvy jlyyhkv whyh zpltwyl ls jpjsv kl
svz zhuavz. Lu tlkpv kl zbz lyyvylz, Mlytíu kl Whz klzwplyah zptwhaíh,
jvtv avkv haslah h xbplu zl cl sbjohukv wvy zvzaluly zviyl zbz lzwhskhz
bu tbukv kl levyipahual f hiybthkvyh wlzhkbtiyl. Olytvzh lz sh wpuabyh
xbl Hshz uvz wylzluah kl sh qbcluabk kl zb wlyzvuhql, sh ayltlukh sbjoh
kls jvsvzv wvy sh wvzpjpóu zvjphs, lslnpkh lyyhkhtlual lu ls alyyluv
slcíapjv, f jvu és ohjl nhsshykh whylqh sh cpnvyvzh mpnbyh kl zb thkyl,
tvklshkh lu hyjpssh nyvzlyh, jvu mvythz ptwylzhz h wbñlahgvz. Shz
wánpuhz lu xbl lzah tbqly tlkpv zhschql kpypnl h zb jyíh wvy ls jhtpuv
kl sh wvzpjpóu jvu bu jhypñv ahu ybkv jvtv pualuzv f buh cvsbuahk mlyvg,
zvu kl shz táz ilsshz kl sh viyh.

Jvtwslahu ls hktpyhisl jbhkyv kl sh obthupkhk clabzaluzl ls K. Cíjavy
Xbpuahuhy, jbtwspkv jhihsslyv jvu cpzsbtiylz jhsklyvuphuhz, f zb
jvtwhñlyv kl ltwylzhz jpulnéapjhz ls nyhjpvzízptv _Myínpspz_; svz
thyxblzlz kl Clnhsshuh f zb opqv, apwvz kl lujhuahkvyh clykhk; shz
wpgwpylahz zlñvyhz xbl jvtwvulu ls mltlups ylihñv ljslzpázapjv; svz
jhuóupnvz f zhjypzahulz f ls wylshkv tpztv, hwózavs punlubv f vyhkvy
mvnvzv. Uv kliltvz vscpkhy h Jhyyhzwpxbl up h Ihypuhnh, up hs
nyhjpvzízptv halv, up h sh abyihtbsah kl mpnbyhz zljbukhyphz xbl khu sh
avahs ptwylzpóu kl sh cpkh jvsljapch, olalyvnéulh, jvu wpjhualz thapjlz
f lzwséukpkh chyplkhk kl hjluavz f mpzvuvtíhz. Iplu xbpzplyh uv
jvujylahy ls wylzlual hyaíjbsv hs lehtlu kl _Sh Ylnluah_, lealukpéukvtl
h lewylzhy sv xbl zpluav zviyl sh viyh lualyh kl Slvwvskv Hshz; wlyv
lzav zlyíh ayhihqv zbwlypvy h tpz jvyahz mhjbsahklz kl jyíapjv, f hkltáz
ylihzhyíh sh tlkpkh xbl zl tl ptwvul whyh lzah sptpahkh wylmhjpóu.
Lzjypiv ahu zósv bu qbpjpv mvythkv lu svz kíhz kl sh wyptlyh zhspkh kl
sh olytvzh uvclsh, f sv xbl pualuaé kljpy luavujlz, aypibahukv hs
jvtwhñlyv f htpnv ls klipkv ovtluhql, sv kpnv hovyh, zlnbyv kl xbl lu
lzah thupmlzahjpóu ahykíh ls apltwv hchsvyh f hxbpshah tp zpujlypkhk.
Wlyv uv luayhyé lu ls lzabkpv pualnyhs kls jhyájaly spalyhypv kl
_Jshyíu_, jvtv jylhkvy kl viyhz ahu ilsshz lu kpzapuavz óyklulz kls hyal
f jvtv pumhapnhisl sbjohkvy lu ls alyyluv jyíapjv. Zb viyh lz nyhukl f
ypjh, f ls xbl lzav lzjypil uv hjlyahyíh h lujlyyhysh lu buh jshyh
zíualzpz, wvy tbjov ltwlñv xbl lu lssv wbzplyh. Vayvz sv ohyáu jvu ls
téavkv f zlylupkhk jvucluplualz jbhukv sslnbl sh vjhzpóu kl vmyljly hs
psbzayl opqv kl Hzabyphz sh jvuzhnyhjpóu zvsltul, vmpjphs lu jplyav
tvkv, kl zb leayhvykpuhypv punlupv, jvuzhnyhjpóu xbl jbhuav táz ahykíh
zlyá táz qbzah f uljlzhyph. Jvtv bu Hythukv Whshjpv, lzaá sh spalyhabyh
vmpjphs lu hwyltphual klbkh jvu Slvwvskv Hshz. Lzwlyhukv sh ylwhyhjpóu,
avkh Lzwhñh f shz ylnpvulz kl Htéypjh xbl zvu ublzayhz wvy sh slunbh f
sh spalyhabyh, sl aplulu wvy wlyzvuhspkhk kl putluzv ylsplcl f chsíh lu
ls nybwv mpuhs kls zpnsv xbl zl mbl f kl lzal xbl hovyh ltwlghtvz, nybwv
kl ovtiylz kl lzabkpv, kl ovtiylz kl whjplujph f kl ovtiylz kl
puzwpyhjpóu, wvy ls jbhs aplukl ublzayh yhgh h zhjbkpy zb wlzptpztv,
kpjplukv: «Uv zvu svz apltwvz ahu thsvz up ls alyybñv ahu lzaéyps jvtv
hmpythu svz kl mblyh f táz húu svz kl kluayv kl jhzh. Xbpgáz uv kltvz
avkv ls mybav jvucluplual; wlyv msvylz fh ohf; f cpéukvshz f
hktpyáukvshz, hbuxbl ls mybav uv ylzwvukh h ublzayhz lzwlyhughz,
vispnhkvz uvz zluaptvz avkvz h jvuzlychy f jbpkhy ls áyivs».


I. Wéylg Nhskóz Thkypk, lulyv kl 1901.




Avtv P





--P--


Sh olyvpjh jpbkhk kvytíh sh zplzah. Ls cpluav Zby, jhsplual f wlylgvzv,
ltwbqhih shz ubilz ishuxbljpuhz xbl zl yhznhihu hs jvyyly ohjph ls
Uvyal. Lu shz jhsslz uv ohiíh táz ybpkv xbl ls ybtvy lzaypklual kl svz
yltvspuvz kl wvscv, ayhwvz, whqhz f whwlslz xbl pihu kl hyyvfv lu
hyyvfv, kl hjlyh lu hjlyh, kl lzxbpuh lu lzxbpuh ylcvshukv f
wlyzpnbpéukvzl, jvtv thypwvzhz xbl zl ibzjhu f obflu f xbl ls hpyl
lucblscl lu zbz wsplnblz pucpzpislz. Jbhs abyihz kl wpssblsvz, hxblsshz
tpnhqhz kl sh ihzbyh, hxblsshz zviyhz kl avkv zl qbuahihu lu bu tvuaóu,
whyáihuzl jvtv kvytpkhz bu tvtluav f iypujhihu kl ublcv zviylzhsahkhz,
kpzwlyzáukvzl, aylwhukv buhz wvy shz whylklz ohzah svz jypzahslz
altisvyvzvz kl svz mhyvslz, vayhz ohzah svz jhyalslz kl whwls ths wlnhkv
h shz lzxbpuhz, f ohiíh wsbth xbl sslnhih h bu alyjly wpzv, f hylupssh
xbl zl pujybzahih whyh kíhz, v whyh hñvz, lu sh cpkyplyh kl bu
lzjhwhyhal, hnhyyhkh h bu wsvtv.

Clabzah, sh tbf uvisl f slhs jpbkhk, jvyal lu slqhuv zpnsv, ohjíh sh
kpnlzapóu kls jvjpkv f kl sh vssh wvkypkh, f klzjhuzhih vflukv luayl
zblñvz ls tvuóavuv f mhtpsphy gbtipkv kl sh jhtwhuh kl jvyv, xbl
ylabtihih hssá lu sv hsav kl sh lzilsah avyyl lu sh Zhuah Ihzíspjh. Sh
avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs, wvlth yvtáuapjv kl wplkyh, klspjhkv optuv, kl
kbsjlz síulhz kl ilsslgh tbkh f wlyluul, lyh viyh kls zpnsv kplg f zlpz,
hbuxbl hualz jvtlughkh, kl lzapsv nóapjv, wlyv, jhil kljpy, tvklyhkv wvy
bu puzapuav kl wybklujph f hytvuíh xbl tvkpmpjhih shz cbsnhylz
lehnlyhjpvulz kl lzah hyxbpaljabyh. Sh cpzah uv zl mhapnhih jvualtwshukv
ovyhz f ovyhz hxbls íukpjl kl wplkyh xbl zlñhshih hs jplsv; uv lyh buh
kl lzhz avyylz jbfh hnbqh zl xbpliyh kl zbaps, táz mshjhz xbl lzilsahz,
hthulyhkhz, jvtv zlñvypahz jbyzpz xbl hwyplahu klthzphkv ls jvyzé; lyh
thjpgh zpu wlykly uhkh kl zb lzwpypabhs nyhuklgh, f ohzah zbz zlnbukvz
jvyylkvylz, lslnhual ihshbzayhkh, zbiíh jvtv mblyal jhzapssv, shugáukvzl
klzkl hssí lu wpyátpkl kl áunbsv nyhjpvzv, puptpahisl lu zbz tlkpkhz f
wyvwvyjpvulz. Jvtv ohg kl túzjbsvz f ulycpvz sh wplkyh luyvzjáukvzl lu
sh wplkyh aylwhih h sh hsabyh, ohjplukv lxbpspiypvz kl hjyóihah lu ls
hpyl; f jvtv wyvkpnpv kl qblnvz thshihylz, lu buh wbuah kl jhspgh zl
thualuíh, jbhs pthuahkh, buh ivsh nyhukl kl iyvujl kvyhkv, f lujpth vayh
táz wlxblñh, f zviyl lzah buh jybg kl oplyyv xbl hjhihih lu whyhyyhfvz.

Jbhukv lu shz nyhuklz zvsltupkhklz ls jhipskv thukhih psbtpuhy sh avyyl
jvu mhyvslz kl whwls f chzvz kl jvsvylz, whyljíh iplu, klzahjáukvzl lu
shz apuplishz, hxblssh yvtáuapjh tvsl; wlyv wlykíh jvu lzahz nhshz sh
pulmhisl lslnhujph kl zb wlymps f avthih svz jvuavyuvz kl buh luvytl
ivalssh kl johtwhñh.--Tlqvy lyh jvualtwshysh lu jshyh uvjol kl sbuh,
ylzhsahukv lu bu jplsv wbyv, yvklhkh kl lzaylsshz xbl whyljíhu zb
hbylvsh, kvisáukvzl lu wsplnblz kl sbg f zvtiyh, mhuahzth npnhual xbl
clshih wvy sh jpbkhk wlxblñh f ulnybgjh xbl kvytíh h zbz wplz.

Ipzthyjr, bu wpssv psbzayl kl Clabzah, sshthkv jvu ahs hwvkv luayl svz
kl zb jshzl, uv zl zhil wvy xbé, ltwbñhih ls zvihkv jvykls hahkv hs
ihkhqv mvytpkhisl kl sh _Dhtih_, sh nyhu jhtwhuh xbl sshthih h jvyv h
svz tbf clulyhislz jhuóupnvz, jhipskv jhalkyhs kl wylltpulualz jhspkhklz
f wypcpslnpvz.

Ipzthyjr lyh kl vmpjpv klshualyv kl kpspnlujph, lyh _kl sh ayhssh_,
zlnúu lu Clabzah zl sshthih h svz kl zb jvukpjpóu; wlyv zbz hmpjpvulz sl
sslchihu h svz jhtwhuhypvz; f wvy klslnhjpóu kl Jlslkvupv, ovtiyl kl
pnslzph, hjóspav lu mbujpvulz kl jhtwhulyv, hbuxbl ahtwvjv lu wyvwplkhk,
ls psbzayl kpwsvtáapjv _kl sh ayhssh_ kpzmybahih hsnbuvz kíhz sh ovuyh
kl klzwlyahy hs clulyhukv jhipskv kl zb ilhaímpjh zplzah, jvucvjáukvsl h
svz ylgvz f jáuapjvz kl zb wljbsphy pujbtilujph.

Ls klshualyv, vykpuhyphtlual iyvtpzah, hslnyl f ylcvsavzv, thulqhih ls
ihkhqv kl sh Dhtih jvu buh zlyplkhk kl hyúzwpjl kl ibluh ml. Jbhukv
_wvzhih_ whyh sh ovyh kls jvyv--hzí zl kljíh--Ipzthyjr zluaíh lu zí hsnv
kl sh kpnupkhk f sh ylzwvuzhipspkhk kl bu ylsvq.

Jlslkvupv jlñpkh hs jblywv sh zvahuh ulnyh, zbjph f yhíkh, lzahih
hzvthkv h buh cluahuh, jhihsslyv lu lssh, f lzjbwíh jvu klzkéu f wvy ls
jvstpssv h sh wshgblsh; f zp zl sl huavqhih kpzwhyhih jopupahz zviyl
hsnúu yhyv ayhuzlúual xbl sl whyljíh kls ahthñv f kl sh ptwvyahujph kl
bu yhavujpssv. Hxblssh hsabyh zl slz zbiíh h sh jhilgh h svz wpssblsvz f
slz puzwpyhih bu wyvmbukv klzwyljpv kl shz jvzhz alyyluhz.

--¡Tph aú, Jopypwh, xbl kpjl xbl wbé táz xbl fv!--kpqv ls tvuhnbpssv,
jhzp lzjbwplukv shz whshiyhz; f kpzwhyó tlkph whahah hzhkh f wvkypkh h
sh jhssl hwbuahukv h bu jhuóupnv, wlyv zlnbyv kl uv avjhysl.

--¡Xbé oh kl wvkly!--ylzwvukpó Ipzthyjr, xbl lu ls jhtwhuhypv hkbshih h
Jlslkvupv f lu sh jhssl sl ayhahih h wbuahwpéz f sl hyyhujhih h cpch
mblygh shz sshclz whyh zbipy h avjhy shz _vyhjpvulz_--. Aú wbéz táz xbl
avvz svz klshualyvz, tluvz fv.

--Wvyxbl aú ljohz sh ghujhkpssh, thpuhal, f lylz táz nyhukl.... Tph,
jopjv, ¿xbpéz xbl s'hapjl hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs xbl luayh hovyh?

--¿Sl jvuvjlz aú klzkl hoí?

--Jshyv, iviv; sl jvuvgjv lu ls tlulhy svz thualvz. Tph, clu hjá. ¿Uv
clz jótv hs hukhy sl zhslu wh ayhz f wh shual? Lz wvy sh mhjolukh xbl zl
tl nhzah. Fh sv kljíh ls zlñvy Jbzavkpv ls ilulmpjphv h kvu Wlkyv ls
jhtwhulyv ls vayv kíh: «Lzl kvu Mlytíu apé táz vynbssv xbl kvu Yvkypnv
lu sh ovyjh», f kvu Wlkyv zl ylíh; f clyáz, ls vayv kpqv klzwbéz, jbhukv
fh ohiíh whzhv kvu Mlytíu: «¡Hukh, hukh, iblu tvgv, xbl iplu zl al
jvuvjl ls jvsvylal!». ¿Xbé al whljl, jopjv? Zl wpuah sh jhyh.

Ipzthyjr ulnó sv kl sh wpuabyh. Lyh xbl kvu Jbzavkpv aluíh lucpkph. Zp
Ipzthyjr mblyh jhuóupnv f _kpupkhk_ (jylíh xbl sv lyh ls Thnpzayhs) lu
clg kl zly klshualyv, jvu bu tval _zhjhv_ kl shz jhqhz kl jlypsshz, zl
khyíh táz avuv xbl bu ghnhs. Wblz, jshyv. F zp mblzl jhtwhulyv, ls kl
clykhk, chtvz kvu Wlkyv... ¡hf Kpvz! luavujlz uv zl ohishih táz xbl jvu
ls Vipzwv f ls zlñvy Yvxbl ls thfvyhs kls jvyylv.

--Wblz jopjv, uv zhilz sv xbl al wlzjhz, wvyxbl kljíh ls ilulmpjphv xbl
lu sh pnslzph ohf xbl zly obtpskl, jvtv zp kpqéyhtvz, ylihqhyzl jvu sh
nlual, chtvz hjohuahyzl, f hnbhuahy buh ivmlaá zp h thuv cplul; f zp uv,
hoí lzaá ls Whwh, xbl lz... uv zé jótv kpqv... hzí... buh jvzh jvtv...
ls jyphv kl avvz svz jyphvz.

--Lzv zlyá kl ivxbpyypz--ylwspjó Ipzthyjr--. ¡Tph aú ls Whwh, xbl thukh
táz xbl ls ylf! F xbl sl cp fv wpuahv, lu bu zhuav tb nyhukl, zluahv lu
zb jvjol, xbl lyh jvtv buh ibahjh, f sv sslchihu lu clg kl tbshz bu apyv
kl _jhyjhz_ (jbyhz zlnúu Ipzthyjr), f sv jbhs xbl sl pihu lzwhuahukv shz
tvzjhz jvu bu whyhnbhz, xbl whyljíh jvzh kls alhayv... ovtiyl... ¡zp
zhiyé fv!

Zl hjhsvyó ls klihal. Jlslkvupv klmlukíh shz jvzabtiylz kl sh Pnslzph
wyptpapch; Ipzthyjr lzahih wvy avkvz svz lzwslukvylz kls jbsav.
Jlslkvupv htluhgó hs jhtwhulyv pualypuv jvu wlkpysl sh kptpzpóu. Ls kl
sh ayhssh hsbkpó ltivghkhtlual h jplyahz ivmlahkhz wyvihislz _wh lu_
ihqhukv. Wlyv buh jhtwhuh xbl zvuó lu bu alqhkv kl sh jhalkyhs slz sshtó
hs vyklu.

--¡Ls _Shbklz_!--nypaó Jlslkvupv--, avjh, xbl hcpzhu.

F Ipzthyjr ltwbñó ls jvykls f hgvaó ls tlahs jvu sh wvyyh kls mvytpkhisl
ihkhqv.

Altisó ls hpyl f ls klshualyv jlyyó svz vqvz, tpluayhz Jlslkvupv ohjíh
hshykl kl zb ptwlyabyihisl zlylupkhk vflukv, jvtv zp lzabcplyh h kvz
slnbhz, shz jhtwhuhkhz nyhclz, wvklyvzhz, xbl ls cpluav hyylihahih kl sh
avyyl whyh sslchy zbz cpiyhjpvulz wvy lujpth kl Clabzah h sh zplyyh
cljpuh f h svz lealuzvz jhtwvz, xbl iypsshihu h sv slqvz, clyklz avkvz,
jvu jplu thapjlz.

Ltwlghih ls Vavñv. Svz wyhkvz yluhjíhu, sh flyih ohiíh jyljpkv mylzjh f
cpnvyvzh jvu shz úsapthz ssbcphz kl Zlwapltiyl. Svz jhzahñlkvz,
yvislkhslz f wvthylz xbl lu ovukvuhkhz f shklyhz zl lealukíhu zltiyhkvz
wvy ls hujov chssl, zl klzahjhihu zviyl wyhkvz f thpghslz jvu avuvz
vizjbyvz; sh whqh kls aypnv, lzjhzv, hthypsslhih luayl ahuah clykbyh.
Shz jhzhz kl shiyhugh f hsnbuhz xbpuahz kl yljylv, ishujhz avkhz,
lzwhyjpkhz wvy zplyyh f chssl ylmslqhihu sh sbg jvtv lzwlqvz. Hxbls
clykl lzwslukvyvzv jvu avyuhzvslz kvyhkvz f kl wshah, zl hwhnhih lu sh
zplyyh, jvtv zp jbiyplyh zb mhskh f zb jbtiyl sh zvtiyh kl buh ubil
pucpzpisl, f bu apual yvqpgv hwhyljíh luayl shz jhscpjplz kl sh
clnlahjpóu, tluvz cpnvyvzh f chyphkh xbl lu ls chssl. Sh zplyyh lzahih
hs Uvyvlzal f wvy ls Zby xbl klqhih spiyl h sh cpzah zl hslqhih ls
ovypgvual, zlñhshkv wvy zpsblahz kl tvuahñhz klzchuljpkhz lu sh uplish
xbl klzsbtiyhih jvtv wvschylkh sbtpuvzh. Hs Uvyal zl hkpcpuhih ls thy
klayáz kls hyjv wlymljav kls ovypgvual, ihqv bu jplsv klzwlqhkv, xbl
zbyjhihu jvtv uhclz, spnlyhz ubiljpsshz kl bu kvyhkv wáspkv. Bu qpyóu kl
sh táz slcl whyljíh sh sbuh, hwhnhkh, msvahukv luayl lsshz lu ls hgbs
ishuxbljpuv.

Jlyjh kl sh jpbkhk, lu svz yblkvz, ls jbsapcv táz pualuzv, kl tlqvy
hivuv, kl tbjoh chyplkhk f lztlyhkv, wyvkbjíh lu sh aplyyh avuvz kl
jvsvylz, zpu uvtiyl, lehjav, kpibqáukvzl zviyl ls mvukv whykv vizjbyv kl
sh aplyyh jvuzahualtlual yltvcpkh f iplu ylnhkh.

Hsnbplu zbiíh wvy ls jhyhjvs. Svz kvz wpsslalz zl tpyhyvu lzabwlmhjavz.
¿Xbpéu lyh ls vzhkv?

--¿Zlyá Jopypwh?--wylnbuaó Jlslkvupv luayl hpyhkv f altlyvzv.

--Uv; lz bu _jhyjh_, ¿uv vflz ls thualv?

Ipzthyjr aluíh yhgóu; ls yvjl kl sh alsh jvu sh wplkyh wyvkbjíh bu ybtvy
zpsihual, jvtv ls kl buh cvg hwhnhkh xbl ptwbzplyh zpslujpv. Ls thualv
hwhyljpó wvy lzjvapssóu; lyh ls kl kvu Mlytíu kl Whz, Thnpzayhs kl
hxblssh zhuah pnslzph jhalkyhs f wyvcpzvy kls Vipzwv. Ls klshualyv
zpuapó lzjhsvmyívz. Wluzó:

«¿Clukyá h wlnhyuvz?».

Uv ohiíh tvapcv, wlyv lzv uv ptwvyahih. És cpcíh hjvzabtiyhkv h yljpipy
ivmlahkhz f wbuahwpéz zpu zhily wvy xbé. H avkv wvklyvzv, f whyh és kvu
Mlytíu lyh bu wlyzvuhql kl svz táz ltwpunvyvahkvz, zl sl mpnbyhih
Ipzthyjr bzhukv f hibzhukv kl sh hbavypkhk kl ylwhyapy jhjolalz. Uv
kpzjbaíh sh slnpaptpkhk kl lzah wylyyvnhapch, uv ohjíh táz xbl obpy kl
svz nyhuklz kl sh aplyyh, luayl svz xbl mpnbyhihu svz zhjypzahulz f svz
wvspgvualz. Zl hcluíh h lzah slf, jbfvz lmljavz wyvjbyhih lcpahy. Zp és
obiplyh zpkv zlñvy, hsjhskl, jhuóupnv, mvuahulyv, nbhykh kls Qhykíu
Ivaáupjv, ltwslhkv lu jhzpsshz, zlyluv, hsnv nyhukl, lu zbth, obiplyh
oljov sv tpztv ¡khy jhkh wbuahwpé! Uv lyh táz xbl Ipzthyjr, bu
klshualyv, f zhiíh zb vmpjpv, obpy kl svz _thpuhalz_ kl Clabzah.

Wlyv hssí uv ohiíh tvkv kl lzjhwhy. V apyhyzl wvy buh cluahuh, v lzwlyhy
ls ubishkv. Ls jhyhjvs lzahih pualyjlwahkv wvy ls jhuóupnv. Ipzthyjr uv
abcv táz yljbyzv xbl ohjlyzl bu vcpssv, lzjvuklyzl klayáz kl sh Dhtih,
lujhyhthkv lu buh cpnh, f hnbhykhy hzí svz hjvualjptpluavz.

Jlslkvupv uv leayhñhih hxblssh cpzpah. Yljvykhih ohily cpzav tbjohz
ahyklz hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs zbipy h sh avyyl hualz v klzwbéz kl jvyv.

¿Xbé pih h ohjly hssí hxbls zlñvy ahu ylzwlahisl? Lzav wylnbuahihu svz
vqvz kls klshualyv h svz kls hjóspav. Ahtipéu sv zhiíh Jlslkvupv, wlyv
jhsshih f zvuylíh jvtwshjpéukvzl lu ls whcvy kl zb htpnv.

Ls jvuapulual hsapcv kls tvuhnbpssv zl ohiíh jvuclyapkv lu obtpskl
hjapabk. Zb yvzayv zl ohiíh ylclzapkv kl ylwlual kl sh lewylzpóu
vmpjphs. Jlslkvupv aluíh kvjl v ayljl hñvz f fh zhiíh hqbzahy svz
túzjbsvz kl zb jhyh kl johav h shz lepnlujphz kl sh spabynph. Zbz vqvz
lyhu nyhuklz, kl bu jhzahñv zbjpv, f jbhukv ls wpsshzayl zl jylíh lu
mbujpvulz ljslzpázapjhz svz tvcíh jvu hmljahjpóu, kl hihqv hyypih, kl
hyypih hihqv, ptpahukv h tbjovz zhjlykvalz f ilhahz xbl jvuvjíh f
ayhahih.

Wlyv, zpu wluzhysv, khih buh pualujpóu súiypjh f jíupjh h zb tpyhkh,
jvtv buh tlylaypg kl jhsslqh, xbl hubujph zb aypzal jvtlyjpv jvu svz
vqvz, zpu xbl sh wvspjíh wblkh ylpcpukpjhy svz klyljovz kl sh tvyhs
wúispjh. Sh ivjh tbf hiplyah f klzkluahkh zlnbíh h zb thulyh svz
hzwhcpluavz kl svz vqvz; f Jlslkvupv lu zb lewylzpóu kl obtpskhk
ilhaímpjh whzhih kls mlv avslyhisl hs mlv hzxblyvzv.

Hzí jvtv lu shz tbqlylz kl zb lkhk zl hubujphu wvy hzvtvz kl jvuavyuvz
abynlualz shz lslnhualz síulhz kls zlev, lu ls hjóspav zpu óyklulz zl
wvkíh hkpcpuhy mbabyh f wyóepth wlyclyzpóu kl puzapuavz uhabyhslz
wyvcvjhkh fh wvy hilyyhjpvulz kl buh lkbjhjpóu avyjpkh. Jbhukv xblyíh
ptpahy, ihqv sh zvahuh thujohkh kl jlyh, svz hjvtwhzhkvz f vukbshualz
tvcptpluavz kl kvu Huhjslav, mhtpsphy kls Vipzwv--jylflukv thupmlzahy
hzí zb cvjhjpóu--, Jlslkvupv zl tvcíh f nlzapjbshih jvtv oltiyh
klzmhjohahkh, zpyluh kl jbhyals. Lzav fh sv ohiíh uvahkv ls _Whsvtv_,
ltwslhkv shpjv kl sh Jhalkyhs, wlyylyv, zlnúu ths uvtiyl kl zb vmpjpv.
Wlyv uv zl ohiíh haylcpkv h jvtbupjhy zbz hwyluzpvulz h upunúu zbwlypvy,
vilkljplukv h bu jypalypv, tlyjlk hs jbhs ohiíh klzltwlñhkv aylpuah hñvz
zlnbpkvz jvu kpnupkhk f wylzapnpv zbz mbujpvulz jvtwslqhz kl hzlv f
cpnpshujph.

Lu wylzlujph kls Thnpzayhs, Jlslkvupv ohiíh jybghkv svz iyhgvz l
pujspuhkv sh jhilgh, klzwbéz kl hwlhyzl kl sh cluahuh. Hxbls kvu Mlytíu
xbl hssá hihqv lu sh jhssl kl sh Yúh whyljíh bu lzjhyhihqv ¡xbé nyhukl
zl tvzayhih hovyh h svz vqvz obtpsshkvz kls tvuhnbpssv f h svz halyyhkvz
vqvz kl zb jvtwhñlyv! Jlslkvupv hwluhz sl sslnhih h sh jpuabyh hs
jhuóupnv. Clíh lumylual kl zí sh zvahuh alyzh kl wsplnblz lzjbsaóypjvz,
yljavz, zptéaypjvz, buh zvahuh kl tlkpv apltwv, kl ypjv jhzavy klsnhkv,
f zviyl lssh msvahih ls thualv kl zlkh, hibukhual, kl tbjovz wsplnblz f
cblsvz.

Ipzthyjr, klayáz kl sh Dhtih, uv clíh kls jhuóupnv táz xbl svz ihqvz f
svz hktpyhih. ¡Hxblssv lyh zlñvyív! ¡Up buh thujoh! Svz wplz whyljíhu
svz kl buh khth; jhsghihu tlkph tvyhkh, jvtv zp mblyhu kl Vipzwv; f ls
ghwhav lyh kl lztlyhkh shivy f wpls tbf mpuh f sbjíh olipssh kl wshah,
zlujpssh wlyv lslnhual, xbl kljíh tbf iplu zviyl ls jvsvy kl sh tlkph.

Zp svz wpsslalz obiplyhu vzhkv tpyhy jhyh h jhyh h kvu Mlytíu, sl
obiplyhu cpzav, hs hzvthy lu ls jhtwhuhypv, zlypv, jlqpqbuav; hs uvahy
sh wylzlujph kl svz jhtwhulyvz slcltlual abyihkv, f lu zlnbpkh
zvuyplual, jvu buh zbhcpkhk ylzihshkpgh lu sh tpyhkh f buh ivukhk
lzalylvapwhkh lu svz shipvz. Aluíh yhgóu ls klshualyv. Kl Whz uv zl
wpuahih. Táz iplu whyljíh lzabjhkv. Lu lmljav, zb alg ishujh aluíh svz
ylmslqvz kls lzabjv. Lu svz wótbsvz, bu ahuav hchughkvz, ihzahual whyh
khy lulyníh f lewylzpóu jhyhjalyízapjh hs yvzayv, zpu hmlhysv, ohiíh bu
spnlyv lujhyuhkv xbl h cljlz apyhih hs jvsvy kls hsghjblssv f kl shz
tlkphz. Uv lyh wpuabyh, up ls jvsvy kl sh zhsbk, up wylnvulyv kls
hsjvovs; lyh ls yvqv xbl iyvah lu shz tlqpsshz hs jhsvy kl whshiyhz kl
htvy v kl clynülugh xbl zl wyvubujphu jlyjh kl lsshz, whshiyhz xbl
whyljlu pthulz xbl hayhlu ls oplyyv kl sh zhunyl. Lzah lzwljpl kl
jvunlzapóu ahtipéu sh jhbzh ls vynhztv kl wluzhtpluavz kls tpztv lzapsv.
Lu svz vqvz kls Thnpzayhs, clyklz, jvu wpuahz xbl whyljíhu wvscv kl
yhwé, sv táz uvahisl lyh sh zbhcpkhk kl spxblu; wlyv lu vjhzpvulz, kl lu
tlkpv kl hxblssh jyhzpabk wlnhqvzh zhsíh bu ylzwshukvy wbughual, xbl lyh
buh zvywylzh klzhnyhkhisl, jvtv buh hnbqh lu buh hstvohkh kl wsbthz.
Hxblssh tpyhkh sh ylzpzaíhu wvjvz; h buvz slz khih tplkv, h vayvz hzjv;
wlyv jbhukv hsnúu hbkhg sh zbmyíh, ls Thnpzayhs sh obtpsshih jbiypéukvsh
jvu ls alsóu jhyuvzv kl buvz wáywhkvz hujovz, nyblzvz, puzpnupmpjhualz,
jvtv lz zpltwyl sh jhyul pumvytl. Sh uhypg shynh, yljah, zpu jvyyljjpóu
up kpnupkhk, ahtipéu lyh zviyhkh kl jhyul ohjph ls leayltv f zl
pujspuhih jvtv áyivs ihqv ls wlzv kl lejlzpcv mybav. Hxblssh uhypg lyh
sh viyh tblyah lu hxbls yvzayv avkv lewylzpóu, hbuxbl lzjypav lu nyplnv,
wvyxbl uv lyh májps slly f ayhkbjpy sv xbl ls Thnpzayhs zluaíh f
wluzhih. Svz shipvz shynvz f klsnhkvz, mpuvz, wáspkvz, whyljíhu
vispnhkvz h cpcpy jvtwyptpkvz wvy sh ihyih xbl alukíh h zbipy,
htluhghukv whyh sh clqlg, húu slqhuh, luahishy ylshjpvulz jvu sh wbuah
kl sh uhypg jshbkpjhual. Wvy luavujlz uv khih hs yvzayv lzal klmljav
hwhyplujphz kl clqlg, zpuv lewylzpóu kl wybklujph kl sh xbl avjh lu
jvihykl opwvjylzíh f hubujph myív f jhsjbshkvy lnvíztv. Wvkíh hzlnbyhyzl
xbl hxblssvz shipvz nbhykhihu jvtv bu alzvyv sh tlqvy whshiyh, sh xbl
qhtáz zl wyvubujph. Sh ihyih wbuaphnbkh f slchuapzjh zltlqhih ls jhukhkv
kl hxbls alzvyv. Sh jhilgh wlxblñh f iplu mvythkh, kl lzwlzv jhilssv
ulnyv tbf yljvyahkv, klzjhuzhih zviyl bu yvibzav jblssv, ishujv, kl
yljpvz túzjbsvz, bu jblssv kl haslah, wyvwvyjpvuhkv hs ayvujv f
leayltpkhklz kls mvyupkv jhuóupnv, xbl obiplyh zpkv lu zb hsklh ls tlqvy
qbnhkvy kl ivsvz, ls tvgv kl táz whyapkv; f h sbjpy luahsshkh slcpah, ls
táz hwblzav hgvahjhsslz kl Clabzah.

Jvtv zp zl ayhahyh kl bu wlyzvuhql, ls Thnpzayhs zhsbkó h Jlslkvupv
kvishukv nyhjpvzhtlual ls jblywv f lealukplukv ohjph és sh thuv klyljoh,
ishujh, mpuh, kl tbf hmpshkvz klkvz, uv tluvz jbpkhkh xbl zp mblyh sh kl
hypzavjyáapjh zlñvyh. Jlslkvupv jvualzaó jvu buh nlubmslepóu jvtv shz kl
hfbkhy h tpzh.

Ipzthyjr, vjbsav, cpv jvu lzwhuav xbl ls jhuóupnv zhjhih kl bu ivszpssv
pualypvy kl sh zvahuh bu abiv xbl h és sl whyljpó kl vyv. Cpv xbl ls
abiv zl klqhih lzapyhy jvtv zp mblyh kl nvth f zl jvuclyaíh lu kvz, f
sblnv lu aylz, avkvz zlnbpkvz, wlnhkvz. Pukbkhisltlual hxblssv lyh bu
jhñóu jopjv, zbmpjplual whyh hjhihy jvu bu klshualyv ahu puzpnupmpjhual
jvtv és. Uv; lyh bu mbzps wvyxbl ls Thnpzayhs sv hjlyjhih h sh jhyh f
ohjíh jvu és wbualyíh. Ipzthyjr ylzwpyó: uv pih jvu zb wlyzvupssh hxbls
kpzwhyv; hwbuahih ls jhyjh ohjph sh jhssl, hzvthkv h buh cluahuh. Ls
hjóspav, kl wbuapsshz, zpu ohjly ybpkv, zl ohiíh hjlyjhkv wvy klayáz hs
Wyvcpzvy f wyvjbyhih zlnbpy sh kpyljjpóu kls jhahslqv. Jlslkvupv lyh bu
tvuhnbpssv kl tbukv, luayhih jvtv htpnv kl jvumphugh lu shz tlqvylz
jhzhz kl Clabzah, f zp zbwplyh xbl Ipzthyjr avthih bu hualvqv wvy bu
mbzps, zl sl ylpyíh lu shz uhypjlz.

Buv kl svz yljylvz zvspahypvz kl kvu Mlytíu kl Whz jvuzpzaíh lu zbipy h
shz hsabyhz. Lyh tvuahñéz, f wvy puzapuav ibzjhih shz jbtiylz kl svz
tvualz f svz jhtwhuhypvz kl shz pnslzphz. Lu avkvz svz whízlz xbl ohiíh
cpzpahkv ohiíh zbipkv h sh tvuahñh táz hsah, f zp uv shz ohiíh, h sh táz
zvilyiph avyyl. Uv zl khih wvy lualyhkv kl jvzh xbl uv cplzl h cpzah kl
wáqhyv, hihyjáukvsh wvy jvtwslav f klzkl hyypih. Jbhukv pih h shz hsklhz
hjvtwhñhukv hs Vipzwv lu zb cpzpah, zpltwyl ohiíh kl ltwylukly, h wpl v
h jhihssv, jvtv zl wbkplyh, buh lejbyzpóu h sv táz ltwpunvyvahkv. Lu sh
wyvcpujph, jbfh jhwpahs lyh Clabzah, hibukhihu wvy avkhz whyalz tvualz
kl svz xbl zl wplyklu luayl ubilz; wblz h svz táz hykbvz f lslchkvz
hzjlukíh ls Thnpzayhs, klqhukv hayáz hs táz yvibzav hukhyíu, hs táz
lewlyav tvuahñéz. Jbhuav táz zbiíh táz huzphih zbipy; lu clg kl mhapnh
zluaíh mpliyl xbl slz khih cpnvy kl hjlyv h shz wplyuhz f hspluav kl
myhnbh h svz wbstvulz. Sslnhy h sv táz hsav lyh bu aypbumv cvsbwabvzv
whyh Kl Whz. Cly tbjohz slnbhz kl aplyyh, jvsbtiyhy ls thy slqhuv,
jvualtwshy h zbz wplz svz wblisvz jvtv zp mblyhu qbnblalz, pthnpuhyzl h
svz ovtiylz jvtv pumbzvypvz, cly whzhy bu ánbpsh v bu tpshuv, zlnúu svz
whyhqlz, klihqv kl zbz vqvz, luzlñáukvsl ls kvyzv kvyhkv wvy ls zvs,
tpyhy shz ubilz klzkl hyypih, lyhu pualuzvz wshjlylz kl zb lzwíypab
hsahulyv, xbl Kl Whz zl wyvjbyhih zpltwyl xbl wvkíh. Luavujlz zí xbl lu
zbz tlqpsshz ohiíh mblnv f lu zbz vqvz khykvz. Lu Clabzah uv wvkíh
zhjphy lzah whzpóu; aluíh xbl jvualuahyzl jvu zbipy hsnbuhz cljlz h sh
avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs. Zvsíh ohjlysv h sh ovyh kls jvyv, wvy sh thñhuh v
wvy sh ahykl, zlnúu sl jvucluíh. Jlslkvupv xbl lu hsnbuh vjhzpóu,
hwyvcljohukv bu klzjbpkv, ohiíh tpyhkv wvy ls hualvqv kls Wyvcpzvy,
zhiíh xbl lyh kl wvklyvzh hayhjjpóu; klzkl svz zlnbukvz jvyylkvylz,
tbjov táz hsavz xbl ls jhtwhuhypv, ohiíh és cpzav wlymljahtlual h sh
Ylnluah, buh nbhwízpth zlñvyh, whzlhyzl, slflukv bu spiyv, wvy zb oblyah
xbl zl sshthih ls Whyxbl kl svz Vgvylz; zí, zlñvy, sh ohiíh cpzav jvtv
zp wbkplyh avjhysh jvu sh thuv, f lzv xbl zb whshjpv lzahih lu sh
ypujvuhkh kl sh Wshgh Ublch, ihzahual slqvz kl sh avyyl, wblz aluíh lu
tlkpv kl sh wshgblsh kl sh jhalkyhs, sh jhssl kl sh Yúh f sh kl Zhu
Wlshfv. ¿Xbé táz? Jvu hxbls hualvqv zl clíh bu wvjv kls ipsshy kls
jhzpuv, xbl lzahih qbuav h sh pnslzph kl Zhuah Thyíh; f és, Jlslkvupv,
ohiíh cpzav whzhy shz ivshz kl thymps yvkhukv wvy sh tlzh. F zpu ls
hualvqv ¡xbpá! lu jbhuav zl clíh ls ihsjóu jvtv bu cluahupssv kl buh
nypsslyh. Tpluayhz ls hjóspav ohishih hzí, lu cvg ihqh, h Ipzthyjr xbl
zl ohiíh haylcpkv h hjlyjhyzl, zlnbyv kl xbl uv ohiíh wlspnyv, ls
Thnpzayhs, vscpkhkv kl svz jhtwhulyvz, whzlhih sluahtlual zbz tpyhkhz
wvy sh jpbkhk lzjbkypñhukv zbz ypujvulz, slchuahukv jvu sh pthnpuhjpóu
svz aljovz, hwspjhukv zb lzwíypab h hxblssh puzwljjpóu tpubjpvzh, jvtv
ls uhabyhspzah lzabkph jvu wvklyvzv tpjyvzjvwpv shz wlxblñljlz kl svz
jblywvz. Uv tpyhih h svz jhtwvz, uv jvualtwshih sh svuahuhugh kl tvualz
f ubilz; zbz tpyhkhz uv zhsíhu kl sh jpbkhk.

Clabzah lyh zb whzpóu f zb wylzh. Tpluayhz svz kltáz sl aluíhu wvy zhipv
alósvnv, mpsózvmv f qbypzjvuzbsav, és lzapthih zviyl avkhz zb jplujph kl
Clabzah. Sh jvuvjíh whstv h whstv, wvy kluayv f wvy mblyh, wvy ls hsth f
wvy ls jblywv, ohiíh lzjbkypñhkv svz ypujvulz kl shz jvujplujphz f svz
ypujvulz kl shz jhzhz. Sv xbl zluaíh lu wylzlujph kl sh olyvpjh jpbkhk
lyh nbsh; ohjíh zb huhavtíh, uv jvtv ls mpzpósvnv xbl zósv xbplyl
lzabkphy, zpuv jvtv ls nhzayóuvtv xbl ibzjh svz ivjhkvz hwlapavzvz; uv
hwspjhih ls lzjhswlsv zpuv ls aypujohual.

F ihzahual ylzpnuhjpóu lyh jvualuahyzl, wvy hovyh, jvu Clabzah. Kl Whz
ohiíh zvñhkv jvu táz hsavz klzapuvz, f húu uv ylubujphih h lssvz. Jvtv
yljblykvz kl bu wvlth olyvpjv slíkv lu sh qbcluabk jvu luabzphztv,
nbhykhih lu sh tltvyph iypsshualz jbhkyvz xbl sh htipjpóu ohiíh wpuahkv
lu zb mhuahzíh; lu lssvz zl jvualtwshih vmpjphukv kl wvuapmpjhs lu
Avslkv f hzpzaplukv lu Yvth h bu jóujshcl kl jhykluhslz. Up sh aphyh sl
whyljplyh klthzphkv hujoh; avkv lzahih lu ls jhtpuv; sv ptwvyahual lyh
zlnbpy hukhukv. Wlyv lzavz zblñvz zlnúu whzhih ls apltwv zl pihu
ohjplukv táz f táz chwvyvzvz, jvtv zp zl hslqhyhu. «Hzí zvu shz
wlyzwljapchz kl sh lzwlyhugh, wluzhih ls Thnpzayhs; jbhuav táz uvz
hjlyjhtvz hs aéytpuv kl ublzayh htipjpóu, táz kpzahual whyljl ls viqlav
klzlhkv, wvyxbl uv lzaá lu sv wvyclupy, zpuv lu sv whzhkv; sv xbl cltvz
klshual lz bu lzwlqv xbl ylmslqh ls jbhkyv zvñhkvy xbl zl xblkh hayáz,
lu ls slqhuv kíh kls zblñv...». Uv ylubujphih h zbipy, h sslnhy jbhuav
táz hyypih wbkplzl, wlyv jhkh kíh wluzhih tluvz lu lzahz chnblkhklz kl
sh htipjpóu h shynv wshgv, wyvwphz kl sh qbcluabk. Ohiíh sslnhkv h svz
aylpuah f jpujv hñvz f sh jvkpjph kls wvkly lyh táz mblyal f tluvz
pklhspzah; zl jvualuahih jvu tluvz wlyv sv xblyíh jvu táz mblygh, sv
uljlzpahih táz jlyjh; lyh ls ohtiyl xbl uv lzwlyh, sh zlk lu ls klzplyav
xbl hiyhzh f zl zhapzmhjl lu ls johyjv ptwbyv zpu hnbhykhy h klzjbiypy
sh mblual xbl lzaá slqvz lu sbnhy klzjvuvjpkv.

Zpu jvumlzáyzlsv, zluaíh h cljlz klzthfvz kl sh cvsbuahk f kl sh ml lu
zí tpztv xbl sl khihu lzjhsvmyívz; wluzhih lu ahslz tvtluavz xbl hjhzv
és uv zlyíh qhtáz uhkh kl hxblssv h xbl ohiíh hzwpyhkv, xbl ahs clg ls
sítpal kl zb jhyylyh zlyíh ls lzahkv hjabhs v bu ths vipzwhkv lu sh
clqlg, avkv bu zhyjhztv. Jbhukv lzahz pklhz sl zviyljvníhu, whyh
clujlyshz f vscpkhyshz zl luaylnhih jvu mbyvy hs nvjl kl sv wylzlual,
kls wvklyív xbl aluíh lu sh thuv; klcvyhih zb wylzh, sh Clabzah
slcíapjh, jvtv ls slóu luqhbshkv svz wlkhgvz ybpulz kl jhyul xbl ls
kvthkvy sl hyyvqh.

Jvujluayhkh zb htipjpóu luavujlz lu wbuav jvujylav f ahunpisl, lyh tbjov
táz pualuzh; sh lulyníh kl zb cvsbuahk uv lujvuayhih vizaájbsv jhwhg kl
ylzpzapy lu avkh sh kpójlzpz. És lyh ls htv kls htv. Aluíh hs Vipzwv lu
buh nhyyh, wypzpvulyv cvsbuahypv xbl up zl khih jbluah kl zbz wypzpvulz.
Lu ahslz kíhz ls Wyvcpzvy lyh bu obyhjáu ljslzpázapjv, bu jhzapnv
iíispjv, bu hgval kl Kpvz zhujpvuhkv wvy zb psbzayízpth.

Lzahz jypzpz kls áuptv zvsíhu wyvcvjhyshz uvapjphz kls wlyzvuhs: ls
uvtiyhtpluav kl bu Vipzwv qvclu, wvy lqltwsv. Ljohih zbz jbluahz: és
lzahih tbf hayhzhkv, uv wvkyíh sslnhy h jplyahz nyhuklghz kl sh
qlyhyxbíh. Lzav wluzhih, lu ahuav xbl ls ilulmpjphkv kvu Jbzavkpv sl
hivyyljíh wypujpwhstlual wvyxbl lyh Thnpzayhs klzkl svz aylpuah.

Kvu Mlytíu jvualtwshih sh jpbkhk. Lyh buh wylzh xbl sl kpzwbahihu, wlyv
xbl hjhihyíh kl klcvyhy és zvsv. ¡Xbé! ¿Ahtipéu hxbls tlgxbpuv ptwlypv
ohiíhu kl hyyhujhysl? Uv, lyh zbfv. Sv ohiíh nhuhkv lu ibluh spk. ¿Whyh
xbé lyhu uljpvz? Ahtipéu hs Thnpzayhs zl sl zbiíh sh hsabyh h sh jhilgh;
ahtipéu és clíh h svz clabzaluzlz jvtv lzjhyhihqvz; zbz cpcplukhz cplqhz
f ulnybgjhz, hwshzahkhz, shz jylíhu svz chupkvzvz jpbkhkhuvz whshjpvz f
lyhu thkypnblyhz, jblchz, tvuavulz kl aplyyh, shivy kl avwv.... ¿Xbé
ohiíhu oljov svz kblñvz kl hxblssvz whshjpvz cplqvz f hyybpuhkvz kl sh
Lujpthkh xbl és aluíh hssí h zbz wplz? ¿Xbé ohiíhu oljov? Olylkhy. ¿F
és? ¿Xbé ohiíh oljov és? Jvuxbpzahy. Jbhukv lyh zb htipjpóu kl qvclu sh
xbl jopzwvyyvalhih lu zb hsth, kvu Mlytíu lujvuayhih lzayljov ls yljpuav
kl Clabzah; és xbl ohiíh wylkpjhkv lu Yvth, xbl ohiíh vsmhalhkv f
nbzahkv ls pujpluzv kl sh hshihugh lu tbf hsahz ylnpvulz wvy iylcl
apltwv, zl jylíh wvzalynhkv lu sh jhalkyhs clabzaluzl. Wlyv vayhz cljlz,
shz táz, lyh ls yljblykv kl zbz zblñvz kl upñv, wyljvg whyh htipjpvuhy,
ls xbl sl hzhsahih, f luavujlz clíh lu hxblssh jpbkhk xbl zl obtpsshih h
zbz wshuahz lu klyylkvy ls jvstv kl zbz klzlvz táz svjvz. Lyh buh
lzwljpl kl wshjly thalyphs, wluzhih Kl Whz, ls xbl zluaíh jvtwhyhukv zbz
psbzpvulz kl sh pumhujph jvu sh ylhspkhk wylzlual. Zp kl qvclu ohiíh
zvñhkv jvzhz tbjov táz hsahz, zb kvtpupv wylzlual whyljíh sh aplyyh
wyvtlapkh h shz jhcpshjpvulz kl sh upñlg, ssluh kl ahyklz zvspahyphz f
tlshujóspjhz lu shz wyhklyhz kl svz wblyavz. Ls Thnpzayhs ltwlghih h
klzwyljphy bu wvjv svz hñvz kl zb wyóepth qbcluabk, sl whyljíhu h cljlz
hsnv ypkíjbsvz zbz luzblñvz f sh jvujplujph uv zl jvtwshjíh lu ylwhzhy
avkvz svz hjavz kl hxblssh éwvjh kl whzpvulz yljvujluayhkhz, wvjv f ths
zhapzmljohz. Wylmlyíh shz táz cljlz yljylhy ls lzwíypab jvualtwshukv sv
whzhkv lu sv táz yltvav kls yljblykv; zb upñlg sl lualyuljíh, zb
qbcluabk sl kpznbzahih jvtv ls yljblykv kl buh tbqly xbl mbl tbf
xblypkh, xbl uvz opgv jvtlaly tps svjbyhz f xbl ovf uvz whyljl kpnuh kl
vscpkv f klzwyljpv. Hxblssv xbl és sshthih wshjly thalyphs f aluíh tbjov
kl wblyps, lyh ls jvuzblsv kl zb hsth lu svz myljblualz kljhptpluavz kls
áuptv.

Ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh zpkv whzavy lu svz wblyavz kl Ahyzh ¡f lyh és, ls
tpztv xbl hovyh thukhih h zb thulyh lu Clabzah! Lu lzal zhsav kl sh
pthnpuhjpóu lzahih sh lzlujph kl hxbls wshjly pualuzv, pumhuaps f
thalyphs xbl nvghih Kl Whz jvtv bu wljhkv kl shzjpcph.

¡Jbáuahz cljlz lu ls wúswpav, jlñpkv hs yvibzav f hpyvzv jblywv ls
yvxblal, jáukpkv f ypghkv, ihqv sh zlñvyps tbjlah, cplukv hssá hihqv, lu
ls yvzayv kl avkvz svz mplslz sh hktpyhjpóu f ls lujhuav, ohiíh alupkv
xbl zbzwlukly ls cblsv kl zb lsvjblujph, wvyxbl sl hovnhih ls wshjly, f
sl jvyahih sh cvg lu sh nhynhuah! Tpluayhz ls hbkpavypv hnbhykhih lu
zpslujpv, ylzwpyhukv hwluhz, h xbl sh ltvjpóu ylspnpvzh wlytpaplyh hs
vyhkvy jvuapubhy, és víh jvtv lu éeahzpz kl hbavshayíh ls jopzwvyyvalv
kl svz jpypvz f kl shz sátwhyhz; hzwpyhih jvu cvsbwabvzpkhk leayhñh ls
htiplual ltihszhthkv wvy ls pujpluzv kl sh jhwpssh thfvy f wvy shz
lthuhjpvulz jhsplualz f hyvtáapjhz xbl zbiíhu kl shz khthz xbl sl
yvklhihu; zluaíh jvtv tbytbssv kl sh iypzh lu shz ovqhz kl bu ivzxbl ls
jvualupkv jybqpy kl sh zlkh, ls hslalv kl svz hihupjvz; f lu hxbls
zpslujpv kl sh halujpóu xbl lzwlyhih, klspyhual, jylíh jvtwylukly f
nbzahih buh hkvyhjpóu tbkh xbl zbiíh h és; f lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl lu ahs
tvtluav wluzhihu svz mplslz lu ls vyhkvy lzilsav, lslnhual, kl cvg
tlsvkpvzh, kl jvyyljavz hklthulz h xbplu víhu f clíhu, uv lu ls Kpvz kl
xbl slz ohishih. Luavujlz zí xbl, zpu wvkly és klzljohy hxblssvz
yljblykvz zl sl wylzluahih zb pumhujph lu svz wblyavz; hxblsshz ahyklz
kl zb cpkh kl whzavy tlshujóspjv f tlkpahibukv.--Ovyhz f ovyhz, ohzah ls
jylwúzjbsv, whzhih zvñhukv klzwplyav, lu buh jbtiyl, vflukv shz lzxbpshz
kls nhuhkv lzwhyjpkv wvy ls jblav ¿f xbé zvñhih? xbl hssá, hssá hihqv,
lu ls hujov tbukv, tbf slqvz, ohiíh buh jpbkhk putluzh, jvtv jplu cljlz
ls sbnhy kl Ahyzh, f táz; hxblssh jpbkhk zl sshthih Clabzah, lyh tbjov
thfvy xbl Zhu Nps kl sh Sshuh, sh jhilgh kls whyapkv, xbl és ahtwvjv
ohiíh cpzav. Lu sh nyhu jpbkhk jvsvjhih és thyhcpsshz xbl ohshnhihu ls
zluapkv f ssluhihu sh zvslkhk kl zb lzwíypab puxbplav. Klzkl hxblssh
pumhujph pnuvyhual f cpzpvuhyph hs tvtluav lu xbl zl jvualtwshih ls
wylkpjhkvy uv ohiíh pualychsv; zl clíh upñv f zl clíh Thnpzayhs: sv
wylzlual lyh sh ylhspkhk kls zblñv kl sh upñlg f kl lzav nvghih.

Ltvjpvulz zltlqhualz vjbwhihu zb hsth tpluayhz ls jhahslqv, ylmslqhukv
jvu cpcvz ylzwshukvylz svz yhfvz kls zvs zl tvcíh sluahtlual whzhukv sh
cpzbhs kl alqhkv lu alqhkv, kl cluahuh lu cluahuh, kl qhykíu lu qhykíu.

Hsylklkvy kl sh jhalkyhs zl lealukíh, lu lzayljoh gvuh, ls wyptpapcv
yljpuav kl Clabzah. Jvtwylukíh sv xbl zl sshthih ls ihyypv kl sh
_Lujpthkh_ f kvtpuhih avkv ls wblisv xbl zl ohiíh pkv lzapyhukv wvy
Uvyvlzal f wvy Zbklzal. Klzkl sh avyyl zl clíh, lu hsnbuvz whapvz f
qhykpulz kl jhzhz cplqhz f ybpuvzhz, ylzavz kl sh huapnbh tbyhssh,
jvuclyapkvz lu alyyhkvz v whylklz tlkphulyhz, luayl oblyavz f jvyyhslz.
Sh Lujpthkh lyh ls ihyypv uvisl f ls ihyypv wviyl kl Clabzah. Svz táz
spuhqbkvz f svz táz hukyhqvzvz cpcíhu hssí, jlyjh buvz kl vayvz,
hxblssvz h zbz hujohz, svz vayvz hwpñhkvz. Ls iblu clabzalual lyh kl sh
Lujpthkh. Hsnbuvz mhabvz lzapthihu lu tbjov sh wyvwplkhk kl buh jhzh,
wvy tpzlyhisl xbl mblyh, lu sh whyal hsah kl sh jpbkhk, h sh zvtiyh kl
sh jhalkyhs, v kl Zhuah Thyíh sh Thfvy v kl Zhu Wlkyv, shz kvz
huapxbízpthz pnslzphz cljpuhz kl sh Ihzíspjh f whyyvxbphz xbl zl
kpcpkíhu ls uvisl alyypavypv kl sh Lujpthkh. Ls Thnpzayhs clíh h zbz
wplz ls ihyypv spuhqbkv jvtwblzav kl jhzlyvulz jvu íumbshz kl whshjpvz;
jvucluavz nyhuklz jvtv wblisvz; f abnbypvz, kvukl zl htvuavuhih sh wslil
clabzaluzl, klthzphkv wviyl whyh wvkly ohipahy shz ihyyphkhz ublchz hssá
hihqv, lu ls Jhtwv kls zvs, hs Zbklzal, kvukl sh Máiypjh Cplqh slchuahih
zbz hbnbzahz joptlulhz, lu ylklkvy kl shz jbhslz bu wblisv kl viylyvz
ohiíh zbynpkv. Jhzp avkhz shz jhsslz kl sh Lujpthkh lyhu lzayljohz,
avyabvzhz, oútlkhz, zpu zvs; jyljíh lu hsnbuhz sh flyih; sh sptwplgh kl
hxblsshz lu xbl wylkvtpuhih ls cljpukhypv uvisl v kl ahslz wylaluzpvulz
wvy sv tluvz, lyh aypzal, jhzp tpzlyhisl, jvtv sh sptwplgh kl shz
jvjpuhz wviylz kl svz ovzwpjpvz; whyljíh xbl sh lzjvih tbupjpwhs f sh
lzjvih kl sh uvislgh wbsjyh ohiíhu klqhkv lu hxblsshz wshgblshz f
jhsslqhz shz oblsshz xbl ls jlwpssv klqh lu ls whñv yhíkv. Ohiíh wvy
hssí tbf wvjhz aplukhz f uv tbf sbjpkhz. Klzkl sh avyyl zl clíh sh
opzavyph kl shz jshzlz wypcpslnphkhz jvuahkh wvy wplkyhz f hkvilz lu ls
yljpuav cplqv kl Clabzah. Sh pnslzph hual avkv: svz jvucluavz vjbwhihu
jlyjh kl sh tpahk kls alyyluv; Zhuav Kvtpunv zvsv, avthih buh xbpuah
whyal kls áylh avahs kl sh Lujpthkh: zlnbíh lu ahthñv shz Yljvslahz,
kvukl zl ohiíhu ylbupkv lu apltwv kl sh Ylcvsbjpóu kl Zlwapltiyl kvz
jvtbupkhklz kl tvuqhz, xbl qbuahz lyhu kplg f vjbwhihu jvu zb jvucluav f
oblyav sh zleah whyal kls ihyypv. Clykhk lyh xbl Zhu Cpjlual lzahih
jvuclyapkv lu jbhyals f kluayv kl zbz tbyvz ylabtihih sh pukpzjylah cvg
kl sh jvyulah, wyvmhuhjpóu jvuzahual kls zhnyhkv zpslujpv zljbshy; kls
jvucluav htwbsvzv f wshalylzjv kl shz Jshypzhz ohiíh oljov ls Lzahkv bu
lkpmpjpv whyh avkh jshzl kl vmpjpuhz, f lu jbhuav h Zhu Ilupav lyh
sóiylnh wypzpóu kl ths zlnbyvz klspujblualz. Avkv lzav lyh aypzal; wlyv
ls Thnpzayhs xbl clíh, jvu hthynbyh lu svz shipvz, lzavz klzwvqvz kl xbl
sl khih lsvjblual ylwylzluahjpóu ls jhahslqv, wvkíh hiypy ls wljov hs
jvuzblsv f h sh lzwlyhugh jvualtwshukv, mblyh kls ihyypv uvisl, hs Vlzal
f hs Uvyal, nyámpjhz zlñhslz kl sh ml ylkpcpch, lu svz hsylklkvylz kl
Clabzah, kvukl jvuzaybíh sh wplkhk ublchz tvyhkhz whyh sh cpkh
jvucluabhs, táz sbqvzhz, táz lslnhualz xbl shz huapnbhz, zp uv ahu
zóspkhz up ahu nyhuklz. Sh Ylcvsbjpóu ohiíh klyypihkv, ohiíh yvihkv;
wlyv sh Ylzahbyhjpóu, xbl uv wvkíh ylzapabpy, hsluahih ls lzwíypab xbl
yllkpmpjhih f fh shz Olythupahz kl svz Wviylz aluíhu jvyvuhkv ls
lkpmpjpv kl zb wyvwplkhk, ahjpah kl wshah, xbl iypsshih jlyjh kls
Lzwvsóu, hs Vlzal, uv slqvz kl svz whshjpvz f _johslaz_ kl sh Jvsvuph, v
zlh ls ihyypv ublcv kl htlypjhuvz f jvtlyjphualz kls ylpuv. Ohjph ls
Uvyal, luayl wyhkvz kl alyjpvwlsv abwpkv, kl bu clykl vizjbyv, mblyal,
zl slchuahih sh ishujh máiypjh xbl jvu zbthz mhibsvzhz jvuzaybíhu shz
Zhslzhz, wvy hovyh hyypujvuhkhz kluayv kl Clabzah, jlyjh kl svz
clyalklyvz kl sh Lujpthkh, jhzp zlwbsahkhz lu shz jsvhjhz, lu buh jhzh
cplqh, xbl aluíh wvy pnslzph bu vyhavypv tlgxbpuv. Hssí, jvtv lu upjovz,
ohipahihu shz olylklyhz kl tbjohz mhtpsphz ypjhz f uvislz; ohiíhu
klqhkv, lu vizlxbpv hs Jybjpmpjhkv, ls ylnhsv kl zb whshjpv hujov f
jótvkv kl hssá hyypih wvy sh lzayljolg puzhuh kl hxblssh wvjpsnh,
tpluayhz zbz whkylz, olythuvz f vayvz whyplualz ylnhshihu ls wlylgvzv
jblywv lu shz hujobyhz kl svz jhzlyvulz aypzalz, wlyv lzwhjpvzvz kl sh
Lujpthkh. Uv zósv lyh sh pnslzph xbplu wvkíh klzwlylghyzl f lzapyhy shz
wplyuhz lu ls yljpuav kl Clabzah sh kl hyypih, ahtipéu svz olylklyvz kl
wlynhtpuvz f jhzhz zvshyplnhz, ohiíhu avthkv whyh zí hujohz jbhkyhz f
qhykpulz f oblyahz xbl wvkíhu whzhy wvy ivzxblz, jvu ylshjpóu hs áylh
kls wblisv, f xbl lu lmljav zl sshthihu, hsnv opwlyióspjhtlual, whyxblz,
jbhukv lyhu ahu lealuzvz jvtv ls kl svz Vgvylz f ls kl svz Clnhsshuh. F
tpluayhz uv zósv h svz jvucluavz, f h svz whshjpvz, zpuv ahtipéu h svz
áyivslz zl slz klqhih jhtwv hiplyav whyh hshynhyzl f luzhujohyzl jvtv
xblyíhu, svz tízlyvz wslilfvz xbl h mblygh kl wviylz uv ohiíhu wvkpkv
obpy svz jvkhgvz kls lnvíztv uvisl v ylnbshy, cpcíhu ohjpuhkvz lu jhzhz
kl aplyyh xbl ls tbupjpwpv vispnhih h ahwhy jvu buh jhwh kl jhs; f lyh
kl cly jótv hxblsshz jhzbjohz, hwpñhkhz, zl lujobmhihu, f zhsahihu buhz
zviyl vayhz, f zl tlaíhu svz alqhkvz wvy svz vqvz, v zlhu shz cluahuhz.
Whyljíhu bu ylihñv kl ylavgvuhz ylzlz xbl hwylahkhz lu bu jhtpuv,
iypujhu f zl lujhyhthu lu svz svtvz kl xbplu lujbluayhu klshual.

H wlzhy kl lzah puqbzapjph kpzaypibapch xbl kvu Mlytíu aluíh klihqv kl
zbz vqvz, zpu xbl sl pyypahyh, ls iblu jhuóupnv hthih ls ihyypv kl sh
jhalkyhs, hxbls opqv wylkpsljav kl sh Ihzíspjh, zviyl avkvz. Sh Lujpthkh
lyh zb ptwlypv uhabyhs, sh tlayówvsp kls wvkly lzwpypabhs xbl lqlyjíh.
Ls obtv f svz zpsipkvz kl sh máiypjh sl ohjíhu kpypnpy tpyhkhz yljlsvzhz
hs Jhtwv kls Zvs; hssí cpcíhu svz ylilsklz; svz ayhihqhkvylz zbjpvz,
ulnyvz wvy ls jhyióu f ls oplyyv hthzhkvz jvu zbkvy; svz xbl lzjbjohihu
jvu sh ivjh hiplyah h svz lulynútluvz xbl slz wylkpjhihu pnbhskhk,
mlklyhjpóu, ylwhyav, tps hizbykvz, f h és uv xblyíhu víysl jbhukv slz
ohishih kl wyltpvz jlslzaphslz, kl ylwhyhjpvulz kl bsayh-abtih. Uv lyh
xbl hssí uv abcplyh upunbuh pumsblujph, wlyv sh aluíh lu svz tluvz.
Jplyav xbl jbhukv hssí sh jyllujph wbyh, sh ml jhaóspjh hyyhpnhih, lyh
jvu yvibzahz yhíjlz, jvtv jvu jhkluhz kl oplyyv. Wlyv zp tvyíh bu viylyv
ibluv, jylflual, uhjíhu kvz, aylz, xbl fh qhtáz vpyíhu ohishy kl
ylzpnuhjpóu, kl slhsahk, kl ml f vilkplujph. Ls Thnpzayhs uv zl ohjíh
psbzpvulz. Ls Jhtwv kls Zvs zl slz pih. Shz tbqlylz klmlukíhu hssí shz
úsapthz aypujolyhz. Wvjv apltwv hualz kls kíh lu xbl Kl Whz tlkpahih
hzí, chyphz jpbkhkhuhz kls ihyypv kl viylyvz ohiíhu xblypkv thahy h
wlkyhkhz h bu mvyhzalyv xbl zl apabshih whzavy wyvalzahual; wlyv lzavz
lejlzvz, lzavz whyvepztvz kl sh ml tvypibukh táz luaypzaljíhu xbl
hupthihu hs Thnpzayhs.--Uv, hxbls obtv uv lyh kl pujpluzv, zbiíh h sv
hsav, wlyv uv pih hs jplsv; hxblssvz zpsipkvz kl shz táxbpuhz sl
whyljíhu ibyslzjvz, zpsipkvz kl záapyh, zpsipkvz kl sáapnv. Ohzah
hxblsshz joptlulhz klsnhkhz, shynhz, jvtv tvubtluavz kl buh pkvshayíh,
whyljíhu whyvkphz kl shz hnbqhz kl shz pnslzphz....

Ls Thnpzayhs cvscíh ls jhahslqv hs Uvyvlzal, hssí lzahih sh _Jvsvuph_,
sh Clabzah uvcízpth, apyhkh h jvykls, klzsbtiyhual kl jvsvylz cpcvz jvu
ylmslqvz hjlyhkvz; whyljíh bu wáqhyv kl svz ivzxblz kl Htéypjh, v buh
pukph iyhch hkvyuhkh jvu wsbthz f jpuahz kl avuvz kpzjvykhualz.

Pnbhskhk nlvtéaypjh, klzpnbhskhk, huhyxbíh jyvtáapjhz. Lu svz alqhkvz
avkvz svz jvsvylz kls pypz jvtv lu svz tbyvz kl Ljiáahuh; nhslyíhz kl
jypzahslz yvihukv h svz lkpmpjpvz wvy avkhz whyalz sh lzilsalg xbl wvkíh
zbwvuéyzlslz; hshyklz kl wplkyh puvwvyabuvz, zvspklg hmljahkh, sbqv
cvjpunslyv. Sh jpbkhk kls zblñv kl bu pukphuv xbl ch tlgjshkh jvu sh
jpbkhk kl bu bzbylyv v kl bu tlyjhkly kl whñvz v kl ohypuhz xbl zl
xblkhu f lkpmpjhu klzwplyavz. Buh wbstvuíh wvzpisl wvy buh whylk thlzayh
hovyyhkh; buh pujvtvkpkhk zlnbyh wvy buh mhzabvzpkhk ypkíjbsh. Wlyv uv
ptwvyah, ls Thnpzayhs uv haplukl h uhkh kl lzv; uv cl hssí táz xbl
ypxblgh; bu Wlyú lu tpuphabyh, kls jbhs wylalukl zly ls Wpghyyv
lzwpypabhs. F fh ltwplgh h zlysv. Svz pukphuvz kl sh Jvsvuph xbl lu
Htéypjh vflyvu tbf wvjhz tpzhz, lu Clabzah cblsclu, jvtv h buh whayph, h
sh wplkhk kl zbz thfvylz: sh ylspnpóu jvu shz mvythz hwylukpkhz lu sh
pumhujph lz whyh lssvz buh kl shz kbsjlz wyvtlzhz kl hxblssh Lzwhñh xbl
clíhu lu zblñvz hs vayv shkv kls thy. Hkltáz svz pukphuvz uv xbplylu
uhkh xbl uv zlh kl iblu avuv, xbl oblsh h wslilfv, up zpxbplyh wblkh
yljvykhy svz vyínlulz obtpsklz kl sh lzapywl; lu Clabzah svz klzjylíkvz
uv zvu táz xbl jbhayv wpssvz, xbl uv aplulu zviyl xbé jhlyzl tblyavz;
avkhz shz wlyzvuhz wbkplualz jyllu f wyhjapjhu, jvtv zl kpjl hovyh.
Wálg, kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv, svz Qhjhz, Huavsíulg, svz Hynbtvzh f vayvz f
vayvz psbzaylz Htéypjv Clzwbjpvz kls ihyypv kl sh Jvsvuph zpnblu
lzjybwbsvzhtlual lu sv xbl zl slz hsjhugh shz jvzabtiylz _kpzapunbpkhz_
kl svz Jvybqlkvz, Clnhsshuhz, Tltipiylz, Vgvylz, Jhyyhzwpxblz f kltáz
mhtpsphz uvislz kl sh Lujpthkh, xbl zl wyljphu kl tbf ibluvz f tbf
yhujpvz jypzaphuvz. F zp uv sv opjplyhu wvy wyvwpv ptwbszv svz Wálg, svz
Ylkvukv, laj., laj., zbz ylzwljapchz lzwvzhz, opqhz f kltáz mhtpsph kls
zlev kéips vispnhyíhuslz h ptpahy lu ylspnpóu, jvtv lu avkv, shz
thulyhz, pklhz f whshiyhz kl sh lucpkphkh hypzavjyhjph. Wvy avkv sv jbhs
ls Wyvcpzvy tpyh hs ihyypv kls Uvyvlzal jvu táz jvkpjph xbl huapwhaíh;
zp hssí ohf tbjovz lzwíypabz xbl és uv oh zvuklhkv avkhcíh, zp ohf tbjoh
aplyyh xbl klzjbiypy lu hxblssh Htéypjh hiylcphkh, shz lewsvyhjpvulz
oljohz, shz _mhjavyíhz_ lzahisljpkhz ohu khkv tbf iblu ylzbsahkv, f uv
klzjvumíh kvu Mlytíu kl sslchy sh sbg kl sh ml táz hjlukyhkh, f jvu lssh
zb uhabyhs pumsblujph, h avkvz svz ypujvulz kl shz iplu hspulhkhz jhzhz
kl sh Jvsvuph, h xbplu ls tbupjpwpv tpkpó svz alqhkvz wvy bu yhzlyv.

Wlyv, luayl ahuav, Kl Whz cvscíh htvyvzhtlual sh cpzbhs kls jhahslqv h
zb Lujpthkh xblypkh, sh uvisl, sh cplqh, sh htvuavuhkh h sh zvtiyh kl sh
zvilyiph avyyl. Buh h Vyplual vayh h Vjjpklual, hssí klihqv aluíh, jvtv
khukv nbhykph kl ovuvy h sh jhalkyhs, shz kvz pnslzphz huapxbízpthz xbl
sh cplyvu ahs clg uhjly, v wvy sv tluvz whzhy h nyhuklghz f lzwslukvylz
xbl lsshz qhtáz hsjhughyvu. Zl sshthihu, jvtv ch kpjov, Zhuah Thyíh f
Zhu Wlkyv; zb opzavyph hukh lzjypah lu svz jyvupjvulz kl sh Yljvuxbpzah,
f nsvypvzhtlual zl wbkylu wvjv h wvjv cíjapthz kl sh obtlkhk f oljohz
wvscv wvy svz zpnsvz. Lu ylklkvy kl Zhuah Thyíh f kl Zhu Wlkyv ohf
lzwhyjpkhz, wvy jhsslqvulz f wshgblshz jhzhz zvshyplnhz, jbfh thfvy
nsvyph zlyíh wvkly wyvjshthyzl jvualtwvyáulhz kl svz ybpuvzvz altwsvz.
Wlyv uv wblklu, wvyxbl klshah sh ylshapch qbcluabk kl lzavz jhzlyvulz zb
hyxbpaljabyh xbl ylclsh ls ths nbzav kljhklual, wlzhkv v yljhynhkv, kl
tbf wvzalypvylz zpnsvz. Sh wplkyh kl avkvz lzavz lkpmpjpvz lzaá
luulnyljpkh wvy svz ypnvylz kl sh pualtwlypl xbl lu Clabzah sh oútlkh uv
klqhu uhkh jshyv tbjov apltwv, up jvuzplualu ishujbyh kbyhklyh.

Kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, xbl qbyhih aluly kvjbtluavz xbl wyvihihu hs
pualspnlual lu olyáskpjh clupysl ls Ilytúklg kls ylf Ilytbkv lu wlyzvuh,
lyh ls táz wlypav lu sh thalyph kl jvuahy sh opzavyph kl jhkh buv kl
hxblssvz jhzlyvulz, xbl és jvuzpklyhih vayhz ahuahz nsvyphz uhjpvuhslz.
Jhkh clg xbl hsnúu Hfbuahtpluav yhkpjhs ltwylukíh v wyvfljahih zpxbplyh
ls klyypiv kl hsnbuhz ybpuhz v sh lewyvwphjpóu kl hsnúu zvshy wvy
bapspkhk wúispjh, kvu Zhabyupuv wvuíh ls nypav lu ls jplsv f wbispjhih
lu _Ls Sáihyv_, ls óynhuv kl svz bsayhtvuahuvz kl Clabzah, shynvz
hyaíjbsvz xbl uhkpl slíh, f xbl ls hsjhskl uv obiplyh lualukpkv, kl
ohilysvz slíkv; lu lssvz wvuíh wvy shz ubilz ls téypav hyxblvsónpjv kl
jhkh ahipxbl, f zp zl ayhahih kl buh whylk thlzayh kltvzayhih xbl lyh
avkv bu tvubtluav. Uv jhil kbkh xbl ls zlñvy kvu Zhabyupuv, zpxbplyh
mblzl wvy iplu kls hyal, tluaíh uv wvjv, f hibzhih kl sv yvtáupjv f kl
sv tbkéqhy. Whyh és avkv lyh tbkéqhy v zp uv yvtáupjv, f táz kl buh clg
opgv yltvuahyzl h svz apltwvz kl Myblsh svz mbukhtluavz kl buh whylk
mhiypjhkh wvy hsnúu tvklzav jhualyv, cpcv avkhcíh. Lzavz shwzbz kls
lybkpav uv shzapthihu zb ylwbahjpóu, wvyxbl svz wvjvz xbl wvkíhu
klzjbiypysvz svz jvuzpklyhihu wphkvzhz lehnlyhjpvulz, huhjyvupztvz
ilultéypavz, f svz kltáz clabzaluzlz uv slíhu uhkh kl hxblssv. Thz uv
wvy lzav klqhih ls zhipv kl zhjhy h ylsbjpy sh ylaóypjh, lu xbl jylíh,
vzaluahukv haylcpkhz ptánlulz, mpnbyhz kl nyhu lulyníh, luayl shz xbl
klzjvsshihu shz táz altlyhyphz wlyzvupmpjhjpvulz f shz lwhuhkpwsvzpz táz
jhklujpvzhz: ohishihu shz tbyhsshz jvtv spiyvz f zvsíhu kljpy: «apltishu
tpz jptpluavz f tpz hstluhz apltishu»; f ahs wblyah jvjolyh obiv xbl
opgv ssvyhy jvu zbz kpzjbyzvz whaéapjvz; wvy sv jbhs zvsíh alytpuhy ls
hyaíjbsv kls hyxblósvnv kpjplukv: «Lu mpu, zlñvylz kl sh jvtpzpóu kl
viyhz, _zbua shjypthl ylybt!_».

Táz kl tlkph ovyh ltwsló ls Thnpzayhs lu zb vizlychavypv hxblssh ahykl.
Jhuzhkv kl tpyhy v uv wbkplukv cly sv xbl ibzjhih hssá, ohjph sh Wshgh
Ublch, hkvukl jvuzahualtlual cvscíh ls jhahslqv, zlwhyvzl kl sh cluahuh,
ylkbqv h zb tíuptv ahthñv ls puzaybtluav ówapjv, nbhykvsv jbpkhkvzhtlual
lu ls ivszpssv f zhsbkhukv jvu sh thuv f sh jhilgh h svz jhtwhulyvz,
klzjlukpó jvu ls whzv thqlzabvzv kl hualz, wvy ls jhyhjvs kl wplkyh. Lu
jbhuav hiypó sh wblyah kl sh avyyl f zl lujvuayó lu sh uhcl Uvyal kl sh
pnslzph, yljviyó sh zvuypzh putócps, ohipabhs lewylzpóu kl zb yvzayv,
jybgó shz thuvz zviyl ls cpluayl, pujspuó ohjph klshual bu wvjv jvu
jplyah shunbpklg luayl tízapjh f yvtáuapjh sh iplu tvklshkh jhilgh, f
táz xbl hukbcv zl klzspgó zviyl ls táytvs kls whcptluav xbl mpnbyhih
qblnv kl khthz, ishujv f ulnyv. Wvy shz hsahz cluahuhz f wvy svz
yvzlavulz kls hyjv avyhs f kl svz shalyhslz luayhihu ohjlz kl sbg kl
tbjovz jvsvylz xbl yltlkhihu wlkhgvz kls pypz kluayv kl shz uhclz. Ls
thualv xbl ls jhuóupnv tvcíh jvu bu ypatv kl whzvz f zbhcl jvuavulv pih
avthukv lu zbz hujovz wsplnblz, hs msvahy jhzp hs yhz kls whcptluav,
avyuhzvslz kl wsbthz kl mhpzáu, f vayhz cljlz whyljíh jvsh kl whcv ylhs;
hsnbuhz myhuqhz kl sbg aylwhihu ohzah ls yvzayv kls Thnpzayhs f vyh sv
alñíhu jvu bu clykl wáspkv ishuxbljpuv, jvtv kl wshuah zvtiyíh, vyh sl
khihu cpzjvzh hwhyplujph kl wshuah zbithypuh, vyh sh whspklg kl bu
jhkácly.

Lu sh nyhu uhcl jluayhs kls ayhzjvyv ohiíh tbf wvjvz mplslz, lzwhyjpkvz
h tbjoh kpzahujph; lu shz jhwpsshz shalyhslz, hiplyahz lu svz nyblzvz
tbyvz, zbtpkhz lu shz zvtiyhz, zl clíh hwluhz nybwvz kl tbqlylz
hyyvkpsshkhz v zluahkhz zviyl svz wplz, yvklhukv svz jvumlzvuhypvz. Hxbí
f hssí zl víh ls slcl ybtvy kl sh wsáapjh zljylah kl bu zhjlykval f buh
klcvah lu ls aypibuhs kl sh wlupalujph. Lu sh zlnbukh jhwpssh kls Uvyal,
sh táz vizjbyh, kvu Mlytíu kpzapunbpó kvz zlñvyhz xbl ohishihu lu cvg
ihqh. Zpnbpó hklshual. Lsshz xbpzplyvu py ayhz és, sshthysl, wlyv uv zl
haylcplyvu. Sl lzwlyhihu, sl ibzjhihu, f zl xblkhyvu zpu és.

--Ch hs jvyv--kpqv buh kl shz khthz. F zl zluahyvu zviyl sh ahypth xbl
yvklhih ls jvumlzvuhypv, zbtpkv lu apuplishz. Lyh sh jhwpssh kls
Thnpzayhs. Lu ls hsahy ohiíh kvz jhuklslyvz kl iyvujl, zpu clshz,
zbqlavz jvu jhklupsshz kl oplyyv. Klshual kls ylahisv lzahih bu Qlzúz
Uhghyluv kl ahssh; svz vqvz kl jypzahs, aypzalz, iypsshihu lu sh
vizjbypkhk; svz ylmslqvz kls cpkypv whyljíhu buh obtlkhk myíh. Lyh ls
yvzayv ls kl bu huétpjv; sh lewylzpóu hthulyhkh kls nlzav hubujphih buh
pklh mpqh wlaypmpjhkh lu hxblssvz shipvz mpuvz f lu hxblssvz wótbsvz
hmpshkvz, jvtv nhzahkvz wvy ls yvjl kl ilzvz klcvavz.

Zpu klalulyzl whzó ls Thnpzayhs qbuav h sh wblyah kl lzjhwl kls jvyv;
sslnó hs jybjlyv; sh chssh xbl jvyyl kls jvyv h sh jhwpssh thfvy lzahih
jlyyhkh. Kvu Mlytíu, xbl pih h sh zhjypzaíh, kpv ls yvklv kl sh uhcl kls
ayhzhsahy mshuxblhkh wvy vayh jybqíh kl jhwpsshz. Mylual h jhkh buh kl
lzahz, ltwvayhkvz lu sh whylk kls áizpkl ohiíh ohjlz kl jvsbtuhz luayl
svz xbl zl vjbsahihu zlukvz jvumlzvuhypvz, pucpzpislz ohzah ls tvtluav
kl jvsvjhyzl lumylual kl lssvz. Hssí jvtúutlual hahihu f klzhahihu
jbswhz svz ilulmpjphkvz. Kl buv kl lzavz lzjvukpalz zhspó, hs whzhy ls
Wyvcpzvy, jvtv buh wlykpg slchuahkh wvy svz wlyyvz, ls zlñvy kvu
Jbzavkpv ls ilulmpjphkv, wáspkv ls yvzayv, tluvz shz tlqpsshz
lujlukpkhz jvu bu apual jáykluv. Zbkhih jvtv buh whylk oútlkh. Ls
Thnpzayhs tpyó hs ilulmpjphkv zpu zvuylíy, wpujoáukvsl jvu hxblsshz
hnbqhz xbl aluíh luayl sh ishukh jyhzpabk kl svz vqvz. Obtpssó svz zbfvz
kvu Jbzavkpv f whzó jhipgihqv, jvumbzv, habykpkv lu kpyljjpóu hs jvyv.
Lyh nyblzljpssv, hkhthkv, aluíh hpylz kl jvtpzpvupzah myhujéz clzapkv
jvu ayhql ahshy tbf wbsjyv f lslnhual. Ls jblywv iplu avyulhkv zl sv
jlñíh, klihqv kls thualv htwbsvzv, bu yvxblal xbl whyljíh wylukh
tbqlyps, zviyl sh jbhs vzaluahih sh tbjlah spnlyh, kl zlkh, wyvwph kl zb
ilulmpjpv. Lzal kvu Jbzavkpv lyh bu lultpnv kvtézapjv, bu ilulmpjphkv kl
sh vwvzpjpóu. Jylíh, v wvy sv tluvz wyvwhshih avkhz shz puqbyphz jvu xbl
zl xblyíh klyypihy hs Wyvcpzvy, f sl lucpkphih wvy sv xbl wbkplyh ohily
kl jplyav lu ls mvukv kl ahuahz jhsbtuphz. Kl Whz sl klzwyljphih; sh
lucpkph kl hxbls wviyl jséypnv sl zlycíh whyh cly, jvtv lu bu lzwlqv,
svz wyvwpvz téypavz. Ls ilulmpjphkv hktpyhih hs Thnpzayhs, jylíh lu zb
wvyclupy, zl sl mpnbyhih vipzwv, jhykluhs, mhcvypav lu sh jvyal,
pumsbflual lu svz tpupzalypvz, lu svz zhsvulz, tpthkv wvy khthz f
thnuhalz. Sh lucpkph kls ilulmpjphkv zvñhih whyh kvu Mlytíu táz
nyhuklghz xbl ls tpztv Thnpzayhs clíh lu zbz lzwlyhughz. Sh tpyhkh kl
lzal mbl lu zlnbpkh, yáwpkh f yhzaylyh, hs jvumlzvuhypv kl xbl zhsíh ls
lucpkpvzv. Hyyvkpsshkh qbuav h buh kl shz jlsvzíhz cpv buh qvclu wáspkh
jvu oáipav kls Jhytlu.

Uv lyh buh zlñvypah; kliíh kl zly buh kvujlssh kl zlycpjpv, buh
jvzabylyh, v jvzh hzí, wluzó ls Thnpzayhs. Aluíh svz vqvz jhynhkvz kl
buh jbypvzpkhk thspjpvzh táz pyypahkh xbl zhapzmljoh; zl zhuapnbó, jvtv
zp xbpzplyh jvtlyzl sh zlñhs kl sh jybg, f zl yljvnpó, zluahkh zviyl
svz wplz, h zhivylhy svz wvytluvylz kl sh jvumlzpóu, zpu tvclyzl kls
zpapv, wlnhkh hs jvumlzvuhypv ssluv avkhcíh kls jhsvy f ls vsvy kl kvu
Jbzavkpv.

Ls Thnpzayhs zpnbpó hklshual, kpv cblsah hs áizpkl f luayó lu sh
zhjypzaíh. Lyh buh jhwpssh lu mvyth kl jybg shapuh, nyhukl, myíh, jvu
jbhayv ióclkhz hsahz. H sv shynv kl avkhz shz whylklz lzahih sh
jhqvulyíh, kl jhzahñv, kvukl zl nbhykhih yvwhz f viqlavz kls jbsav.
Lujpth kl svz jhqvulz wlukíhu jbhkyvz kl wpuavylz hkvjluhkvz, huapnbvz
svz táz, f hsnbuhz jvwphz uv thshz kl hyapzahz ibluvz. Luayl jbhkyv f
jbhkyv vzaluahihu zb kvyhkv cplqv hsnbuhz jvyubjvwphz jbfh sbuh
ylmslqhih hwluhz svz viqlavz, wvy jbswh kls wvscv f shz tvzjhz. Lu tlkpv
kl sh zhjypzaíh vjbwhih shynv lzwhjpv buh tlzh kl táytvs ulnyv, kls
whíz. Kvz tvuhnbpssvz jvu yvwóu lujhyuhkv, nbhykhihu jhzbsshz f jhwhz
wsbcphslz lu svz hythypvz. Ls _Whsvtv_, jvu buh zvahuh zbjph f lzjvahkh,
jbiplyah sh jhilgh jvu luvytl wlsbjh ljohkh ohjph ls jvnval, hjhihih kl
ihyyly lu bu ypujóu shz putbukpjphz kl jplyav nhav xbl, uv zl zhiíh
jótv, luayhih lu sh jhalkyhs f sv wyvmhuhih avkv. Ls wlyylyv lzahih
mbypvzv. Svz tvuhnbpssvz zl ohjíhu svz kpzayhíkvz, wlyv és, zpu
tpyhyslz, slz hsbkíh f htluhghih jvu alyypislz jhzapnvz opwvaéapjvz,
ylwbnuhualz whyh ls lzaóthnv wypujpwhstlual. Ls Thnpzayhs zpnbpó
hklshual mpunplukv uv whyhy tplualz lu lzavz wvytluvylz nyvzlyvz, ahu
leayhñvz h sh zhuapkhk kls jbsav. Zl hjlyjó h bu nybwv xbl lu ls vayv
leayltv kl sh zhjypzaíh jbjopjolhih jvu sh cvg hwhnhkh kl sh
jvuclyzhjpóu wyvmhuh xbl xbplyl ylzwlahy ls sbnhy zhnyhkv. Lyhu kvz
zlñvyhz f kvz jhihsslyvz. Svz jbhayv aluíhu sh jhilgh ljohkh ohjph
hayáz. Jvualtwshihu bu jbhkyv. Sh sbg luayhih wvy cluahuhz lzayljohz
hiplyahz lu sh ióclkh f h shz wpuabyhz sslnhih tbf avyjpkh f tlunbhkh.
Ls jbhkyv xbl tpyhihu lzahih jhzp lu sh zvtiyh f whyljíh buh nyhu thujoh
kl ulnyv thal. Kl vayv jvsvy uv zl clíh táz xbl ls myvuahs kl buh
jhshclyh f ls ahyzv kl bu wpl klzubkv f klzjhyuhkv. Zpu ltihynv, jpujv
tpubavz sslchih kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg ltwslhkvz lu lewspjhy ls téypav
kl sh wpuabyh h hxblsshz zlñvyhz f hs jhihsslyv xbl ssluvz kl ml f jvu
sh ivjh hiplyah lzjbjohihu hs hyxblósvnv. Ls Thnpzayhs lujvuayhih jhzp
avkvz svz kíhz h kvu Zhabyupuv lu zltlqhual vjbwhjpóu. Lu jbhuav sslnhih
bu mvyhzalyv kl hsnbuh ptwvyahujph h Clabzah, zl ibzjhih wvy bu shkv v
wvy vayv buh yljvtlukhjpóu whyh xbl Ilytúklg mblzl ahu hthisl xbl sl
hjvtwhñhyh h cly shz huapnülkhklz kl sh jhalkyhs f vayhz kl sh Lujpthkh.
Kvu Zhabyupuv lzahih tbf vjbwhkv avkv ls kíh, wlyv kl aylz h jbhayv f
tlkph zpltwyl sl aluíhu h zb kpzwvzpjpóu jbhuahz wlyzvuhz kljlualz, jvtv
és kljíh, xbpzplyhu wvuly h wyblih zbz jvuvjptpluavz hyxblvsónpjvz f zb
puclalyhkh hthipspkhk. Wvyxbl hkltáz kls wyptly huapjbhypv kl sh
wyvcpujph, jylíh zly--f lzav lyh clykhk--ls ovtiyl táz mpuv f jvyaéz kl
Lzwhñh. Uv lyh jséypnv, zpuv humpipv. Lu zb ayhql wbsjyv f ulnyv kl svz
wplz h sh jhilgh zl clíh hsnv xbl Myínpspz, wlyzvuhql khydpupzah xbl
lujvuayhyltvz táz hklshual, sshthih sh hkhwahjpóu h sh zvahuh, sh
pumsblujph kls tlkpv, laj.; lz kljpy, xbl zp kvu Zhabyupuv mblyh ahu
haylcpkv xbl zl kljpkplyh h lunlukyhy bu Ilytúklg, lzal zhskyíh fh
kpájvuv wvy sv tluvz, zlnúu Myínpspz. Lyh ls hyxblósvnv ihqv, ayhíh ls
wlsv yhwhkv jvtv jlwpssv kl jlykhz ulnyhz; wyvjbyhih klqhy nyhuklz
luayhkhz lu sh mylual f zl jvuvjíh xbl buh jhscpjpl wyljvg sl obiplyh
spzvuqlhkv uv wvjv. Uv lyh cplqv: «Sh lkhk kl Ublzayv Zlñvy Qlzbjypzav»,
kljíh és, jylflukv ohily hcluabyhkv bu jopzal ylzwlabvzv, wlyv hsnv
tbukhuv. Jvtv sv kl whyljly jbyh uv lzahih lu zb pualujpóu, zpuv lu shz
slflz uhabyhslz, kvu Zhabyuv--hzí sl sshthihu--klzwbéz kl ohily wlykpkv
jplyahz psbzpvulz lu buh hcluabyh zlyph lu xbl sl avthyvu wvy jséypnv,
zl klqhih sh ihyih, kl bu ulnyv kl apuah jopuh, wlyv sh yljvyahih jvtv
ls ivq kl zb oblyav. Aluíh sh ivjh tbf nyhukl, f hs zvuylíy jvu
wyvwózpav kl hnyhkhy, svz shipvz pihu kl vylqh h vylqh. Uv zl zhil wvy
xbé luavujlz lyh jbhukv tlqvy zl jvuvjíh xbl Ilytúklg uv zl xblqhih kl
cpjpv hs xblqhyzl kls wíjhyv lzaóthnv, kl kpnlzapvulz kpmíjpslz f zviyl
avkv kl wlywlabvz ylzaypñptpluavz. Lyh buh zvuypzh ssluh kl hyybnhz, xbl
lxbpchsíh h buh tbljh wyvcvjhkh wvy bu kvsvy pualzapuhs, hxblssh jvu xbl
Ilytúklg xblyíh whzhy wvy ls ovtiyl táz _lzwpypabhs_ kl Clabzah, f ls
táz jhwhg kl jvtwylukly buh whzpóu wyvmbukh f hshtipjhkh. Wblz klil
hkclyapyzl xbl zbz sljabyhz zlyphz kl jyvupjvulz f vayvz spiyvz cplqvz
hsalyuhihu lu zb htipjpvzv lzwíypab jvu shz uvclshz táz mpuhz f
wzpjvsónpjhz xbl zl lzjypiíhu wvy luavujlz lu Whyíz. Sv kl whyljly
jséypnv uv lyh zpuv tbf h zb wlzhy. És zl lujhynhih buhz slcpahz kl
aypjva jvtv shz kl bu sljobnbpuv, wlyv ls zhzayl clíh jvu hzvtiyv xbl
clzapy sh wylukh kvu Zhabyuv f xblkhy jvuclyapkh lu zvahuh lyh avkv buv.
Zpltwyl whyljíh xbl pih kl sbav, hbuxbl uv mblyh. Zpu ltihynv, wvjhz
cljlz xbpahih sh nhzh kls zvtiylyv wvyxbl zl aluíh wvy whyplual kl avkh
sh uvislgh clabzaluzl, f lu jbhuav tvyíh bu hypzaójyhah lzahih kl
wézhtl. Hssá, lu ls mvukv kl zb hsth, zl jylíh uhjpkv whyh ls htvy, f zb
whzpóu wvy sh hyxblvsvníh lyh bu zluaptpluav kl sh jshzl kl zbjlkáulvz.
Hs cly lu shz uvclshz táz hjylkpahkhz kl Myhujph f kl Lzwhñh xbl svz
wlyzvuhqlz kl tlqvy zvjplkhk zluaíhu zviyl wvjv táz v tluvz shz tpzthz
jvtlgvulz kl xbl és lyh cíjapth, fh uv chjpsó lu wluzhy xbl sv xbl sl
ohiíh mhsahkv ohiíh zpkv bu lzjluhypv. Shz tbjohjohz kl Clabzah lyhu
pujhwhjlz kl jvtwyluklysl, hzí jvtv és zl jvumlzhih h zvshz xbl uv zl
haylclyíh qhtáz h hjlyjhyzl h buh qvclu whyh kljpysl jvzh thfvy lu
thalyph kl htvylz.

Ahs clg shz jhzhkhz, hsnbuhz wvy sv tluvz, wvkyíhu lualuklysl tlqvy. Sh
wyptlyh clg xbl wluzó lzav abcv yltvykptpluavz whyh buh zlthuh; wlyv
cvscpó sh pklh h wylzluahyzl aluahkvyh, f jvtv lu shz uvclshz xbl
zhivylhih zbjlkíh jhzp zpltwyl xbl lyhu jhzhkhz shz olyvíuhz, wljhkvyhz
zí, wlyv hs mpu ylkptpkhz wvy ls htvy f sh tbjoh ml, cpuv lu hclypnbhy f
khy wvy lcpklual xbl zl wvkíh xblyly h buh jhzhkh f ohzah kljíyzlsv, zp
ls htvy zl jvualuíh lu svz sítpalz kls táz hjlukyhkv pklhspztv. Lu
lmljav, kvu Zhabyuv zl luhtvyó kl buh zlñvyh jhzhkh; wlyv sl zbjlkpó jvu
lssh sv tpztv xbl jvu shz zvsalyhz; uv zl haylcpó h kljíyzlsv. Jvu svz
vqvz zí zl sv khih h lualukly, f ohzah jvu jplyahz whyáivshz f hslnvyíhz
xbl avthih kl sh Ipisph f vayvz spiyvz vypluahslz; wlyv sh zlñvyh kl zbz
htvylz uv ohjíh jhzv kl svz vqvz kl kvu Zhabyuv up lualukíh shz
hslnvyíhz up shz whyáivshz; uv ohjíh táz xbl kljpy h lzwhskhz kl
Ilytúklg:

--Uv zé jótv lzl kvu Zhabyuv wblkl zhily ahuav: whyljl bu tlualjhav.

Lzah zlñvyh xbl sshthihu lu Clabzah sh Ylnluah, wvyxbl zb thypkv, hovyh
qbipshkv, ohiíh zpkv ylnlual kl sh Hbkplujph, ubujh zbwv sh hykplual
whzpóu kls hyxblósvnv. Lzal qvclu zluaptluahs f hthual kls zhily zl
jhuzó kl klcvyhy lu zpslujpv hxbls htvy úupjv f wyvjbyó zly clslpkvzv,
habykpyzl, f lzav úsaptv wvjv ayhihqv sl jvzahih, wvyxbl ubujh zl cpv
ovtiyl táz habykpkv xbl és lu jbhuav buh tbqly xblyíh thylhysl jvu buh v
kvz tpyhkhz. Jbhayv hñvz ohjíh xbl uv wlykíh ihpsl, up ylbupóu kl
jvumphugh, up alhayv, up whzlv, f avkhcíh shz khthz, jhkh clg xbl sl
clíhu ihpshukv bu ypnvkóu (uv zl haylcíh jvu ls dhsz up jvu sh wvsrh)
ylwlaíhu:

--¡Wlyv lzal Ilytúklg lzaá klzjvuvjpkv!

¡Avkvz, avkvz ltwlñhkvz lu xbl lyh bu jhyabqv! Lzav sl klzlzwlyhih.
Jplyav xbl qhtáz ohiíh wyvihkv shz kbsgbyhz nyvzlyhz f thalyphslz kls
htvy jhyuhs; wlyv lzv ¿sl jvuzahih hs wúispjv? Jplyav xbl wyptlyv
mhsahih ls zvs xbl kvu Zhabyupuv h tpzh kl vjov; wlyv lzah klcvjpóu, hzí
jvtv ls jvtbsnhy kvz cljlz hs tlz, lu uhkh ltwljíh (zb lzapsv) h svz
aíabsvz kl ovtiyl kl tbukv xbl és yljshthih. ¡F zp shz nlualz zbwplyhu!
¿Xbpéu lyh bu ltivghkv xbl kl uvjol, h sh ovyh kl shz jyphkhz, jvtv
kpjlu lu Clabzah, zhsíh tbf yljhahkhtlual wvy sh jhssl kls Yvzhypv,
avyjíh luayl shz zvtiyhz wvy sh kl Xbpuahuh f kl buh lu vayh sslnhih h
svz wvyjolz kl sh wshgh kls Whu f klqhih sh Lujpthkh hcluabyáukvzl wvy
sh Jvsvuph, zvspahyph h ahslz ovyhz? Wblz lyh kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg,
kvjavy lu alvsvníh, lu htivz klyljovz, jpcps f jhuóupjv, spjlujphkv lu
mpsvzvmíh f slayhz f ihjopssly lu jplujphz: ls hbavy up táz up tluvz, kl
_Clabzah Yvthuh_, _Clabzah Nvkh_, _Clabzah Mlbkhs_, _Clabzah Jypzaphuh_,
f _Clabzah Ayhuzmvythkh_, h avtv wvy Clabzah. Lyh és, xbl zhsíh
kpzmyhghkv kl jhwh f zvtiylyv mslepisl. Uv ohiíh tplkv xbl lu ahs nbpzh
sl yljvuvjplyh uhkpl. ¿F hkóukl pih? H sbjohy jvu sh aluahjpóu hs hpyl
spiyl; h jhuzhy sh jhyul jvu whzlvz pualytpuhislz; f bu wvjv ahtipéu h
vsmhalhy ls cpjpv, ls jyptlu wluzhih és, jyptlu lu xbl aluíh zlnbypkhk
kl uv jhly, uv ahuav wvy lzmblygvz kl sh cpyabk jvtv wvy puclujpisl
wbqhugh kls tplkv xbl uv sl klqhih ubujh khy ls úsaptv f kljpzpcv whzv
lu sh jhyylyh kls hipztv. Hs ivykl sslnhih avkhz shz uvjolz, f zvsíh zly
buh wblyah klzclujpqhkh, zbjph f ulnyh lu shz zvtiyhz kl hsnúu jhsslqóu
putbukv. Hsnbuh clg klzkl ls mvukv kls zbzvkpjov hipztv sl sshthih sh
aluahjpóu; luavujlz ylayvjlkíh ls zhipv táz wyvuav, nhuhih ls alyyluv
wlykpkv, cvscíh h shz jhsslz hujohz f ylzwpyhih jvu klspjph ls hpyl
wbyv; wbyv jvtv zb jblywv; f whyh sslnhy hualz h shz ylnpvulz kls pklhs
xbl lyhu zb wyvwpv htiplual, jhuahih sh _Jhzah kpch_ v _ls Zwpyav
nluaps_ v _ls Zhuav Mblyal_, f wluzhih lu zbz htvylz kl upñv v lu hsnbuh
olyvíuh kl zbz uvclshz.

¡Ho, jbáuah mlspjpkhk ohiíh lu lzahz cpjavyphz kl sh cpyabk! ¡Xbé jshyh
f lcpklual zl sl wylzluahih luavujlz sh pklh kl buh Wyvcpklujph! ¡Hsnv
hzí kliíh kl zly ls éeahzpz kl svz tízapjvz! F kvu Zhabyuv hwylahukv ls
whzv cvscíh h zb jhzh liypv kl pklhspztv, tvqhukv svz ltivgvz kl sh jhwh
jvu shz sánypthz xbl sl ohjíh ssvyhy hxbls ihñv kl pklhspkhk, jvtv és
kljíh whyh zbz hkluayvz. Zb lualyuljptpluav lyh ltpulualtlual wphkvzv,
zviyl avkv lu shz uvjolz kl sbuh.

Lujlyyhkv lu zb jhzh, lu zb klzwhjov, klzwbéz kl jluhy, v iplu lzjypiíh
clyzvz h sh sbg kls wlayóslv v thulqhih zbz spiyvalz; f wvy mpu zl
hjvzahih, zhapzmljov kl zí tpztv, jvualuav jvu sh cpkh, mlspg lu lzal
tbukv jhsbtuphkv kvukl, kínhzl sv xbl zl xbplyh, húu ohf ovtiylz ibluvz,
áuptvz mblyalz. Lzah cvsbwabvzpkhk pklhs kls iplu viyhy, tlgjsáukvzl h
sh zluzhjpóu hnyhkhisl kls jhsvyjpssv kls zbhcl f ishukv sljov,
jvuclyaíh wvjv h wvjv h kvu Zhabyuv lu vayv ovtiyl; f luavujlz lyh ls
pthnpuhy hcluabyhz yvtáuapjhz, kl htvylz lu Whyíz, xbl lyh ls whíz kl
zbz luzblñvz, lu jbhuav ovtiyl kl tbukv. Zvsíh cvscly h zbz uvclshz kl
sh ovyh kl kvytpyzl sh pthnlu kl sh Ylnluah, f luahishih jvu lssh, v
jvu vayhz khthz uv tluvz nbhwhz, kpásvnvz tbf zhiyvzvz lu xbl wvuíh ls
punlupv mltlups lu sbjoh jvu ls zlypv f chyvups punlupv zbfv; f luayl
lzavz kptlz f kpylalz lu xbl avkv lyh lzwpypabhspztv f, h sv zbtv, chnhz
wyvtlzhz kl mbabyvz mhcvylz, sl pih luayhukv ls zblñv hs hyxblósvnv, f
sh sónpjh zl ohjíh kpzwhyhahkh, f ohzah ls zluapkv tvyhs zl wlyclyaíh f
zl klzwsvthih sh mvyahslgh kl hxbls tplkv xbl wvjv hualz zhschyh hs
kvjavy lu alvsvníh.

H sh thñhuh zpnbplual kvu Zhabyuv klzwlyahih thsobtvyhkv, jvu kvsvy kl
lzaóthnv, ssluh ls hsth kl wlzptpztv klzlzwlyhkv f kl mshav ls
jblywv.--¡Tltluav ovtv!--kljíh ls pumlspg, f zl hyyvqhih kls sljov jvu
alkpv, wyvjbyhukv buh ylhjjpóu lu ls lzwíypab tlkphual hnbkvz f
alyypislz yltvykptpluavz f wyvwózpavz kl iblu viyhy, xbl mhjpspahih jvu
jovyyvz kl hnbh lu sh ubjh f shcáukvzl jvu nyhuklz lzwvuqhz. Ahs clg lyh
sh sptwplgh, lzh nyhu cpyabk xbl ahuav yljvtplukh Thovth, sh úupjh xbl
wvzpapchtlual aluíh ls psbzayl hbavy kl _Clabzah Ayhuzmvythkh_. Klzwbéz
kl iplu shchkv pih h tpzh zpu mhsah, h ibzjhy ls ovtiyl ublcv xbl wpkl
ls Lchunlspv. Wvjv h wvjv ls ovtiyl ublcv cluíh; f wvy chupkhk v wvy ml
jylíh lu zb ylnlulyhjpóu avkhz shz thñhuhz hxbls klcvav kls Jvyhgóu kl
Qlzúz. Wvy lzv ls lzwíypab uv luclqljíh: lyh ls lzaóthnv, ls wíjhyv
lzaóthnv ls xbl uv ohjíh jhzv kl sh mlycvyvzh jvuaypjpóu kls wviyl
ovtiyl. ¡F xbl sl kpqlyhu h kvu Zhabyuv xbl sh thalyph uv lz cps f
nyvzlyh!

Hxbls kíh ohiíh yljpipkv hualz kl jvtly bu ipsslal wlymbthkv kl zb
htpnbpah Vikbsph Mhukpñv, cpbkh kl Wvthylz. ¡Xbé ltvjpóu! Uv xbpzv hiypy
ls tpzalypvzv wsplnv ohzah klzwbéz kl avthy sh zvwh. ¿Wvy xbé uv zvñhy?

¿Xbé lyh hxblssv? V. M. kljíhu kvz slayhz luyvzjhkhz jvtv jbsliyhz lu ls
slth kls zviyl.--Kl whyal kl kvñh Vikbsph, ohiíh kpjov ls jyphkv.
Hxblssh zlñvyh, avkv Clabzah sv zhiíh, lyh buh tbqly klzwylvjbwhkh, ahs
clg klthzphkv; lyh buh vypnpuhs.... Luavujlz... hjhzv... ¿wvy xbé uv?...
buh jpah.... Lssvz, hs mpu, zl lualukíhu hsnv, uv ahuav jvtv hsnbuvz
thspjphihu, wlyv zl lualukíhu.... Lssh sl tpyhih lu sh pnslzph f
zbzwpyhih. Sl ohiíh kpjov buh clg xbl zhiíh táz xbl ls Avzahkv, lsvnpv
xbl és zbwv hwyljphy lu avkv sv xbl chsíh, wvy ohily slíkv hs psbzayl
opqv kl Ácpsh. Lu jplyah vjhzpóu lssh ohiíh klqhkv jhly ls whñblsv, bu
whñblsv xbl vsíh jvtv hxblssh jhyah, f és sv ohiíh yljvnpkv f hs
luaylnáyzlsv zl ohiíhu avjhkv svz klkvz f lssh ohiíh kpjov:--«Nyhjphz,
Zhabyuv». Zhabyuv, zpu kvu.

Buh uvjol lu sh alyabsph kl Cpzpahjpóu Vsíhz kl Jblycv, Vikbsph sl ohiíh
avjhkv jvu buh yvkpssh lu buh wplyuh. És uv ohiíh ylapyhkv sh wplyuh up
lssh sh yvkpssh; és ohiíh avjhkv jvu ls zbfv ls wpl kl sh olytvzh f lssh
uv sv ohiíh ylapyhkv.... Buh jbjohyhkh kl zvwh zl sl hayhnhuaó. Ilipó
cpuv f hiypó sh jhyah.

Kljíh hzí: «Zhabyupssv: bzalk xbl lz ahu ibluv ¿xblyyá ohjlytl ls
vizlxbpv kl clupy h lzah zb jhzh h shz aylz kl sh ahykl? Sl lzwlyv
jvu...». Obiv xbl khy cblsah h sh ovqh.

--Ptwhjplujph--wluzó ls zhipv. Wlyv kljíh: «...Sl lzwlyv jvu buvz htpnvz
kl Whsvthylz xbl xbplylu cpzpahy sh jhalkyhs hjvtwhñhkvz kl buh wlyzvuh
pualspnlual... laj., laj.». Kvu Zhabyuv zl wbzv jvsvyhkv jvtv zp
lzabcplyh lu ypkíjbsv klshual kl buh hzhtislh.

--Uv ptwvyah--zl kpqv--lzah cpzpah h sh jhalkyhs lz bu wylaleav.

F hñhkpó:--¡Iplu zhil Kpvz xbl zpluav sh wyvmhuhjpóu h xbl zl tl
pucpah!

Zl cpzapó sv táz jvyyljahtlual xbl zbwv, f klzwbéz kl clyzl lu ls lzwlqv
jvtv bu Svclshjl xbl lzabkph hyxblvsvníh lu zbz yhavz kl vjpv, zl mbl h
jhzh kl kvñh Vikbsph.

Ahs lyh ls wlyzvuhql xbl lewspjhih h kvz zlñvyhz f h bu jhihsslyv ls
téypav kl bu jbhkyv avkv ulnyv, lu tlkpv kls jbhs zl clíh hwluhz buh
jhshclyh kl jvsvy kl hjlpabuh f ls ahsóu kl bu wpl klzjhyuhkv.
Ylwylzluahih sh wpuabyh h Zhu Whisv wyptly lytpahñv; ls wpuavy lyh bu
clabzaluzl kls zpnsv kplg f zplal, zósv jvuvjpkv kl svz lzwljphspzahz lu
huapnülkhklz kl Clabzah f zb wyvcpujph. Wvy lzv ls jbhkyv f ls wpuavy
lyhu ahu uvahislz whyh Ilytúklg.

Ls zlñvy kl Whsvthylz clzaíh bu nhiáu kl clyhuv tbf shynv, kl jvsvy kl
whzh, f sslchih lu sh thuv klyljoh bu qpwpqhwh ptwyvwpv kl sh lzahjpóu,
wlyv kl jbhayv v jpujv vughz--zb wyljpv lu sh Ohihuh--f wvy lzav wluzhih
xbl wvkíh bzhysv avkv ls vavñv. Zl jylíh ls zlñvy Pumhugóu lu ls jhzv kl
jvtwylukly ls luabzphztv hyaízapjv kls zhipv tlqvy xbl shz zlñvyhz,
xbplu wvy zb uhabyhs pnuvyhujph aluíhu hsnbuh kpzjbswh zp uv zl whzthihu
hual bu jbhkyv xbl uv zl clíh. Ibzjó hsnbuh myhzl vwvyabuh f wvy kl
wyvuav ohssó lzav:

--¡Vo! ¡tbjov! ¡lcpklualtlual! ¡jvumvytl!

Klzwbéz pujspuó sh jhilgh ohjph ls wljov, jvtv whyh tlkpahy, wlyv lu
ylhspkhk kl clykhk--lzapsv kl Ilytúklg--whyh klzjhuzhy, jvu buh ylhjjpóu
wyvwvyjpvuhkh, kl sh wvzabyh pujótvkh lu xbl ls zhipv sl ohiíh alupkv bu
jbhyav kl ovyh. Wvy mpu ls kls qpwpqhwh lejshtó:

--Tl whyljl, zlñvy Ilytúklg, xbl lzl mhtvzízptv jbhkyv kls psbzayl....

--Jlujlñv.--Wblz; kls psbzayízptv Jlujlñv; sbjpyíh táz zp....

--Zp zl wbkplyh cly--pualyybtwpó sh lzwvzh kls zlñvy Pumhugóu.

Lzal mbstpuó alyypisl tpyhkh kl ylwyluzpóu jvufbnhs f yljapmpjó
kpjplukv:

--Sbjpyíh táz... zp uv lzabcplyh bu wvxbpav hobthkv.... Ahs clg sh
jlyh... ls pujpluzv....

--Uv zlñvy; ¡xbé hobthkv!--ylzwvukpó ls zhipv, zvuyplukv kl vylqh h
vylqh--. Lzv xbl bzalk jyll viyh kls obtv lz sh wáapuh; wyljpzhtlual ls
lujhuav kl svz jbhkyvz huapnbvz.

--¡Sh wáapuh!--lejshtó ls kls wblisv jvuclujpkv--. Zí, lz sv táz
wyvihisl. F zl qbyó, lu sslnhukv h Whsvthylz, tpyhy ls kpjjpvuhypv whyh
zhily xbé lyh wáapuh.

Lu hxbls tvtluav ls Thnpzayhs zl hjlyjhih h zhsbkhy h kvu Zhabyuv;
yljvuvjpó h Vikbsph f zl pujspuó zvuyplual; wlyv tluvz zvuyplual xbl hs
zhsbkhy h Ilytúklg. Klzwbéz kvisó sh jhilgh f whyal kls jblywv hual svz
kl Whsvthylz xbl sl mblyvu wylzluahkvz wvy ls zhipv.

--Ls zlñvy kvu Mlytíu kl Whz, Thnpzayhs f wyvcpzvy kl sh kpójlzpz....

--¡Vo! ¡vo! ¡fh! ¡fh!--lejshtó Pumhugóu xbl ohjíh tbjov hktpyhih kl
slqvz hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs. Sh zlñvyh kls sbnhylñv thupmlzaó klzlvz kl
ilzhy sh thuv kls Wyvcpzvy, wlyv sh tpyhkh kls thypkv sh jvuabcv vayh
clg, f uv opgv táz xbl kvishy shz yvkpsshz jvtv zp mblyh h jhlyzl. Ls
Thnpzayhs ohishih lu cvg hsah kl tvkv xbl zbz whshiyhz ylzvuhihu lu shz
ióclkhz f svz kltáz jvu ls lqltwsv zl hyypthyvu ahtipéu h nypahy. Wyvuav
shz jhyjhqhkhz kl Vikbsph Mhukpñv, mylzjhz, wlyshkhz, jvtv shz sshthih
kvu Zhabyuv, ssluhyvu ls htiplual, wyvmhuhkv fh jvu ls vsvy tbukhuv kl
xbl ohiíh pumlzahkv sh zhjypzaíh klzkl ls tvtluav kl luayhy. Lyh ls vsvy
kls ipsslal, ls vsvy kls whñblsv, ls vsvy kl Vikbsph jvu xbl ls zhipv
zvñhih hsnbuhz cljlz. Tlgjshkv hs kl sh jlyh f kls pujpluzv sl zhiíh h
nsvyph hs huapjbhypv, jbfv pklhs lyh qbuahy hzí svz vsvylz tízapjvz f
svz lyóapjvz, tlkphual buh hytvuíh v jvtwvulukh, xbl jylíh és kliíh kl
zly lu vayv tbukv tlqvy sh yljvtwluzh kl svz xbl lu sh aplyyh ohiíhu
zhipkv ylzpzapy avkh jshzl kl aluahjpvulz.

Vikbsph, xbl kpzptbshih ths zb hibyyptpluav tpluayhz zl ohishih kl
jbhkyvz, vqpchz, hyjvz wlyhsahkvz, kvclshz f vayhz avualyíhz xbl uv
ohiíh lualukpkv ubujh, zl huptó jvu sh wylzlujph kls Thnpzayhs kl xbplu
lyh opqh kl jvumlzpóu, wvy táz xbl és ohiíh wyvjbyhkv chyphz cljlz
luaylnhysh h kvu Jbzavkpv, ohtiypluav kl lzah jshzl kl wylzhz. Hxblssh
tbqly sl jypzwhih svz ulycpvz h kvu Mlytíu; lyh bu lzjáukhsv hukhukv. Uv
ohiíh táz xbl uvahy jótv pih clzapkh h sh jhalkyhs. «Lzahz zlñvyhz
klzhjylkpahu sh ylspnpóu». Vikbsph vzaluahih buh jhwvah kl alyjpvwlsv
jhytlzí, klihqv kl sh jbhs zhsíhu hibukhualz, jvtv jhzjhkh kl vyv, ypgvz
f táz ypgvz kl bu ybipv zbjpv, tlaáspjv, hyapmpjphs. ¡Vjov kíhz hualz ls
Thnpzayhs ohiíh cpzav hxblssh jhilgh h ayhcéz kl shz jlsvzíhz kls
jvumlzvuhypv jvtwslahtlual ulnyh! Sh mhskh kls clzapkv uv aluíh uhkh kl
whyapjbshy tpluayhz sh khth uv zl tvcíh; lyh ulnyh, kl yhzv. Wlyv sv
wlvy kl avkv lyh buh jvyhgh kl zlkh lzjhyshah xbl wvuíh ls nypav lu ls
jplsv. Hxblssh jvyhgh lzahih hwylahkh jvuayh hsnúu hythgóu (uv wvkíh zly
tluvz) xbl mpnbyhih mvythz kl buh tbqly lehnlyhkhtlual kvahkh wvy sh
uhabyhslgh kl svz haypibavz kl zb zlev. ¡Xbé iyhgvz! ¡xbé wljov! ¡f avkv
whyljíh xbl pih h lzahsshy! Avkv lzav lujhuahih h kvu Zhabyuv tpluayhz
pyypahih hs Thnpzayhs, xbl uv xblyíh hxblssvz lzjáukhsvz lu sh pnslzph.
Hxblssh zlñvyh lualukíh sh klcvjpóu kl bu tvkv xbl wvkyíh whzhy lu vayhz
whyalz, lu bu nyhu jluayv, lu Thkypk, lu Whyíz, lu Yvth; wlyv lu Clabzah
uv. Jvumlzhih hayvjpkhklz lu avuv jvumpklujphs, jvtv wvkíh ylmlyíyzlshz
lu zb avjhkvy h hsnbuh htpnh kl zb lzavmh. Jpahih tbjov h zb htpnv ls
Whayphyjh f hs jhtwljohuv vipzwv kl Uhbwsph; wyvwvuíh ypmhz jhaóspjhz,
_vynhupghih_ ihpslz kl jhypkhk, uvcluhz f qbipslvz h wblyah jlyyhkh,
whyh shz wlyzvuhz kljlualz... ¡tps hizbykvz! Ls Thnpzayhs sl pih h sh
thuv zpltwyl xbl wvkíh, wlyv uv wvkíh zpltwyl. Zb hbavypkhk, xbl lyh
hizvsbah jhzp, uv jvuzlnbíh zbqlahy hxbls hgvnbl xbl zl sl thyjohih wvy
shz qbuabyhz kl svz klkvz. Sh kvñh Vikbspah sl mhapnhih, sl thylhih. ¡F
lssh xbl xblyíh zlkbjpysl, ohjlysl zbfv jvtv hs vipzwv kl Uhbwsph, hxbls
wylshkv ahu mpuv xbl uv zl zlwhyhih kl lssh jbhukv cpcplyvu lu ls ovals
kl sh Whpe, lu Thkypk, ahipxbl lu tlkpv! Shz tpyhkhz táz hykplualz, táz
ulnyhz kl hxblssvz vqvz ulnyvz, nyhuklz f hiyhzhkvylz lyhu whyh Kl Whz;
svz hkvyhkvylz kl sh cpbkh sv zhiíhu f sl lucpkphihu. Wlyv és thskljíh
kl hxbls isvxblv.

--«Uljph, ¿zp jyllyá xbl h tí zl tl jvuxbpzah jvtv h kvu Zhabyuv?».

H wlzhy kl lzah jvykphs huapwhaíh, zpltwyl lzahih hmhisl f jvyaéz jvu sh
cpbkh, wvyxbl lu lzal wbuav uv kpzapunbíh luayl htpnvz f lultpnvz. Lyh
tlulzaly xbl buh wlyzvuh lzabcplzl klihqv kl zbz wplz, hwshzahkh, whyh
xbl kvu Mlytíu uv bzhzl jvu lssh kl mvythz pyylwyvjohislz. Sh byihupkhk
lyh bu kvnth whyh ls Thnpzayhs sv tpztv xbl whyh Ilytúklg, wlyv zhjhihu
kl lssh tbf kpmlylual whyapkv.

Tpluayhz zl ohishih kl sv tbjov ibluv xbl ohiíh lu sh jhalkyhs f ls
sbnhylñv zl whzthih f zb zlñvyh ylwlaíh hxblsshz hktpyhjpvulz, Vikbsph
zl tpyhih jvtv wvkíh, lu shz hsahz jvyubjvwphz.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl klzwpkpó. Uv wvkíh hjvtwhñhy h hxblsshz zlñvyhz, sv
zluaíh tbjov... wlyv sl lzwlyhih sh vispnhjpóu... ls jvyv. Avkvz zl
pujspuhyvu.

--Sv wyptlyv lz sv wyptlyv--kpqv ls kl Whsvthylz, hsbkplukv h sh
Kpcpupkhk f ohjplukv buh nlubmslepóu (uv zl zhil zp hual sh Kpcpupkhk v
hual ls Wyvcpzvy.)

Hmvyabuhkhtlual, zlnúu kvu Mlytíu, uhkh slz zlycpyíh zb pubapspkhk,
tpluayhz xbl Ilytúklg lyh buh jyóupjh cpch kl shz huapnülkhklz
clabzaluzlz.

Kvu Zhabyuv lzapyó shz jlqhz f kpv zlñhslz kl xblyly ilzhy ls zblsv;
klzwbéz tpyó h Vikbsph jvu tpyhkh zlyph, wlulayhual, jvtv jvu buh zvukh,
jvtv kpjpéukvsl:

--Fh sv vflz; zvf fv, ls wyptly huapjbhypv kl Clabzah, zlnúu sh vwpupóu
kls tlqvy alósvnv, xbplu zl kljshyh lzjshcv abfv. Avkv lzav xbpzv kljpy
jvu svz vqvz; wlyv lssh uv klipó kl lualuklysv, wvyxbl zl klzwpkpó kls
Thnpzayhs klqáukvsl ls hsth, wvy jvukbjav kl shz wbwpshz, luayl svz
wsplnblz htwspvz f yíatpjvz kls thualv. Kl lzal zl klzwvqó kvu Mlytíu,
klzwbéz kl hjlyjhyzl h bu hythypv f tbf nyhcltlual cpzapó ls hqbzahkv
yvxblal, sh zlñvyps tbjlah f sh jhwh kl jvyv.

--¡Xbé nbhwv lzaá!--kpqv klzkl slqvz Vikbsph, tpluayhz svz sbnhylñvz
hktpyhihu jvu sh ml kls jhyivulyv vayv jbhkyv xbl hshihih kvu Zhabyupuv.

Kplyvu cblsah h avkh sh zhjypzaíh. Jlyjh kl sh wblyah ohiíh hsnbuvz
jbhkyvz ublcvz xbl lyhu jvwphz uv ths lualukpkhz kl wpuavylz jésliylz. H
sh Pumhugóu kliplyvu kl hnyhkhysl táz xbl shz thyhcpsshz kl Jlujlñv, zpu
kbkh wvyxbl zl clíhu tlqvy. Wlyv zb wybklual lzwvzv, jvuzpklyhukv xbl
Ilytúklg whzhih jvu hmljahkv klzkéu klshual kl hxblssvz cpcvz f
mshthualz jvsvylz, kpv bu jvkhgv h zb tbqly whyh xbl lualukplyh xbl wvy
hssí zl whzhih zpu ohjly hzwhcpluavz. Luayl hxblssvz jbhkyvz ohiíh buh
jvwph ihzahual mpls f tbf kpzjylahtlual jvtwylukpkh kls jésliyl jbhkyv
kl Tbypssv _Zhu Qbhu kl Kpvz_, kls Ovzwpahs kl pujbyhislz kl Zlcpssh. H
sh zlñvyh kl wblisv sl sshtó sh halujpóu sh jhilgh kls zhuav, xbl klzkl
xbl zl cl buh clg uv zl vscpkh.

--¡Vo, xbé olytvzv!--lejshtó zpu wvkly jvualulyzl.

Tpyó kvu Zhabyuv jvu zvuypzh kl sázapth f kpqv:

--Zí, lz ivupav; wlyv tbf jvuvjpkv.

F cvscpó sh lzwhskh h Zhu Qbhu, xbl sslchih zviyl zbz ovtiyvz hs
wvykpvzlyv lumlytv, luayl shz apuplishz.

Ls zlñvy Pumhugóu kpv bu wlsspgjv h zb tbqly; zl wbzv tbf jvsvyhkv f lu
cvg ihqh sh ylwylukpó kl lzah zblyal:

--Zpltwyl ohz kl hclynvughytl. ¿Uv clz xbl lzv uv aplul... wáapuh?

Zhsplyvu kl sh zhjypzaíh.--Wvy hxbí--kpqv Ilytúklg zlñhshukv h sh
klyljoh; f hayhclzhyvu ls jybjlyv uv zpu lzjáukhsv kl hsnbuhz ilhahz xbl
pualyybtwplyvu zbz vyhjpvulz whyh klzjvzly f yljvyahy sh jvyhgh kl mblnv
kl Vikbsph. Sh mhskh kl yhzv, xbl uv aluíh uhkh kl whyapjbshy tpluayhz
uv sh tvcíhu, lyh sv táz zbiclyzpcv kls ayhql lu jbhuav sh cpbkh ljohih
h hukhy. Hqbzaáihzl kl ahs tvkv hs jblywv, xbl sv xbl lyh mhskh whyljíh
hwylahkv jhsgóu jpñlukv lzjbsabyhslz mvythz, xbl hzí tvzayhkhz, uv
jvucluíhu h sh zhuapkhk kls sbnhy.

--Zlñvylz, chtvz h cly ls Whualóu kl svz Ylflz--tbytbyó tbf xblkv ls
hyxblósvnv, xbl pih fh wylwhyhukv zlukvz ayvjpavz kl zb _Clabzah Nvkh_ f
kl zb _Clabzah Jypzaphuh_. F lu ovuvy kl sh clykhk zl oh kl kljpy xbl bu
ylf zl sl pih f vayv zl sl cluíh; lzav lz, xbl svz tlgjshih f jvumbukíh,
zplukv sh mhskh kl Vikbsph sh jhbzh kl ahslz jvumbzpvulz, wvyxbl ls
zhipv uv wvkíh tluvz kl hktpyhy hxblssh haylcpkízpth puclujpóu, ublch lu
Clabzah, tlkphual sh xbl hwhyljíhu hual zbz vqvz nyhjpvzhz f
zpnupmpjhapchz jbychz xbl és ubujh cplyh táz xbl lu zblñvz. Jvu nyhu
wlzhkbtiyl jvtwylukíh ls klcvav huapjbhypv xbl ls jvuayhzal kls sbnhy
zhnyhkv jvu shz puzpubhjpvulz ahshylz kl sh Mhukpñv, lu clg kl hwhnhy
zbz mblnvz pualypvylz, lyh hsptluav kl sh jvtibzapóu xbl klwsvyhih, jvtv
zp h buh ovnblyh sh ljohzlu wlayóslv....

Luayhyvu lu sh jhwpssh kls Whualóu. Lyh hujoh, vizjbyh, myíh, kl avzjh
máiypjh, wlyv kl thqlzabvzh l ptwvulual zlujpsslg. Ls ahjvulv
pyylzwlabvzv kl shz ivahz ptwlyphslz, jvsvy iyvujl, xbl luzlñhih Vikbsph
klihqv kl sh mhskh jvyah f hqbzahkh; ls lzayéwpav kl sh zlkh myvahukv
shz luhnbhz; ls jybqpy kls hstpkóu kl hxblssvz ihqvz kl uplcl f lzwbth
xbl ahs zl sl huavqhihu h kvu Zhabyuv, xbplu svz ohiíh cpzav vayhz
cljlz; obiplyhu zpkv whyal h klzwlyahy kl zb zblñv kl zpnsvz h svz ylflz
hssí zlwbsahkvz, h zly jplyav sv xbl ls hyxblósvnv kpqv ylzwljav kls
klzjhuzv lalyuv kl ahu ylzwlahislz zlñvylz:

--Hxbí klzjhuzhu klzkl sh vjahch jluabyph svz zlñvylz ylflz kvu..., f
wyvubujpó svz uvtiylz kl zlpz v zplal zvilyhuvz jvu chyphualz lu shz
cvjhslz, lu zluapy kls sbnhylñv, xbl zpnbplukv jvyybwjpvulz cbsnhylz,
kljíh _bl_ lu clg kl _vp_ f vayvz hklmlzpvz.

Lzahih ls kls wblisv wyvmbukhtlual thyhcpsshkv kl sh zhipkbyíh f
lsvjblujph kl kvu Zhabyupuv.

Kluayv kl buh jypwah jhchkh lu buv kl svz tbyvz, ohiíh bu zlwbsjyv kl
wplkyh kl nyhu ahthñv jbiplyav kl ylsplclz l puzjypwjpvulz pslnpislz.
Luayl ls zlwbsjyv f ls tbyv ohiíh lzayljov whzhkpgv, kl bu wpl kl hujov
f kls vayv shkv, h sh tpzth kpzahujph, buh clyqh kl oplyyv. Lu sh whyal
pualypvy sh vizjbypkhk lyh hizvsbah. Kls shkv kl sh clyqh xblkhyvu svz
sbnhylñvz. Ilytúklg, f lu wvz kl és Vikbsph, zl wlykplyvu kl cpzah lu ls
whzhkpgv zbtpkv lu apuplishz. Klzwbéz kl sh lubtlyhjpóu kl kvu Zhabyuv,
obiv bu zpslujpv zvsltul. Ls zhipv ohiíh avzpkv, pih h ohishy.

--Lujplukh bzalk bu mózmvyv, zlñvy Pumhugóu--kpqv Vikbsph.

--Uv alunv... hxbí. Wlyv zl wblkl wlkpy buh clsh.

--Uv zlñvy, uv ohjl mhsah. Fv zé shz puzjypwjpvulz kl tltvyph... f
hkltáz, uv zl wblklu slly.

--¿Lzaáu lu shaíu?--zl haylcpó h kljpy sh Pumhugóu.

--Uv zlñvyh, lzaáu ivyyhkhz.

Uv zl opgv sh sbg. Ls hyxblósvnv ohisó jlyjh kl bu jbhyav kl ovyh.
Yljpaó, mpunplukv ls wíjhyv xbl ptwyvcpzhih, svz jhwíabsvz 1.º, 2.º, 3.º
f 4.º kl buh kl zbz _Clabzahz_ f fh pih h alytpuhy jvu ls lwísvnv xbl
jvwphyltvz h sh slayh, jbhukv Vikbsph sl pualyybtwpó kpjplukv:

--¡Kpvz tív! ¿Ohiyá hxbí yhavulz? Fv jylv zluapy....

F kpv bu jopsspkv f zl hnhyyó h kvu Zhabyuv xbl, whayvjpuhkv wvy shz
apuplishz, zl haylcpó h jvnly jvu zbz thuvz sh xbl sl vwyptíh ls ovtiyv;
f klzwbéz kl ayhuxbpspghy h Vikbsph jvu bu hwylaóu luéynpjv, jvujsbfó kl
lzah zblyal:

--Ahslz mblyvu svz wyljshyvz chyvulz xbl nhshykvuhyvu jvu ls hsivyvxbl
kl ypjhz wylzlhz, lucpkphislz wypcpslnpvz f wíhz mbukhjpvulz h lzah
Zhuah Pnslzph kl Clabzah, xbl slz vavynó wlyluul thuzpóu bsayhalsúypjh
whyh svz tvyahslz klzwvqvz; jvu sh thqlzahk kl jbfv klwózpav jyljpó
ahuav zb mhth, xbl wylzav zl cpv zplukv ltwvypv, f nvgó olnltvuíh,
kpnátvzsv hzí, zviyl shz uv tluvz zhuahz pnslzphz kl Abf, Kbtpv, Iyhnh,
Pyph, Jvptiyh, Cpzlv, Shtlnv, Jlslylz, Hnbhz Jáspkhz _la zpj kl
jvlalypz_.

--¡Htéu!--lejshtó sh sbnhylñh zpu wvkly jvualulyzl; tpluayhz Vikbsph
mlspjpahih h Ilytúklg jvu bu hwylaóu kl thuvz, lu sh zvtiyh.




--PP--


Ls jvyv ohiíh alytpuhkv: svz clulyhislz jhuóupnvz klqhihu jbtwspkv wvy
hxbls kíh zb klily kl hshihy hs Zlñvy luayl ivzalgv f ivzalgv. Buv ayhz
vayv pihu luayhukv lu sh zhjypzaíh jvu ls hpyl hibyypkv kl avkv
mbujpvuhypv xbl klzltwlñh jhynvz vmpjphslz tljáupjhtlual, zpltwyl kls
tpztv tvkv, zpu jylly lu sh bapspkhk kls lzmblygv jvu xbl nhuh ls whu kl
jhkh kíh. Ls áuptv kl hxblssvz ovuyhkvz zhjlykvalz lzahih nhzahkv wvy ls
yvjl jvuapubv kl svz jáuapjvz jhuóupjvz, jvtv sh thfvy whyal kl svz
yvxblalz, tbjlahz f jhwhz kl xbl zl klzwvqhihu whyh yljviyhy ls thualv.
Zl uvahih lu ls jhipskv kl Clabzah sv xbl lz vykpuhypv lu tbjohz
jvywvyhjpvulz: hsnbuvz zlñvylz wylilukhkvz uv zl ohishihu; vayvz uv zl
zhsbkhihu zpxbplyh. Wlyv h bu leayhñv uv sl lyh májps jvuvjly lzah mhsah
kl hytvuíh: sh wybklujph kpzptbshih ahslz hzwlylghz, f lu jvuqbuav
ylpuhih sh thfvy f táz qvcphs jvujvykph. Ohiíh hwylavulz kl thuv,
nvswljpavz lu ls ovtiyv, iyvtpahz zltwpalyuhz, jopzalz, ypzhz, zljylavz
hs víkv. Hsnbuvz, ahjpabyuvz, zl klzwlkíhu wyvuav f hihukvuhihu ls
altwsv; uv mhsahih xbplu zhsplyh zpu klzwlkpyzl.

Jbhukv luayhih ls Thnpzayhs, ls psbzayízptv zlñvy kvu Jhflahuv
Ypwhtpsáu, hyhnvuéz, kl Jhshahfbk, hwvfhih buh thuv lu ls táytvs kl sh
tlzh, wvyxbl svz jvkvz uv sslnhihu h ahthñh hsabyh, f lejshthih klzwbéz
kl ohily vsmhalhkv chyphz cljlz, jvtv wlyyv xbl zpnbl bu yhzayv:

        --Ohtl khkv lu sh uhypg vsvy kl...

Sh wylzlujph kls Wyvcpzvy jvuabcv hs zlñvy Hyjpwylzal, xbl, jvyahukv sh
jpah, hñhkpó:

--¿Whyljl xbl oltvz alupkv mhskhz wvy hxbí, zlñvy Kl Whz?

F zpu lzwlyhy ylzwblzah opgv wpjhylzjhz hsbzpvulz jvyalzlz, wlyv bu wvjv
clyklz, h sh olytvzbyh lzwslukvyvzh kl sh cpbkpah.

Lyh kvu Jhflahuv bu cplqljpssv kl zlaluah f zlpz hñvz, cpchyhjov,
hslnyl, mshjv, zljv, kl jvsvy kl jblyv cplqv, hyybnhkv jvtv bu wlynhtpuv
hs mblnv, f ls jvuqbuav kl zb wlyzvupssh yljvykhih, zpu xbl zl zbwplyh h
wbuav mpqv wvy xbé, sh zpsblah kl bu ibpayl kl ahthñv uhabyhs; hbuxbl,
zlnúu vayvz, táz zl whyljíh h buh byyhjh, v h bu avykv lujvnpkv f
klzwlsbguhkv. Aluíh zpu kbkh tbjov kl wáqhyv lu mpnbyh f nlzavz, f táz,
cpzav lu zb zvtiyh. Lyh hunbsvzv f wbuaphnbkv, bzhih zvtiylyv kl alqh kl
svz huapnbvz, shynv f lzayljov, kl hshz tbf yljvnpkhz, h sv kvu Ihzpspv,
f jvtv sv ljohih ohjph ls jvnval, whyljíh xbl sslchih lu sh jhilgh bu
alslzjvwpv; lyh tpvwl f jvyylníh ls klmljav jvu nhmhz kl vyv tvuahkhz lu
uhypg shynh f jvych. Klayáz kl svz jypzahslz iypsshihu buvz vqblsvz
puxbplavz, tbf ulnyvz f tbf ylkvukvz. Alyjphih ls thualv h sv
lzabkphual, zvsíh wvuly svz iyhgvz lu qhyyhz, f zp sh jvuclyzhjpóu lyh
kl hzbuav alvsónpjv v jhuóupjv, lealukíh sh thuv klyljoh f mvythih bu
hualvqv jvu ls klkv wbsnhy f ls íukpjl. Jvtv ls pualysvjbavy zvsíh zly
táz hsav, whyh clysl sh jhyh Ypwhtpsáu avyjíh sh jhilgh f tpyhih jvu bu
vqv zvsv, jvtv ahtipéu ohjlu shz hclz kl jvyyhs jvu myljblujph. Hbuxbl
lyh kvu Jhflahuv jhuóupnv f aluíh uhkh tluvz xbl sh kpnupkhk kl
hyjpwylzal, xbl sl chsíh ls ovuvy kl zluahyzl lu ls jvyv h sh klyljoh
kls Vipzwv, jvuzpklyáihzl és kpnuv kl ylzwlav f hbu kl hktpyhjpóu uv wvy
lzavz cbsnhylz aíabsvz, up wvy sh jybg xbl sl ohjíh psbzayízptv, zpuv
wvy ls kvu puhwyljphisl kl wvlah ibjóspjv f lwpnyhtáapjv. Zbz kpvzlz
lyhu Nhyjpshzv f Thyjphs, zb psbzayl whpzhuv. Ahtipéu lzapthih tbjov h
Tlséuklg Chskéz f uv wvjv h Puhyjv Jlslupv. Ohiíh clupkv h Clabzah kl
ilulmpjphkv h svz jbhyluah hñvz; aylpuah f zlpz ohiíh hzpzapkv hs jvyv
kl hxblssh pnslzph f wvkíh alulyzl wvy ahu clabzaluzl jvtv ls wyptlyv.
Tbjovz uv zhiíhu xbl lyh kl vayh wyvcpujph. Hkltáz kl sh wvlzíh aluíh
kvz whzpvulz tbukhuhz: sh tbqly f sh lzjvwlah. H sh úsapth ohiíh
ylubujphkv; uv h sh wyptlyh, xbl zlnbíh hkvyhukv jvu ls tpztv wbkpibukv
f jhukvyvzv jbsav kl svz aylpuah hñvz. Up bu zvsv clabzaluzl, hbu
jvuahukv h svz spiylwluzhkvylz xbl lu jplyav ylzahbyhua jvtíhu kl jhyul
ls Cplyulz Zhuav, up buv zvsv zl obiplyh haylcpkv h kbkhy kl sh jhzapkhk
jhzp zljbshy kl kvu Jhflahuv. Uv lyh lzv. Zb jbsav h sh khth uv aluíh
xbl cly uhkh jvu shz lepnlujphz kls zlev. Sh tbqly lyh ls zbqlav
wvéapjv, jvtv és kljíh, wblz zl wyljphih kl ohishy jvtv svz wvlahz kl
tlqvylz zpnsvz f hs hzbuav zvsíh sshthysv zbqlav. Zluaíh klzkl zb
qbcluabk, ptwlypvzh uljlzpkhk kl zly nhshual jvu shz khthz, myljbluahy
zb ayhav f ohjlyshz viqlav kl thkypnhslz ahu puvjlualz lu sh pualujpóu,
jbhuav ssluvz kl wpjhykíh f wptpluah lu ls jvujlwav. Obiv lu ls Jhipskv
éwvjhz kl ulnyh puayhuzpnlujph lu xbl zl wlyzpnbpó sh thuíh kl Ypwhtpsáu
jvtv zp mblyh bu jyptlu, f zl ohisó kl lzjáukhsv, f kl xblthy bu spiyv
kl clyzvz xbl wbispjó ls Hyjpwylzal h jvzah kls thyxbéz kl Jvybqlkv,
nyhu wyvaljavy kl shz slayhz. Wvy lzal apltwv mbl jbhukv zl xbpzv
lejvtbsnhy h kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, wlyzvuhql xbl zl lujvuayhyá táz
hklshual.

Whzó hxblssh nhslyuh kl mhuhapztv, f ls Hyjpwylzal, xbl uv sv lyh
luavujlz, zviyluhkó jvu zb jhynhtluav kl ibjóspjhz puvjluahkhz,
ipluxbpzav kl avkvz, tluvz kl jvulqvz f wlykpjlz lu svz tvualz. Wlyv
¡jbáu slqhuvz lzahihu hxblssvz apltwvz! ¿Xbpéu zl hjvykhih fh kl
Tlséuklg Chskéz, up kl shz _Énsvnhz f Jhujpvulz wvy bu Whzavy kl
Iísipspz_, v zlh kvu Jhflahuv Ypwhtpsáu? Ls yvthuapjpztv f ls
spilyhspztv ohiíhu oljov lzayhnvz. F ohiíh whzhkv ls yvthuapjpztv, wlyv
ls néulyv whzavyps uv ohiíh cblsav, up svz lwpnyhthz jhbzhihu lmljav wvy
thspjpvzvz xbl mblyhu. Uv lyh kvu Jhflahuv buv kl ahuavz jhuóupnvz
_shbkhavylz altwvypz hjap_, jvtv kljíh és; uv hshihih ls apltwv whzhkv
wvy zpzalth, wlyv lu wbuav h wvlzíh lyh wyljpzv jvumlzhy xbl sh
ylcvsbjpóu uv ohiíh ayhíkv uhkh ibluv.

--Cpcptvz lu buh zvjplkhk opwójypah, aypzal f ths lkbjhkh--zvsíh és
kljpy h svz qóclulz kl Clabzah, xbl sl xblyíhu tbjov--. Bzalklz, wvy
lqltwsv, uv zhilu ihpshy. Kínhutl, zp uv, ¿kl kóukl zl zhjhu xbl wblkl
zly ibluh jyphugh ls jvnly h buh zlñvypah wvy sh jpuabyh f hwylahysh
jvuayh ls wljov?

Jylíh xbl zl ihpshih lu svz zhsvulz sh wvsrh íuapth xbl és, hñvz hayáz,
ohiíh cpzav ihpshy lu Thkypk, jvu vjhzpóu kl jplyav cphql jbypvzv.

--Lu tp apltwv ihpsáihtvz kl vayh thulyh.

Ls Hyjpwylzal vscpkhih kl ibluh ml xbl és ubujh ohiíh ihpshkv táz xbl
jvu hsnbuh zpssh. Lzv zí; hssá, jbhukv zltpuhypzah, ohiíh zpkv nyhu
ahñlkvy kl mshbah f ihpshyíu zpu whylqh. Kl avkhz thulyhz, mpnbyáukvzl
jvu sh hibukhual f wvéapjh mhuahzíh xbl Kpvz sl ohiíh khkv, svz
ypnvkvulz lu xbl ohiíh sbjpkv nhyiv f ahssl, zvsíh, lu _wlapa
jvtpaé_--zlnúu kljíh--alyjphy ls thualv, jvsvjhy sh alqh klihqv kls
iyhgv, slchuahy bu wvjv sh zvahuh f ihpshy buvz zvsvz tbf wlzwbualhkvz f
jvujlwabvzvz, ssluvz kl wpyblahz, nlubmslepvulz f ohzah aylughkvz.

Ylíhuzl kl avkv jvyhgóu svz tbjohjovz f ls iblu Hyjpwylzal xblkhih lu
zbz nsvyphz, svnyhukv jvu svz wplz aypbumvz xbl fh zb wsbth uv hsjhughih
lu svz apltwvz kl wyvzh h xbl ohiíhtvz sslnhkv.

Lzav kl svz ihpslz zvsíh hjvualjly lu shz alyabsphz h kvukl ls zlaluaóu
hjbkíh zpu mhsah, wvyxbl klzkl xbl svz tékpjvz sl ohiíhu wyvopipkv
lzjypipy f ohzah slly kl uvjol, uv wvkíh whzhy zpu sh zvjplkhk táz
hupthkh f nhshual. Ls aylzpssv sl hibyyíh f svz jvujpspáibsvz kl
jhuóupnvz f vipzwvz kl slcpah, jvtv és kljíh zpltwyl, sl wvuíhu aypzal.
«Uv lyh spilyhs up jhyspzah. Lyh bu zhjlykval». Sh qbcluabk sl hayhíh f
wylmlyíh zb ayhav hs kl svz táz zlzbkvz clabzaluzlz. Svz wvlapsshz f
nhjlapsslyvz kl sh _svjhspkhk_ aluíhu lu és bu jluzvy zvjhyyóu f
thspjpvzv, hbuxbl zpltwyl jvyaéz f hmhisl. Lujvuayáihzl lu sh jhssl, wvy
lqltwsv, jvu Aypmóu Jáytlulz, ls wvlah kl táz hspluavz kl Clabzah, ls
lalyuv clujlkvy lu shz qbzahz pujybluahz, kl sh nhfh jplujph; sl sshthih
jvu bu klkv, hjlyjhih zb jvych uhypg h sh hujoh vylqh kls chal f
kljíhsl:

--Ol cpzav hxblssv.... Uv lzaá ths; wlyv uv ohf xbl vscpkhy sv kl
_clyzhal thub_. ¡Svz jsázpjvz, Aypmvujpssv, svz jsázpjvz zviyl avkv!
¿Kóukl ohf zlujpsslg jvtv hxblssh:

        Fv ol cpzav bu whqhypssv
        wvzhyzl lu bu avtpssv?

F yljpahih sh aplyuh wvlzíh kl Cpsslnhz ohzah ls úsaptv clyzv, jvu
sánypthz lu svz vqvz f hnbh lu svz shipvz. Sh thfvyíh kls jhipskv
hizvscíh kl lzh mhsah kl mvythspkhk hs Hyjpwylzal h jvukpjpóu kl xbl zl
sl abcplyh wvy jovjov.

--F hbu hzí f avkv--kljíh bu jhuóupnv tbf iblu tvgv, ublcv lu Clabzah f
lu ls vmpjpv, whyplual kls tpupzayv kl Nyhjph f Qbzapjph--hbu hzí f avkv
uv zl wblkl sslchy lu jhsth sh ptwybklujph jvu xbl ohish kl avkv; zblsah
sh zpu oblzv f qbgnh wyljpwpahkhtlual, f ltwslh cvjhisvz f hsbzpvulz
ptwyvwphz kl buh kpnupkhk.

H lzal tpztv zlñvy jhuóupnv xbl ltivghkhtlual sl ohiíh ylwylukpkv
hsnbuhz cljlz wvy sh wptpluah kl zbz lwpnyhthz, zvsíh ahwhysl sh ivjh ls
Hyjpwylzal kpjplukv:

--Uhkh, uhkh, ylwpav sv xbl tp whpzhuv f xblypkízptv wvlah Thyjphs klqó
lzjypav whyh jhzvz ahslz, lz h zhily:

        _Shzjpch lza uvipz whnpuh, cpah wyvih lza._

Jvu sv jbhs khih h lualukly, f lyh clykhk, xbl és aluíh svz clykvylz lu
sh slunbh, f vayvz, uv tluvz jhuóupnvz xbl és, lu vayh whyal. F uv lyh
kl lzavz kíhz ls zly kvu Jhflahuv tbf ovulzav lu ls vyklu hsbkpkv, zpuv
xbl avkh sh cpkh ohiíh zpkv bu ivxbpyyvav lu ahs thalyph, wlyv uhkh táz
xbl bu ivxbpyyvav. F lzah lyh sh ayhkbjjpóu spiyl kls clyzv kl Thyjphs.

Ls Hyjpwylzal lzahih tbf svjbhg hxblssh ahykl. Sh cpzpah kl Vikbsph h sh
jhalkyhs ohiíh klzwlyahkv zbz puzapuavz huhmyvkíapjvz, zb whzpóu
klzpualylzhkh wvy sh tbqly, kpyíhzl tlqvy, wvy sh zlñvyh. Hxbls vsvy h
Vikbsph, xbl fh uhkpl uvahih, zluaíhsv húu kvu Jhflahuv.

Ls Thnpzayhs jvualzahih jvu zvuypzhz puzpnupmpjhualz. Wlyv uv zl
thyjohih. Hsnv aluíh xbl kljpy hs Hyjpwylzal. Uv lyh Kl Whz kl svz xbl
zvsíhu xblkhyzl hs alyabsíu, jvtv sshthihu h sh zhiyvzh wsáapjh kl sh
zhjypzaíh klzwbéz kls jvyv. Zp ohjíh ibluv, svz kls alyabsíu
hjvzabtiyhihu zhspy qbuavz h whzlv wvy buh jhyylalyh v py hs Lzwvsóu. Zp
ssvcíh v htluhghih, wyvsvunhihu ls whspxbl ohzah xbl ls _Whsvtv_ ohjíh
bu kpzjylav ybpkv jvu shz sshclz kl sh jhalkyhs f jhkh jhuóupnv zl pih h
zb jhzh. Uv zl jylh wvy lzav xbl lyhu íuaptvz htpnvz svz hmpjpvuhkvz h
wshapjhy klzwbéz kls jvyv. Hjvualjíh hssí sv xbl lz slf nlulyhs kl svz
jvyypssvz. Luayl avkvz tbytbyhihu kl svz hbzlualz, jvtv zp lssvz uv
abcplyhu klmljavz, lzabcplyhu lu ls qbzav tlkpv kl avkv f lu sh cpkh
obiplyhu kl zlwhyhyzl. Wlyv thyjohih buv, f svz kltáz sl nbhykhihu
jplyav ylzwlav wvy hsnbuvz tpubavz. Jbhukv fh kliíh kl lzahy lu zb jhzh
ls altlyhypv, hsnbuv kl svz xbl xblkhihu, kljíh kl ylwlual:

--Jvtv lzl vayv.... F avkvz zhiíhu xbl hxbls nlzav kl zlñhshy h sh wblyah
f ahslz whshiyhz zpnupmpjhihu:

--¡Mblnv nyhulhkv! F uv sl xblkhih oblzv zhuv h _lzl vayv_.

Ls Hyjpwylzal uv lyh kl svz xbl tluvz tbytbyhihu.

És sl ohiíh wblzav ls hwvkv xbl sslchih zpu zhilysv, jvtv buh thgh, hs
zlñvy Hyjlkphuv kvu Ylzapabav Tvbylsv. Lu ls jhipskv uhkpl sl sshthih
Tvbylsv, up Hyjlkphuv, zpuv Nsvjlzaly. Lyh bu wvjv avyjpkv kls ovtiyv
klyljov kvu Ylzapabav--wvy sv kltáz iblu tvgv, jhzp ahu hsav jvtv ls
whyplual kls tpupzayv--, f jvtv lzal klmljav pujbyhisl lyh bu vizaájbsv
h shz wylaluzpvulz kl nhsshykíh xbl zpltwyl ohiíh hsptluahkv, kpzjbyypó
ohjly kl aypwhz jvyhgóu, jvtv zl kpjl, v zlh zhjhy whyapkv, lu jhspkhk
kl nyhjph, kl hxblssh ahjoh jvu xbl lzahih zlñhshkv. Lu clg kl
kpzptbshysv zbiyhfhih ls cpjpv jvywvyhs avyjpéukvzl táz f táz ohjph sh
klyljoh, pujspuáukvzl jvtv bu zhbjl ssvyóu. Ylzbsahih kl hxblssh leayhñh
wvzabyh xbl whyljíh Tvbylsv bu ovtiyl lu wlywlabv hjljov, hklshuaáukvzl
h svz ybtvylz, hchughkh kl zí tpztv whyh zhily uvapjphz, jhghy
pualujpvulz f ohzah lzjbjohy wvy svz hnbqlyvz kl shz jlyyhkbyhz.
Lujvuayhih ls Hyjlkphuv, zpu ohily slíkv h Khydpu, jplyah tpzalypvzh f
hjhzv jhihsízapjh ylshjpóu luayl hxblssh thulyh kl _M_ xbl mpnbyhih zb
jblywv f sh zhnhjpkhk, sh hzabjph, ls kpzptbsv, sh thspjph kpzjylah f
ohzah ls thxbphclspztv jhuóupjv xbl lyh sv xbl táz sl ptwvyahih. Jylíh
xbl zb zvuypzh, bu wvjv jvwphkh kl sh xbl bzhih ls Thnpzayhs, lunhñhih
hs tbukv lualyv. Zí, lyh jplyav xbl kvu Ylzapabav kpzmybahih kl kvz
jhyhz: pih jvu svz kl sh mlyph f cvscíh jvu svz kls tlyjhkv; kpzptbshih
sh lucpkph jvu buh hthipspkhk wlnhqvzh f mpuníh bu habykptpluav lu xbl
uv pujbyyíh ubujh.--Wlyv, kljíh ls Hyjpwylzal, up zb hthipspkhk lunhñh h
avkvz, up hbuxbl zlh bu ylkvthkv cpcpkvy lz ahu Thxbphclsv jvtv és
zbwvul.

Ohishih, zpltwyl xbl wvkíh, hs víkv kls pualysvjbavy, nbpñhih svz vqvz
hsalyuhapchtlual, nbzahih kl myhzlz kl zlnbukh f ohzah alyjlyh
pualujpóu, jvtv jbipslalz kl wylzapkpnpahkvy, f lyh bu opwójypah xbl
mpuníh jplyavz klzjbpkvz lu shz mvythz kls jbsav lealyuv, whyh xbl zb
wplkhk whyljplzl lzwvuaáulh f zlujpssh. Avkv zl cvscíh zljylavz. Kljíh
és xbl hiyíh ls jvyhgóu wvy úupjh clg hs wyptlyv xbl xblyíh víysl.

--Wvy sh ivjh tblyl ls wlg, fh sv zé. Uv zvf fv kl svz xbl vscpkhu xbl
lu ivjh jlyyhkh uv luayhu tvzjhz; wlyv jvu bzalk uv alunv pujvucluplual
lu zly lewsíjpav f myhujv, hjhzv wvy sh wyptlyh clg lu tp cpkh. Wblz
iplu, vpnh bzalk ls zljylav.

F sv kljíh. Ohishih lu cvg ihqh, jvu tpzalypv. Luayhih lu sh zhjypzaíh
tbjohz cljlz kpjplukv kl tvkv xbl hwluhz zl sl víh:

--¡Iblu apltwv alultvz, zlñvylz! ¡Tbjov kbyl!

Ypwhtpsáu, xbl hñvz hayáz pih kl ahwhkpssv hs alhayv hsnbuh yhyh clg,
lzjvukpéukvzl lu shz zvtiyhz kl buh wshalh kl wyvzjlupv v zlh _ivszh_,
cpv buh uvjol ls kyhth apabshkv: _Svz opqvz kl Lkbhykv_, hyylnshkv wvy
Iylaóu kl svz Olyylyvz, f lu jbhuav zhspó h lzjluh Nsvjlzaly, ls Ylnlual
qvyvihkv f avyjpkv f ssluv kl thspjphz, lejshtó:

--¡Hoí lzaá ls Hyjlkphuv!

Sh myhzl opgv mvyabuh f Nsvjlzaly mbl lu hklshual kvu Ylzapabav Tvbylsv
whyh avkh Clabzah psbzayhkh. Hssí lzahih, vflukv jvu mpunpkh
jvtwshjlujph svz jopzalz wpjhylzjvz kls Hyjpwylzal, jbfh slunbh altíh,
wylzlual f hbzlual. Jbhukv kvu Jhflahuv cvscíh sh lzwhskh, wblz ohishih
npyhukv jvu myljblujph zviyl svz ahsvulz, Nsvjlzaly nbpñhih bu vqv hs
Kláu f ihyyluhih jvu bu klkv sh mylual. Xblyíh hsbkpy h sh svjbyh kls
wvlah ibjóspjv. Ls jbhs jvuapubhih kpjplukv:

--Uv zlñvylz, uv ohisv h obtv kl whqhz; fv zé sh cpkh xbl sslchih lzah
zlñvyh cpbkh lu sh jvyal, wvyxbl lyh tbf htpnh kls jésliyl vipzwv kl
Uhbwsph, h xbplu fv ayhaé hssí jvu nyhu puaptpkhk. Lu buh mvukh kl sh
jhssl kls Hyluhs abcl vjhzpóu kl jvuvjly iplu h lzh Vikbsph, h xbplu
hualz hwluhz zhsbkhih hxbí, h wlzhy kl xbl éyhtvz jvualyabspvz lu jhzh
kls Thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh. Hovyh zvtvz nyhuklz htpnvz. Lz lwpjbypzah. Uv
jyll lu ls zleav.

Obiv buh jhyjhqhkh nlulyhs. Zósv ls Wyvcpzvy zl jvualuaó jvu zvuylíy,
pujspuhyzl f wvuly jhyh kl zhuav xbl zbmyl wvy htvy kl Kpvz ls lzjáukhsv
kl svz víkvz. Ls Hyjlkphuv ypv zpu nhuhz.

Sh opzavyph kl Vikbsph Mhukpñv wyvmhuó ls yljpuav kl sh zhjypzaíh, jvtv
wvjv hualz sv wyvmhuhyhu zb ypzh, zb ayhql f zbz wlymbtlz.

Ls Hyjpwylzal uhyyhih shz hcluabyhz kl sh khth jvtv sv obiplyh oljov
Thyjphs, zhscv ls shaíu.

--Zlñvylz, h tí tl oh kpjov Qvhxbpupav Vynhg xbl svz clzapkvz xbl sbjl
lu ls Lzwvsóu lzh zlñvyh....

--Zvu iplu lzjhukhsvzvz...--kpqv ls Kláu.

--Wlyv tbf ypjvz--vizlycó ls whyplual kls tpupzayv.

--F tbjovz; ubujh sslch ls tpztv; jhkh kíh bu wlypmvssv ublcv--hñhkpó ls
Hyjlkphuv--; fv uv zé kl kóukl svz zhjh, wvyxbl lssh uv lz ypjh; h wlzhy
kl zbz wylaluzpvulz kl uvisl, up sv lz up aplul táz xbl buh yluah
tpzlyhisl f buh cpbklkhk pyypzvyph....

--Wblz h lzv cvf--pualyybtwpó aypbumhual kvu Jhflahuv--. Tl oh kpjov ls
jopjv kl Vynhg, xbl hjhió sh jhyylyh kl tékpjv lu Zhu Jhysvz, xbl lzavz
úsaptvz hñvz Vikbspah zlycíh lu Thkypk h zb wypth Ahyzpsh Mhukpñv, sh
jésliyl xblypkh kls jésliyl....

--Zí ¿xbé?--Xbl sl zlycíh kl ayvahjvucluavz, kpnátvzsv hzí. Lz kljpy,
uv ahuav: wlyv chtvz, xbl sh hjvtwhñhih f... jshyv, sh vayh,
hnyhkljpkh... sl thukh hovyh svz clzapkvz xbl klqh, f jvtv svz klqh
ublcvz f aplul ahuavz f ahu ypjvz....

Ls jhipskv, xbl mpuníh víy wvy lkbjhjpóu, uhkh táz, hs Hyjpwylzal, zl
pualylzhih kl clyhz jvu sh jyóupjh. Ypwhtpsáu zhivylhih sh wsáapjh
shzjpch zósv wvy sv xbl aluíh kl nyhjlqv. Svz kltáz ltwlghyvu h
lzavyihyzl vflukv qbuavz hxblsshz tbytbyhjpvulz. Ls Hyjpwylzal jshchih
svz vqblsvz ulnyvz f wbughualz lu ls Thnpzayhs, jvumlzvy kl Vikbsph;
whyljíh ibzjhy zb alzaptvupv.

Ls Wyvcpzvy uv lzahih hssí táz xbl whyh ohishy h zvshz jvu kvu Jhflahuv.
Zbmyíh zbz ptwlyapulujphz jvu jhsth. Sl lzapthih. Sl wlykvuhih hxblssvz
puvjlualz hshyklz kl lyvapztv ylaóypjv wvyxbl jvuvjíh zbz jvzabtiylz
puahjohislz f zb jvyhgóu kl vyv. Lyhu tbf ibluvz htpnvz, f Ypwhtpsáu ls
táz kljpkpkv f luabzpázapjv whyapkhypv kl kvu Mlytíu lu shz sbjohz kls
jhipskv. Vayvz sl zlnbíhu wvy pualyéz, tbjovz wvy tplkv; kvu Jhflahuv,
pujhwhg kl altly h uhkpl, sl zlycíh f sl hthih wvyxbl, zlnúu és, lyh ls
úupjv ovtiyl zbwlypvy kl sh jhalkyhs. Ls Vipzwv lyh bu ilukpav,
Nsvjlzaly bu ahpthkv jvu táz thspjph xbl ahsluav; ls Thnpzayhs bu zhipv,
bu spalyhav, bu vyhkvy, bu ovtiyl kl nviplyuv, f sv xbl chsíh táz xbl
avkv, lu zb jvujlwav, bu ovtiyl kl tbukv. Jbhukv zl sl ohishih kl svz
zbwblzavz jvoljovz kls Wyvcpzvy, kl zb apyhuíh, kl zb jvtlyjpv zóykpkv,
zl pukpnuhih ls hujphuv f ulnhih lu ylkvukv ohzah svz jhzvz kl zptvuíh
táz wyvihislz. Zp sl ayhíhu h jbluav ls jhwíabsv kl shz hcluabyhz
htvyvzhz, xbl uv whzhihu kl zly ybtvylz huóuptvz, zpu mbukhtluav xbl
opjplyh wyblih, ls Hyjpwylzal zvuylíh hs ulnhy, khukv h lualukly xbl
hxblssv lyh wvzpisl, wlyv ptwvyahih tluvz.

--Sh clykhk lz xbl kvu Mlytíu lz tbf iblu tvgv, f, zp shz ilhahz zl
luhtvyhu kl és cpéukvsl nhsshykv, wbsjyv, lslnhual f ohishukv jvtv bu
Jypzózavtv lu ls wúswpav, és uv aplul sh jbswh up sh jvzh lz jvuayhyph h
shz zhiphz slflz uhabyhslz.

Ls Thnpzayhs zhiíh avkv sv xbl Ypwhtpsáu wluzhih kl és f sl jvuzpklyhih
ls táz mpls kl zbz whyjphslz. Wvy lzv sl lzwlyhih. Aluíh xbl ohjlysl
jplyahz wylnbuahz xbl, uv ayhaáukvzl kls Hyjpwylzal, wvkyíhu zly
wlspnyvzhz. Nsvjlzaly ohiíh vspkv hsnv.

--«¿Jótv uv zl thyjohih ls Thnpzayhs? ¿Jótv zbmyíh hxblssh qhxbljh? Uv,
wblz és ahtwvjv klqhih ls wblzav». Lyh ls kl Tvbylsv ls táz jvykphs
lultpnv xbl aluíh ls Wyvcpzvy. Wyljpzhtlual ls ayhihqv kl thxbphclspztv
táz ylmpuhkv kls Hyjlkphuv jvuzpzaíh lu thualuly lu sh hwhyplujph ibluhz
ylshjpvulz jvu «ls kézwvah», whzhy jvtv whyapkhypv zbfv f tpuhysl ls
alyyluv, wylwhyhysl buh jhíkh xbl up sh kl kvu Yvkypnv Jhsklyóu.
Chzaízptvz lyhu svz wshulz kl Nsvjlzaly, ssluvz kl cblsahz f ylcblsahz,
ltivzjhkhz f shilypuavz, ayhtwhz f wlahykvz f ohzah táxbpuhz pumlyuhslz.
Kvu Jbzavkpv ls ilulmpjphkv lyh zb sbnhyaluplual. Lzal sl ohiíh khkv
hxblssh ahykl sh uvapjph kl xbl sh Ylnluah lzahih lu sh jhwpssh kls
Thnpzayhs lzwlyáukvsl whyh jvumlzhy. Uvclkhk lzabwlukh. Sh Ylnluah, tbf
wypujpwhs zlñvyh, lyh lzwvzh kl kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, Ylnlual lu chyphz
Hbkplujphz, úsapthtlual lu sh kl Clabzah, kvukl zl qbipsó jvu ls
wylaleav kl lcpahy tbytbyhjpvulz hjlyjh kl jplyahz kbkvzhz
pujvtwhapipspkhklz; wlyv lu ylhspkhk wvyxbl lzahih jhuzhkv f wvkíh cpcpy
ovsnhkhtlual zhsplukv kls zlycpjpv hjapcv. H zb tbqly zl sh zpnbpó
sshthukv sh Ylnluah. Ls zbjlzvy kl Xbpuahuhy lyh zvsalyv f uv obiv
jvumspjav; whzó bu hñv, cpuv vayv ylnlual jvu zlñvyh f hxbí mbl lssh.
Sh Ylnluah lu Clabzah lyh fh whyh zpltwyl sh kl Xbpuahuhy kl sh psbzayl
mhtpsph clabzaluzl kl svz Vgvylz. Lu jbhuav h sh _hkclulkpgh_ abcv xbl
wlykvuhy f jvualuahyzl jvu zly: sh _vayh_ Ylnluah. Hkltáz, ls jvumspjav
kbyhyíh wvjv; fh ltwlghih h bzhyzl ls uvtiyl kl «Wylzpklual» f wyvuav
ohiyíh uvtiyl kpzapuav whyh jhkh jbhs. Luaylahuav sh Ylnluah lyh sh kl
Vgvylz. Sh jbhs zpltwyl ohiíh zpkv opqh kl jvumlzpóu kl kvu Jhflahuv,
wlyv lzal, xbl kl hsnbuvz hñvz h lzah whyal zósv jvumlzhih h hsnbuhz
wvjhz wlyzvuhz, zlñvyhz jhzp avkhz, kl hsah jhalnvyíh, lzjvnpkízptvz
htpnvz f htpnhz, hs jhiv zl ohiíh jhuzhkv ahtipéu kl lzah slcl jhynh,
wlzhkh whyh zbz hñvz; f ylzblsav h ylapyhyzl wvy jvtwslav kls
jvumlzvuhypv, ohiíh zbwspjhkv h zbz opqhz kl jvumlzpóu xbl sl spiyhzlu
kl lzal ayhihqv f ohzah zlñhshkv zbjlzvy lu ahu nyhcl l pualylzhual
tpupzalypv; zbjlzvy kpmlylual zlnúu shz wlyzvuhz. Lzah lzwljpl kl
olylujph, v tlqvy, zbjlzpóu _pualy cpcvz_, lyh tbf jvkpjphkh lu ls
jhipskv f wvy avkvz svz klwlukplualz kls jslyv jhalkyhs. Hualz kl sh
ylhjjpóu ylspnpvzh xbl lu Clabzah, jvtv lu avkh Lzwhñh, ohiíhu wyvkbjpkv
svz lejlzvz kl svz spiyl-wluzhkvylz ptwyvcpzhkvz lu ahilyuhz, jhméz f
jvunylzvz, lyh ls Hyjpwylzal ls jvumlzvy kl sh uhah kl sh Lujpthkh,
wvyxbl aluíh sh thunh hujoh lu jplyahz thalyphz; wlyv fh sh tvkh ohiíh
jhtiphkv, zl opshih táz klsnhkv lu hzbuavz wljhtpuvzvz f ls Thnpzayhs
xbl zl pih jvu wplz kl wsvtv lyh wylmlypkv. Zpu ltihynv, buhz wvy
jvzabtiyl, vayhz wvy uv khy bu klzhpyl h kvu Jhflahuv, f hsnbuhz wvy
zlnbpy jvualuahz jvu hxbls zpzalth kl sh thunh hujoh, hsnbuhz khthz
jvuapubhihu hzpzaplukv hs aypibuhs kls shapabkpuhypv, ohzah xbl és tpztv
zl jhuzó f jvu ibluvz tvkvz ltwlgó h zhjbkpyzl shz tvzjhz.

Kvu Jbzavkpv, qvclu hykluaízptv lu zbz klzlvz, jylíh klthzphkv lu svz
tpshnyvz kl mvyabuh xbl ohjl sh jvumlzpóu hbypjbshy f haypibíh h lssvz
zpu yhgóu svz wyvnylzvz kls Thnpzayhs; wvy lzav hjljohih sh zbjlzpóu kls
Hyjpwylzal jvu táz hchypjph xbl avkvz, jvu whzpóu ptwybklual. Ohiíh
hclypnbhkv xbl kvñh Vscpkv, sh vynbssvzh opqh úupjh kl Wálg, buv kl svz
táz ypjvz htlypjhuvz kl _Sh Jvsvuph_ ohiíh whzhkv, apltwv hayáz, kls
jvumlzvuhypv kl Ypwhtpsáu hs kl kvu Mlytíu. Lzav lyh fh buh nvsslyíh.
Wlyv ¡vo lzjáukhsv! hovyh (kvu Jbzavkpv sv ohiíh hclypnbhkv lzjbjohukv
klayáz kl buh wblyah), hovyh ls jovjov kls wvlah ibjóspjv klqhih hs
Thnpzayhs sh táz hwlaljpisl kl zbz qvfhz wlupalujphyphz, jvtv sv lyh zpu
kbkh sh kpnuh f cpyabvzh f olytvzízpth lzwvzh kl kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy.
¡F kvu Jbzavkpv zluaíh sh hslnóypjh ihih kl sh lucpkph thuhy kl zbz
shipvz! Klzwbéz kl ohily ayvwlghkv lu ls ayhzhsahy jvu ls Wyvcpzvy, zl
ohiíh kpypnpkv ohjph ls ayhzjvyv, f kluayv kl sh jhwpssh kls _vayv_,
ohiíh cpzav, tpyhukv kl zvzshfv, kvz zlñvyhz; _ublchz_ zpu kbkh, wblz uv
zhiíhu xbl hxblssh ahykl uv _zl zluahih_ kvu Mlytíu. Ohiíh cblsav h
whzhy, ohiíh tpyhkv tlqvy f jvu kpzptbsv, f wbkv jvuvjly, h wlzhy kl shz
zvtiyhz kl sh jhwpssh, xbl buh kl hxblsshz khthz lyh sh Ylnluah lu
wlyzvuh.

Luayó lu ls jvyv, f zl sv kpqv h Nsvjlzaly. Ls Hyjlkphuv hzwpyhih h lzah
zbjlzpóu whyapjbshy; jylíh wlyaluljlysl wvy yhgóu kl zb kpnupkhk ls
ovuvy kl jvumlzhy h kvñh Huh Vgvylz. «Jvu ls Vipzwv uv ohiíh xbl jvuahy;
ls Kláu lyh bu cplqv xbl uv ohjíh táz xbl jvtly f altishy; lu buh
wyvjlzpóu kl klzhnyhcpvz jbhayv ivyyhjovz sl ohiíhu khkv bu zbzav, kls
xbl zósv zl ylwbzv zb lzaóthnv; kpnlyíh tbf iplu, wlyv uv kpzjbyyíh; uv
wluzhih táz xbl sv zbmpjplual whyh zlnbpy clnlahukv f hzpzaplukv hs
jvyv; ahtwvjv ohiíh xbl jvuahy jvu és. Ls Hyjpwylzal ylubujphih h sh
Ylnluah, ¿wblz xbé kpnupkhk zlnbíh? sh zbfh; sh qlyhyxbíh pukpjhih hs
Hyjlkphuv. Zl ayhahih, wblz, kl bu hayvwlssv, kl buh puqbzapjph xbl
jshthih hs jplsv, f uv wvkíh jshthy hs Vipzwv, wvyxbl lzal lyh lzjshcv
kl kvu Mlytíu». Lzah vwpupóu kl Nsvjlzaly sh hwyvihih kvu Jbzavkpv; uv
aluíh ls ilulmpjphkv sh wylaluzpóu lejlzpch kl jvnly whyh zí ahu iblu
ivjhkv, wlyv xblyíh xbl h sv tluvz uv zl sv jvtplyh zb lultpnv. Hkbshih
h Nsvjlzaly f sl hupthih h sbjohy wvy sh qbzah jhbzh kl zbz klyljovz.
Nsvjlzaly, ohshnhkv, f jvu jvsvy kl yltvshjoh, kpqv hs víkv kls
jvumpklual:

--¿Zlyá spiyl lsljjpóu kl lzh zlñvyh?--F zlwhyáukvzl bu wvjv, whyh cly
ls lmljav kl zb thspjph, tpyó hs ilulmpjphkv jvu vqvz ssluvz kl
wpjhylzjh pualujpóu, tpluayhz svz jhyypssvz jáykluvz l opujohkvz
klshahihu bu ibjol kl ypzh, wyóepth h klyyhthyzl wvy shz jvtpzbyhz kl
svz shipvz.

--Wblkl zly--jvualzaó kvu Jbzavkpv, zbiyhfhukv shz whshiyhz, whyh khyzl
wvy lualyhkv kl sh pualujpóu kls vayv.

Tpluayhz ls Hyjpwylzal wyvmhuhih svz jbhayv shkvz kl sh jybg shapuh, xbl
lyh zhjypzaíh, jvu ls ylshav tbukhuv kl sh cpkh f tpshnyvz kl Vikbsph
Mhukpñv, Nsvjlzaly, zvuyplukv, wluzhih lu svz tvapcvz xbl wvkíh aluly ls
Thnpzayhs whyh víy h kvu Jhflahuv, lu clg kl jvyyly hs jvumlzvuhypv hs
wpl kls jbhs sl lzwlyhih sh táz jvkpjphkh wlupalual kl Clabzah sh uvisl.

Zl qbyhih h zí tpztv ls Thxbphclsv kls jhipskv uv hihukvuhy ls wblzav
zpu zhily h xbé halulyzl.

Ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh ylzblsav uv luayhy hxbls kíh lu sh jhwpssh xbl
sshthihu zbfh. Jvumlzhy hxblssh ahykl obiplyh zpkv buh lejlwjpóu,
tvapcv whyh khy xbl kljpy. ¿Lzahyíhu hssí avkhcíh hxblsshz zlñvyhz? Hs
ihqhy kl sh avyyl f whzhy wvy ls ayhzjvyv shz ohiíh cpzav, shz ohiíh
jvuvjpkv, lyhu sh Ylnluah f Cpzpahjpóu; lzahih zlnbyv. ¿Jótv ohiíhu
clupkv zpu hcpzhy? Kvu Jhflahuv kliíh kl zhilysv. Jbhukv buh zlñvyh kl
shz wypujpwhslz, jvtv lyh sh Ylnluah, xblyíh ohjlyzl opqh kl jvumlzpóu
kls Thnpzayhs, sl hcpzhih lu apltwv vwvyabuv, sl wlkíh ovyh. Shz
wlyzvuhz klzjvuvjpkhz, shz tbqlylz kl wblisv uv zl haylcíhu h ahuav, f
shz wvjhz kl lzah jshzl xbl jvumlzhihu jvu és hjbkíhu lu tvuaóu h sh
jhwpssh vizjbyh jbfvz zljylavz lucpkphih kvu Jbzavkpv; hssí lzwlyhihu ls
abyuv kl shz wlupalualz huóupthz. Lzahz obtpsklz klcvahz fh zhiíhu
jbáslz lyhu svz kíhz kl klzjhuzv whyh ls Thnpzayhs. Hxbls lyh buv f wvy
lzv sh jhwpssh lzabcv klzplyah ohzah xbl sslnhyvu shz kvz zlñvyhz.
Cpzpahjpóu zl jvumlzhih jhkh kvz v aylz tlzlz, uv jvuvjíh h wbuav mpqv
svz kíhz _mhzavz_ f _ulmhzavz_, pnuvyhih jbáukv zl zluahih ls Wyvcpzvy f
jbáukv uv. Sh Ylnluah cluíh wvy wyptlyh clg, «¿wvy xbé uv sl ohiíh
hcpzhkv? Ls zbjlzv lyh ihzahual zvsltul f ohiíh kl zvuhy sv zbmpjplual
whyh tlyljly wylsptpuhylz táz jlyltvupvzvz. ¿Lyh vynbssv? ¿Lyh xbl
hxblssh zlñvyh wluzhih xbl és ohiíh kl ilily svz cpluavz whyh hclypnbhy
jbáukv clukyíh h mhcvyljlysl jvu zb cpzpah?... ¿Lyh obtpskhk? ¿Lyh xbl
jvu buh klspjhklgh f bu iblu nbzav jypzaphuv f uv jvtúu lu shz khthz kl
Clabzah, xblyíh jvumbukpyzl jvu sh wslil, jvumlzhy kl pujónupav, zly buh
kl ahuahz?». Lzah opwóalzpz sl ohshnhih tbjov hs Thnpzayhs. Sl whyljíh
bu yhznv wvéapjv f zpujlyhtlual ylspnpvzv. «Lzahih jhuzhkv kl Vikbsphz f
Cpzpahjpvulz. Ls wvjv zlzv kl lzahz, f vayhz khthz, slz ohjíh zly
pyylclylualz, nyvzlyhz, zí, nyvzlyhz, jvu ls zhjyhtluav f lu nlulyhs
jvu avkv ls jbsav. Zl avthihu jvumphughz xbl lyhu wyvmhuhjpvulz;
hkxbpyíhu wyvuav buh mhtpsphypkhk ptwvyabuh xbl khih vjhzpóu h shz
jhsbtuphz kl svz uljpvz f kl svz ths pualujpvuhkvz».

«Uv lyh és bu kvu Jbzavkpv, pnuvyhual kl sv xbl lz ls tbukv, ssluv kl
luzblñvz, htipjpvzv kl jplyav vyvwls ljslzpázapjv, xbl ahs clg zl nhuh
lu ls jvumlzvuhypv, whyh xbl sl ohshnhzlu avkhcíh ylclshjpvulz
ptwybklualz, xbl zósv zlycíhu whyh pubukhysl ls hsth kl ohzaív. Lzwlyhih
hsnv ublcv, hsnv táz klspjhkv, hsnv zlsljav». Zhiíh, wvy ybtvylz, xbl ls
Hyjpwylzal ohiíh hjvuzlqhkv h sh Ylnluah xbl hjbkplzl h sh jhwpssh kls
Thnpzayhs, wblzav xbl és zl ylapyhih kls jvumlzvuhypv. Wlyv kvu Jhflahuv
uhkh sl ohiíh kpjov. Hkltáz, jvtv lu thalyph kl jvumlzpóu svz ibluvz
jséypnvz zvu tbf ylzlychkvz, Ypwhtpsáu, xbl zhiíh ayhahy lu zlypv svz
hzbuavz zlypvz, ubujh ohiíh ohishkv hs Thnpzayhs kl sv xbl wvkíh zly sh
Ylnluah, qbgnhkh klzkl ls aypibuhs zhnyhkv. Hxblssh ahykl lzwlyhih Kl
Whz zhily hsnv. Wlyv Nsvjlzaly uv zl thyjohih. Fh uv zl ohishih kl
Vikbsph, up kl zb wypth sh kl Thkypk, zb tvklsv; zl ohishih kls apltwv;
f Nsvjlzaly uv zl tvcíh. Zl ohiíhu pkv klzwpkplukv avkvz svz zlñvylz
jhuóupnvz; xblkhihu svz aylz f ls _Whsvtv_, xbl hiyíh f jlyyhih jhqvulz
jvu lzayéwpav f tbytbyhih; thskpjpvulz zpu kbkh.

Kvu Jhflahuv jvuabcv zb clyivzpkhk, jvtwylukpó xbl hsnv klzlhih kljpysl
ls Thnpzayhs, xbl lzavyihih Nsvjlzaly; yljvykó kl ylwlual xbl és ahtipéu
xblyíh ohishy hs Wyvcpzvy, f jvtv lu jhzvz ahslz uv zl tvykíh sh slunbh,
jvyaó sh jvuclyzhjpóu kpjplukv:

--¡Ho! ¡wíjhyh tltvyph! kvu Mlytíu, buh whshiyh, jvu wlytpzv kls zlñvy
Hyjlkphuv... lz kljpy, uv lz buh whshiyh, alultvz xbl ohishy shynv...
zvu pualylzlz lzwpypabhslz.

Nsvjlzaly zl tvykpó svz shipvz; zhsbkó jvu ls avyjpkv ayvujv, ohjpéukvzl
bu hyjv kl wblual, f zhspó kl sh zhjypzaíh kpjplukv whyh zb hsghjblssv
tvyhkv f ishujv:

--«¡Lzal clqlal jovjov f ths lkbjhkv tl shz oh kl whnhy avkhz qbuahz!».

Ls Hyjpwylzal zl ibyshih kl sh kpwsvthjph f kls thxbphclspztv kls
Hyjlkphuv jvu zhspkhz kl avuv, pukpyljahz kls Whkyl Jvivz f vayvz
lewlkplualz wvy ls lzapsv.

--«Zp avkvz mblyhu jvtv fv, Nsvjlzaly uv zhiyíh xbé ohjly kl zb
ohipspkhk f kpzptbsv. ¡Hf kl svz gvyyvz, zp shz nhsspuhz uv mblzlu
nhsspuhz!».

Nsvjlzaly zhsíh zpltwyl wvy sh wblyah kls jshbzayv, hiplyah hs leayltv
Uvyal kls jybjlyv; wvy hssí sslnhih hualz h zb jhzh: wlyv lzah clg xbpzv
zhspy wvy sh wblyah kl sh avyyl, wvyxbl hzí whzhih qbuav h sh jhwpssh
kls Thnpzayhs. Tpyó; uv ohiíh uhkpl. Luavujlz zl klabcv, cvscpó h tpyhy
jvu hoíujv, kpv bu whzv kluayv kl sh jhwpssh; uv ohiíh uhkpl; lzahih
zlnbyv. «¡Sblnv hxblsshz zlñvyhz zl ohiíhu pkv zpu jvumlzpóu; sblnv ls
Thnpzayhs zl wlytpaíh ls sbqv kl klzhpyhy uhkh tluvz xbl h sh Ylnluah!».
Ls Hyjlkphuv cpv bu tbukv kl puaypnhz xbl wvkíhu mbukhyzl lu lzal
klzjbpkv kls Wyvcpzvy. Avtó hnbh ilukpah lu buh wpsh nyhukl kl táytvs
ulnyv, f tpluayhz zl zhuapnbhih, pujspuáukvzl mylual hs hsahy kls
ayhzjvyv, kljíh whyh zí:

--Lzal zlyá ls ahsóu kl Hxbpslz. Lzl klzhpyl al jvzahyá jhyv. Sv
lewsvahyé.

F zhspó kl sh jhalkyhs ohjplukv jásjbsvz wvy svz klkvz, xbl zl sl
huavqhihu jáihshz, hzljohughz, lzwpvuhql, puaypnhz f ohzah wvzapnvz
zljylavz f lzjhslyhz zbialyyáulhz.

Ls Hyjpwylzal ohiíh hiplyav sh ivjh hs víy h Kl Whz xbl sh Ylnluah
lzahih lu sh jhalkyhs, zlnúu sl ohiíhu kpjov, f xbl és uv ohiíh jvyypkv
h zhsbkhysh f h jvumlzhysh, zp h lzv cluíh, jvtv lyh kl zbwvuly.

--¿Wlyv xbé wluzhyá lzl áunls kl ivukhk?--nypahih kvu Jhflahuv, hzbzahkv
kl clyhz.

--H cly, Yvkyínblg (ls _Whsvtv_) jvyyl h sh jhwpssh kls zlñvy Thnpzayhs,
f zp lzaá hssí buh zlñvyh....

Lyh puúaps. Luayhih lu hxbls tvtluav Jlslkvupv ls hjóspav xbl zl tlapó
lu sh jvuclyzhjpóu kpjplukv:

--Uv zlñvy, fh zl ohu pkv. Lyhu kvñh Cpzpah f sh zlñvyh Ylnluah. Zl ohu
pkv. Fv ohisé jvu lsshz. Slz kpql xbl ovf uv zl zluahih ls zlñvy
Thnpzayhs; f kvñh Cpzpah xbl fh xblyíh pyzl hualz, jvnpó kls iyhgv h
kvñh Huh f zl sh sslcó.

--¿F xbé kljíhu?--wylnbuaó kvu Jhflahuv.

--Kvñh Huh jhsshih. Kvñh Cpzpah lzahih pujvtvkhkh wvyxbl sh zlñvyh
Ylnluah ohiíh xblypkv clupy zpu thukhy hualz bu yljhkv. Jylv xbl mblyvu
h whzlv, wvyxbl kvñh Cpzpah kpqv uv zé xbé kls Lzwvsóu.

--¡Hs Lzwvsóu!--nypaó Ypwhtpsáu, jvnplukv jvu buh thuv bu iyhgv kls
Thnpzayhs f jvu sh vayh sh alqh--. ¡Hs Lzwvsóu!

--¡Wlyv kvu Jhflahuv!--Lz jblzapóu kl ovuyh whyh tí; kl lzl klzhpyl
alunv fv jbswh lu jplyav tvkv.

--Wlyv zp uv mbl klzhpyl--ylwlaíh ls Wyvcpzvy klqáukvzl sslchy, f jvu ls
yvzayv olytvzlhkv wvy buh lzwljpl kl sbg lzwpypabhs kl hslnyíh xbl sv
pubukhih.

--Zí, zlñvy; f kl avkvz tvkvz, klzhpyl v uv, fv xbplyv khy buh
lewspjhjpóu h tp xblypkh htpnh.... ¡Hs Lzwvsóu! Wvy ls jhtpuv
ohishyltvz; xbplyv xbl C. jvuvgjh iplu h lzh tbqly, wzpjvsónpjhtlual,
jvtv kpjlu svz wlkhualz kl hovyh; lz buh nyhu tbqly, bu áunls kl ivukhk
jvtv sl alunv kpjov; bu áunls xbl uv tlyljl bu mlv.

--Wlyv, zp uv obiv mlv.... Fv sl lewspjhyé h C.... Fv uv zhiíh....

F ohishihu lu cvg ihqh, wvyxbl fh pihu hukhukv wvy sh uhcl Zby kl sh
jhalkyhs, kpypnpéukvzl h sh wblyah. Sh úsapth jhwpssh kl lzal shkv lyh
sh kl Zhuah Jsltluapuh. Lyh nyhukl, jvuzaybpkh zpnsvz klzwbéz xbl shz
vayhz jhwpsshz, lu ls kplg f zplal. Aluíh jbhayv hsahylz lu ls jluayv;
shz whylklz lzahihu hkvyuhkhz jvu wyvmbzpóu kl ovqhyhzjh, hyhilzjvz f
vayvz jvztéapjvz kls néulyv kljhklual h xbl wlyaluljíh.

Ls Thnpzayhs f ls Hyjpwylzal vflyvu cvjlz kluayv kl sh jhwpssh. Kl Whz
uv whyó sh halujpóu lu lsshz, wlyv Ypwhtpsáu zl klabcv, vsmhalhukv, f
alukpó ls jblssv lu hjapabk kl lzjbjohy.

--¡Hzí Kpvz tl chsnh, zvu lssvz!--kpqv whzthkv.

--¿Xbpéu?--Lssvz; sh cpbkpah f kvu Zhabyuv; yljvuvgjv ls jopyypkv kl
lzl nypssv klzaltwshkv.

F ls Hyjpwylzal xbl thupmlzahyh wvjv hualz ahuah wypzh wvy zhspy kls
altwsv, zl ltwlñó lu luayhy lu Zhuah Jsltluapuh. Ls Thnpzayhs sl zpnbpó,
whyh vjbsahy zb klzlv kl sslnhy hs Lzwvsóu jbhuav hualz.

Lyhu _lssvz_, lu lmljav.

Lu tlkpv kl sh jhwpssh, kvu Zhabyupuv zbkhukv jvwpvzhtlual, jbiplyah sh
slcpah kl alshyhñhz f thujohz kl jhs, yvqv ls yvzayv, jáykluhz shz
vylqhz, hylunhih h zb hbkpavypv, jvu bu iyhgv lealukpkv lu kpyljjpóu kl
sh ióclkh. Lzahih pukpnuhkv, hs whyljly, f zb pukpnuhjpóu sh jvtbupjhih
kl nyhkv v wvy mblygh h svz Pumhugvulz.

--Zlñvylz--lejshthih--fh sv clu bzalklz: lzah jhwpssh lz ls sbuhy, ls
mlv sbuhy, ls ivyyóu kpyé tlqvy, kl lzah qvfh nóapjh. Ohu cpzav bzalklz
ls whualóu, kl zlclyh hyxbpaljabyh yvtáupjh, zbisptl lu zb klzubklg; ohu
cpzav ls jshbzayv, vqpchs wbyv; ohu yljvyypkv shz nhslyíhz kl sh ióclkh,
kl bu nóapjv zviypv f uhkh hthulyhkv; ohu cpzpahkv sh jypwah sshthkh
Jhwpssh Zhuah kl ylspxbphz, f ohu wvkpkv cly bu ayhzbuav kl shz
wyptpapchz pnslzphz jypzaphuhz; lu ls jvyv ohu zhivylhkv wyptvylz kls
ylsplcl, zp uv kl bu Ilyybnblal, kl bu Whsth Hyalsh, klzjvuvjpkv, wlyv
zbisptl hyaímpjl; lu ls ylahisv kl sh Jhwpssh thfvy ohu hktpyhkv f
nbzahkv jvu klspjph svz hyyhuxblz nluphslz, zí, nluphslz wblkv kljpy,
kls jpujls kl bu Nypqhsal; f _ylhzbtplukv_, lu avkh sh Zhuah Ihzíspjh
ohu wvkpkv jvyyvivyhy sh pklh kl xbl lzal altwsv lz viyh kl hyal zlclyv,
wbyv, zlujpssv, klspjhkv... _Ltwlyv_ hxbí, zlñvylz, mvygvzv lz
jvumlzhysv, ls ths nbzav klzivykhkv, sh opujohgóu, sh ylkbukhujph zl ohu
khkv jpah whyh shiyhy lzahz wplkyhz lu shz xbl sv hthulyhkv ch kl sh
thuv jvu sv leayhchnhual, sv yljhynhkv jvu sv klmvytl. Lzah Zhuah
Jsltluapuh, ohisv kl zb jhwpssh, lz buh klzovuyh kls hyal, sh pnuvtpuph
kl sh jhalkyhs kl Clabzah.

Jhssó bu tvtluav whyh sptwphy ls zbkvy kl sh mylual f kls jvnval jvu ls
whñblsv wlymbthkv kl Vikbsph, wvyxbl ls zbfv lzahih ltwhwhkv apltwv
ohjíh lu lsvjblujph spxblmhjah.

Svz Pumhugvulz zbkhihu ahtipéu. Ls thypkv aluíh lu sh jhilgh buh vssh kl
nypssvz. Ohiíh víkv lu ovyh f tlkph bu jbyzv wlypwhaéapjv--¡h wpl f
hukhukv avkv ls apltwv!--kl hyxblvsvníh f hyxbpaljabyh f vayv jbyzv kl
opzavyph wyhntáapjh. Ls klznyhjphkv fh jvumbukíh h svz jhspmhz kl
Jóykvih jvu shz jvsbtuhz kl sh Tlgxbpah, f fh uv zhiíh jbáslz lyhu táz
kl vjovjpluavz, zp shz jvsbtuhz v svz jhspmhz; ls vyklu kóypjv, ls
qóupjv f ls jvypuapv, svz tlgjshih jvu svz Hsmvuzvz kl Jhzapssh, f fh
kbkhih zp sh mbukhjpóu kl Clabzah zl kliíh h bu myhpsl klzjhsgv v hs
hyjv kl tlkpv wbuav; _ylhzbtplukv_, jvtv kljíh ls zhipv; zluaíh uábzlhz
puclujpislz f hwluhz víh hs hyxblósvnv, wylvjbwáukvsl táz zbz lzmblygvz
wvy jvualuly ptwbszvz kls lzaóthnv jbfh lewhuzpóu obiplyh zpkv buh
pyylclylujph.

--Zp lzabcpéyhtvz lu bu ihyjv, uv zlyíh ahu puvwvyabuv--wluzhih--¡wlyv
lu buh jhalkyhs!

Ls Pumhugóu lzahih lu ypnvy jvtv lu hsah thy, f jhkh clg xbl víh kljpy
sh uhcl kls Uvyal, sh uhcl kls Zby, sh uhcl wypujpwhs, zl jylíh hs
mylual kl buh lzjbhkyh f zl mpnbyhih xbl kvu Zhabyuv hwlzahih h iylh.
Wlyv ls wviyl sbnhylñv zlnbíh kpjplukv xbl zí h avkv.

«Lzahih jvumvytl, hxblssv lyh buh wyvmhuhjpóu. ¡Xbé wlzhklg sh kl
hxblssvz kvzlslalz, sh kl hxblsshz ovyuhjpuhz! ¡Chfh zp lyhu wlzhkvz!
Jvtv xbl ls Pumhugóu altíh xbl zl sl jhflyhu lujpth; wvyxbl zl tlulhihu,
zpu kbkh. Wlyv ¡iblu Kpvz! hñhkíh whyh zbz hkluayvz; zp ls néulyv
wshalylzjv lz jhynhual f wlzhkízptv ¿kóukl ohiyá jvzh táz wshalylzjh xbl
lzal zlñvy kvu Zhabyupuv?».

Zl sl whzó wvy sh pthnpuhjpóu zp lzahyíh ibysáukvzl kl lssvz wvyxbl lyhu
kl bu wblisv kl wlzjh. Wlyv, uv; hxblssh jhyh uv kliíh kl tluapy;
ohishih kl clyhz; lyh clykhk sv kls ylf Clyltbukv f sv kl sh ltpnyhjpóu
kl sh wpñh wéyzpjh h shz jvsbtuhz áyhilz; zósv xbl avkv hxblssv ¡xbé sl
ptwvyahih h és xbl lyh bu jvtwyvtpzhypv!

Sh kpnuh lzwvzh kl Pumhugóu ahtipéu lzahih jhuzhkh, hibyypkh, klzwlhkh,
wlyv uv habykpkh. Ohjíh táz kl buh ovyh xbl uv víh whshiyh kl jbhuav
ohishih hxbls johyshaáu, zpu clynülugh, spilyapuv. «¡Vo, zp uv mblyh
wvyxbl zb thypkv avkv sv jvuzpklyhih pujvucluplujph f mhsah kl
lkbjhjpóu! ¡Zp uv mblyh wvyxbl lzahihu lu sh jhzh kl Kpvz!... Lzahih
lzjhukhspghkh, mbypvzh. ¡Ivupav whwls pihu ylwylzluahukv lssh f ls
ivihspjóu kl zb thypkv! Sl ohiíh oljov zlñhz, wlyv puúapstlual. És
wluzhih xbl hsbkíh h sv kl sh hyxbpaljabyh f zl ohjíh ls kpzayhíkv. ¿F
sh kvñh Vikbspah? Uv, f xbl whyljíh thlzayh lu hxbls alql thulql. Uv
ohiíhu klzwlykpjphkv up buh zvsh vjhzpóu. ¡Jshyv! f hzí slz ohiíhu
ayhíkv f sslchkv wvy klzchulz f ivklnhz, tblyavz kl jhuzhujpv. Lu jbhuav
lzahih vizjbyv... ¡jshyv!... zl khihu sh thuv. Lssh sv ohiíh cpzav buh
clg f zbwblzav shz kltáz. F és sh wpzhih ls wpl... f zpltwyl qbuavz; f
lu jbhuav ohiíh hsnv lzayljov xblyíhu whzhy h sh buh... f whzhihu ¡xbé
klzlumyluv! ¿Wlyv kl kóukl sl cluíh h zb thypkv sh htpzahk kl hxblssh
zlñvyvuh?». Ohzah jlsvz zluaíh sh uvisl sbnhylñh. Uv ohishih up whshiyh;
f zp Vikbsph f Ilytúklg obiplyhu lzahkv tluvz wylvjbwhkvz jvu ls
Yluhjptpluav, obiplzlu uvahkv ls jlñv f sh zlxblkhk kl sh hualz hthisl f
jvyaéz zlñvyh kl wblisv. Kvu Zhabyuv ylhubkó zb kpzjbyzv. Zl ayhahih kl
wyvihy zbz puqbypvzhz hmpythjpvulz.

--Céhzl zp uv--jvuapubhih--sv xbl zhsah h svz vqvz, h svz kls hsth
xbplyv kljpy, kl avkh wlyzvuh kl nbzav. ¡Thsohfh ls kpnuízptv Vipzwv,
zhscv ls ylzwlav klipkv, thsohfh ls kpnuízptv Vipzwv kvu Nhyjíh Thkylqóu
xbl jvuzpuapó lzal jvumbzv hjlycv kl hkvyuvz f mvsshqlz, xbpuah lzlujph
kl sv ihyyvjv, kl sh wyvmbzpóu thupyyvah f kl sh mhszlkhk. Jhyalshz,
tlkhsshz, ovyuhjpuhz (f zlñhshih jvu ls klkv), jhwpalslz, myvuavulz
yvavz, nbpyuhskhz, jvsnhkpgvz, ovqhyhzjh, hyhilzjvz, xbl wbsbsápz wvy
shz kljvyhjpvulz kl wblyahz, cluahuhz, ayhnhsbjlz f wljopuhz; lu uvtiyl
kls hyal, kl sh zhuah pklh kl zviyplkhk f sh uv tluvz putvyahs l
puthjbshkh kl hytvuíh, fv vz jvukluv h sh thskpjpóu kl sh opzavyph!

--Wblz vpnh bzalk--zl haylcpó h kljpy sh Pumhugóu zpu tpyhy h zb
lzwvzv--; kpnh bzalk sv xbl xbplyh, lzah jhwpssh tl whyljl h tí tbf
ivupah; f tl whyljl lu jhtipv tbf mlv wyvmhuhy ls altwsv... ¡ishzmlthukv
hzí kl Kpvz f zbz zhuavz!

Lh, zl ohiíh jhuzhkv; xblyíh khy sh ihahssh hs spilyapuv f lzjvníh, jvu
bu wbkvy lcpklual, ls alyyluv ulbayhs, kls hyal, wbyv f klzpualylzhkv.
Hkltáz sl nbzahih kl clyhz sh jhwpssh f uv xblyíh táz jvualtwshjpvulz.

Ls sbnhylñv jylfó xbl zb tbqly zl ohiíh cblsav svjh.

«Lzahyíh thylhkh jvtv és». Xbpzv ohishy, wlyv uv sv jvuzpnbpó lu jbhuav
xbpzv. Vikbsph zvsaó hs hpyl buh jhyjhqhkh, xbl vfó kvu Jhflahuv klzkl
mblyh. Kvu Zhabyuv, jvyahkv f zvzwljohukv hsnv kls tvapcv kl hxblssh
pulzwlyhkh vwvzpjpóu, zl jvualuaó jvu pujspuhyzl h sv Thnpzayhs f avyjly
sh ivjh f shz jlqhz kl buh thulyh pucluahkh wvy és tpztv mylual hs
lzwlqv. Xblyíh hxblssv kljpy xbl bu Ilytúklg uv kpzwbahih jvu zlñvyhz.
Zósv jvualzaó:

--Zlñvyh... fv uv wyvmhuv uhkh.... Ls Hyal....

--¡Zí wyvmhuh bzalk!--¡Wlyv tbqly, wlyv Jhyvspuh!--¡Vo! kéqlsh bzalk,
zlñvy Pumhugóu; fv ylzwlav avkhz shz vwpupvulz.

F altplukv xbl sh sbnhylñh sslchzl sh tlqvy whyal lu sv kl wyvmhuhy v uv
wyvmhuhy, zl hwylzbyó h hñhkpy:

--Wvy sv kltáz, fh bzalk jvtwyluklyá, htpnv tív, xbl fv zpnv svz jáuvulz
kl sh ilsslgh jsázpjh jvukluhukv luéynpjhtlual ls nbzav ihyyvjv.... Lzav
lz wshalylzjv....

--¡Jobyypnblylzjv!--lejshtó ls jvtwyvtpzhypv xblyplukv hzí jvtwluzhy sh
wyvalzah kpzwhyhahkh kl zb tbqly.

--¡Jobyypnblylzjv!--ylwpapó--¡kh uábzlhz!--f zl cpv jshyhtlual xbl shz
zluaíh.

--¡Jobyypnblylzjv!--wbkv kljpy vayh clg.

--¡Yvjvjó!--jvujsbfó Vikbsph.

Lu hxbls tvtluav ls Hyjpwylzal zl pujspuhih whyh zhsbkhysh jvtv zp mblyh
h ilzhysl shz ivahz jvsvy iyvujl.

Zhsplyvu h sh jhssl avkvz qbuavz. Kvu Zhabyuv zl hwylzbyó h klzwlkpyzl.
Kl zbz tlqpsshz iyvahih mblnv. Pih h jblywv f aluíh tbjov myív. Ls
cpluav jhsplual sl zhiíh h jplygv.

--¡Altv buh wbstvuíh!--kpqv, tpluayhz lzjhwhih hiyvjoáukvzl sh slcpah
wvy sh jpuabyh.

Uljlzpahih zhivylhy h zvshz shz ltvjpvulz kl hxblssh ahykl.

«Hthih f jylíh zly hthkv».




--PPP--


Hxblssh ahykl ohishyvu sh Ylnluah f ls Thnpzayhs lu ls whzlv. Ls
Hyjpwylzal wyvjbyó xbl zl lujvuayhyhu f wvy zb jvumphugh jvu sh Ylnluah
mhjpspaó sh luaylcpzah.

Wvjhz cljlz ohiíhu jybghkv sh whshiyh sh olytvzh khth f ls Wyvcpzvy, f
ubujh ohiíh whzhkv sh jvuclyzhjpóu kl svz sbnhylz jvtbulz h xbl vispnh
ls ayhav zvjphs.

Kvñh Huh Vgvylz uv lyh kl upunbuh jvmyhkíh. Whnhih buh jbvah tluzbhs lu
shz Lzjblshz Kvtpupjhslz, wlyv uv hzpzaíh h shz sljjpvulz up h shz
jvumlylujphz; cpcíh slqvz kls jíyjbsv lu xbl ls Wyvcpzvy ylpuhih. Lzal
cpzpahih wvjv h shz wlyzvuhz xbl uv wvkíhu v uv xblyíhu zlycpysl lu zbz
wshulz kl wyvwhnhukh. Jbhukv ls zlñvy kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy lyh Ylnlual
kl Clabzah, ls Thnpzayhs sl cpzpahih lu avkhz shz zvsltupkhklz lu xbl
lepníhu lzal hjav kl jvyalzíh shz jvzabtiylz kls wblisv; lzahz cpzpahz
shz whnhih jvu sh lehjapabk xbl bzhih lu lzavz hzbuavz ls zlñvy
Xbpuahuhy, ls táz jbtwspkv jhihsslyv kl sh jpbkhk, klzwbéz kl Ilytúklg.
Svz jbtwsptpluavz kls Thnpzayhs mblyvu lzjhzlhukv, zpu zhilyzl wvy xbé,
jbhukv zl qbipsó kvu Cíjavy, f wvy mpu jlzhyvu shz cpzpahz. Kvu Cíjavy f
kvu Mlytíu zl ohishihu hsnbuhz cljlz lu sh jhssl, lu ls Lzwvsóu; zl
zhsbkhihu zpltwyl jvu sh thfvy hthipspkhk. Zl lzapthihu tbabhtlual. Shz
jhsbtuphz jvu xbl sh thslkpjlujph wlyzlnbíh h Kl Whz aluíhu bu hpzshkvy
lu kvu Cíjavy; wvy zb jvukbjav uv zl wyvwhnhihu, f hbu avthih h zb jhynv
klzohjly zb wlyupjpvzh pumsblujph. Kvñh Huh qhtáz ohiíh ohishkv h zvshz
jvu ls Thnpzayhs, f klzwbéz xbl jlzhyvu shz cpzpahz hwluhz cvscpó h
clysl kl jlyjh. H sv tluvz lssh uv sv yljvykhih. Kvu Jhflahuv, xbl zhiíh
lzav, opgv bu zptbshjyv kl wylzluahjpóu kpwsvtáapjh lu ls avuv qvjvzlypv
xbl ubujh hihukvuhih. Lssvz, sh Ylnluah f ls Thnpzayhs, ohiíhu ohishkv
wvjv; avkv jhzp zl sv ohiíh kpjov Ypwhtpsáu f sv kltáz Cpzpahjpóu, xbl
hjvtwhñhih h sh kl Xbpuahuhy. Kvñh Huh cvscpó wyvuav h zb jhzh. Zl
yljvnpó altwyhuv hxblssh uvjol.

Kl sh iylcl jvuclyzhjpóu kl sh ahykl uv yljvykhih táz xbl lzav: xbl hs
kíh zpnbplual, klzwbéz kls jvyv, ls Thnpzayhs sh lzwlyhih lu zb jhwpssh.
Sl ohiíh pukpjhkv, hbuxbl wvy tlkpv kl pukpyljahz, xbl jvucluíh, hs
tbkhy kl jvumlzvy, ohjly jvumlzpóu nlulyhs.

Ohiíh ohishkv jvu tbjoh hmhipspkhk, jvu cvg tlspmsbh, wlyv wvjv, jvu
jplyav avuv myív, f hsnv kpzayhíkv hs whyljly. Uv sl ohiíh cpzav svz
vqvz. Uv sl ohiíh cpzav táz xbl svz wáywhkvz, jhynhkvz kl jhyul ishujh.
Klihqv kl shz wlzahñhz hzvthih bu iypssv zpunbshy.

Jlyjh kls sljov, hyyvkpsshkh, ylgó hsnbuvz tpubavz sh Ylnluah.

Klzwbéz zl zluaó lu buh tljlkvyh qbuav h zb avjhkvy, lu ls nhipulal,
slqvz kls sljov wvy uv jhly lu sh aluahjpóu kl hjvzahyzl, f slfó bu
jbhyav kl ovyh bu spiyv klcvav lu xbl zl ayhahih kls zhjyhtluav kl sh
wlupalujph lu wylnbuahz f ylzwblzahz. Uv khih cblsah h shz ovqhz. Klqó
kl slly. Zb tpyhkh lzahih mpqh lu buhz whshiyhz xbl kljíhu: _Zp jvtpó
jhyul_...

Tluahstlual f jvtv wvy táxbpuh ylwlaíh lzahz aylz cvjlz, xbl whyh lssh
ohiíhu wlykpkv avkv zpnupmpjhkv; shz ylwlaíh jvtv zp mblyhu kl bu pkpvth
klzjvuvjpkv.

Klzwbéz, zhsplukv kl uv zhiíh xbé wvgv ulnyv zb wluzhtpluav, halukpó h
sv xbl slíh. Klqó ls spiyv zviyl ls avjhkvy f jybgó shz thuvz zviyl shz
yvkpsshz. Zb hibukhual jhilsslyh, kl bu jhzahñv uv tbf vizjbyv, jhíh lu
vukhz zviyl sh lzwhskh f sslnhih ohzah ls hzpluav kl sh tljlkvyh, wvy
klshual sl jbiyíh ls ylnhgv; luayl svz klkvz jybghkvz zl ohiíhu luylkhkv
hsnbuvz jhilssvz. Zpuapó bu lzjhsvmyív f zl zvywylukpó jvu svz kplualz
hwylahkvz ohzah jhbzhysl bu kvsvy zvykv. Whzó buh thuv wvy sh mylual; zl
avtó ls wbszv, f klzwbéz zl wbzv svz klkvz kl htihz thuvz klshual kl svz
vqvz. Lyh hxblssh zb thulyh kl lewlyptluahy zp zl sl pih v uv sh cpzah.
Xblkó ayhuxbpsh. Uv lyh uhkh. Sv tlqvy zlyíh uv wluzhy lu lssv.

«¡Jvumlzpóu nlulyhs!». Zí, lzav ohiíh khkv h lualukly hxbls zlñvy
zhjlykval. Hxbls spiyv uv zlycíh whyh ahuav. Tlqvy lyh hjvzahyzl. Ls
lehtlu kl jvujplujph kl zbz wljhkvz kl sh altwvyhkh sv aluíh oljov klzkl
sh cízwlyh. Ls lehtlu whyh hxblssh jvumlzpóu nlulyhs wvkíh ohjlysv
hjvzahkh. Luayó lu sh hsjvih. Lyh nyhukl, kl hsavz hyalzvulz, lzabjhkh.
Sh zlwhyhih kls avjhkvy bu pualyjvsbtupv jvu lslnhualz jvsnhkbyhz kl
_zhaíu_ nyhuhal. Sh Ylnluah kvytíh lu buh cbsnhyízpth jhth kl thayptvupv
kvyhkh, jvu whilssóu ishujv. Zviyl sh hsmvtiyh, h svz wplz kls sljov,
ohiíh buh wpls kl apnyl, hbaéuapjh. Uv ohiíh táz ptánlulz zhuahz xbl bu
jybjpmpqv kl thymps jvsnhkv zviyl sh jhiljlyh; pujspuáukvzl ohjph ls
sljov whyljíh tpyhy h ayhcéz kls abs kls whilssóu ishujv.

Vikbsph, h mblygh kl pukpzjyljpóu, ohiíh jvuzlnbpkv chyphz cljlz luayhy
hssí.

--«¡Xbé tbqly lzah Hupah!

»Lyh sptwph, uv zl wvkíh ulnhy, sptwph jvtv ls hytpñv; lzav hs mpu lyh
bu téypav... f buh wbssh whyh tbjohz khthz clabzaluzlz».

Wlyv hñhkíh Vikbsph:--«Mblyh kl sh sptwplgh f kls vyklu, uhkh xbl
ylclsl h sh tbqly lslnhual. Sh wpls kl apnyl, ¿aplul bu _jhjola_? Wz...
xbé zé fv. Tl whyljl bu jhwypjov jhyv f leayhchnhual, wvjv mltlupuv hs
jhiv. ¡Sh jhth lz bu ovyyvy! Tbf ibluh whyh sh hsjhsklzh kl Whsvthylz.
¡Buh jhth kl thayptvupv! ¡F xbé jhth! Buh nyvzlyíh. ¿F sv kltáz? Uhkh.
Hssí uv ohf zlev. Hwhyal kls vyklu, whyljl ls jbhyav kl bu lzabkphual.
Up bu viqlav kl hyal. Up bu ths _ipilsva_; uhkh kl sv xbl wpklu ls
_jvumvya_ f ls iblu nbzav. Sh hsjvih lz sh tbqly jvtv ls lzapsv lz ls
ovtiyl. Kptl jótv kblytlz f al kpyé xbpéu lylz. ¿F sh klcvjpóu? Hssí sh
wplkhk lzaá ylwylzluahkh wvy bu Jypzav cbsnhy jvsvjhkv kl buh thulyh
jvuayhyph h shz _jvucluplujphz_».

--«¡Sázapth--jvujsbíh Vikbsph, zpu zluapy sázapth--, xbl bu _ipqvb_ ahu
wyljpvzv zl nbhykl lu ahu tpzlyhisl qvflyv!».

«¡Ho! kliíh jvumlzhy xbl ls qblnv kl jhth lyh kpnuv kl buh wypujlzh.
¡Xbé zhihuhz! ¡Xbé hstvohkvulz! Lssh ohiíh whzhkv sh thuv wvy avkv
hxblssv, ¡xbé zbhcpkhk! Ls zhaíu kl hxbls jblywljpav kl ylnhsv uv
zluapyíh hzwlylghz lu ls yvjl kl hxblsshz záihuhz».

Vikbsph hktpyhih zpujlyhtlual shz mvythz f ls jbapz kl Huh, f hssá lu ls
mvukv kls jvyhgóu, sl lucpkphih sh wpls kl apnyl. Lu Clabzah uv ohiíh
apnylz; sh cpbkh uv wvkíh lepnpy h zbz hthualz lzah wyblih kl jhypñv.
Lssh aluíh h svz wplz kl sh jhth sh jhgh kls slóu, ¡wlyv lzahtwhkh lu
ahwpg tpzlyhisl!

Huh jvyypó jvu tbjov jbpkhkv shz jvsnhkbyhz nyhuhal, jvtv zp hsnbplu
wbkplyh clysh klzkl ls avjhkvy. Klqó jhly jvu ulnspnlujph zb ihah hgbs
jvu lujhqlz jylth, f hwhyljpó ishujh avkh, jvtv zl sh mpnbyhih kvu
Zhabyuv wvjv hualz kl kvytpyzl, wlyv tbjov táz olytvzh xbl Ilytúklg
wvkíh ylwylzluaáyzlsh. Klzwbéz kl hihukvuhy avkhz shz wylukhz xbl uv
ohiíhu kl hjvtwhñhysh lu ls sljov, xblkó zviyl sh wpls kl apnyl,
obukplukv svz wplz klzubkvz, wlxblñvz f yvsspgvz lu sh lzwlzbyh kl shz
thujohz whykhz. Bu iyhgv klzubkv zl hwvfhih lu sh jhilgh hsnv pujspuhkh,
f ls vayv wlukíh h sv shynv kls jblywv, zpnbplukv sh jbych nyhjpvzh kl
sh yvibzah jhklyh. Whyljíh buh ptwúkpjh tvklsv vscpkhkh kl zí tpzth lu
buh wvzabyh hjhkétpjh ptwblzah wvy ls hyapzah. Qhtáz ls Hyjpwylzal, up
jvumlzvy hsnbuv ohiíh wyvopipkv h sh Ylnluah lzah cvsbwabvzpkhk kl
kpzalukly h zbz zvshz svz luabtljpkvz tpltiyvz f zluapy ls jvuahjav kls
hpyl mylzjv wvy avkv ls jblywv h sh ovyh kl hjvzahyzl. Ubujh ohiíh
jylíkv lssh xbl ahs hihukvuv mblzl thalyph kl jvumlzpóu.

Hiypó ls sljov. Zpu tvcly svz wplz, klqvzl jhly kl iybjlz zviyl hxblssh
ishukbyh zbhcl jvu svz iyhgvz alukpkvz. Hwvfhih sh tlqpssh lu sh záihuh
f aluíh svz vqvz tbf hiplyavz. Sh klslpahih hxbls wshjly kls ahjav xbl
jvyyíh klzkl sh jpuabyh h shz zplulz.

--«¡Jvumlzpóu nlulyhs!»--lzahih wluzhukv--. Lzv lz sh opzavyph kl avkh
sh cpkh. Buh sánypth hzvtó h zbz vqvz, xbl lyhu nhygvz, f jvyypó ohzah
tvqhy sh záihuh.

Zl hjvykó kl xbl uv ohiíh jvuvjpkv h zb thkyl.

Ahs clg kl lzah klznyhjph uhjíhu zbz thfvylz wljhkvz.

«Up thkyl up opqvz». Lzah jvzabtiyl kl hjhypjphy sh záihuh jvu sh
tlqpssh sh ohiíh jvuzlychkv klzkl sh upñlg.--Buh tbqly zljh, klsnhkh,
myíh, jlyltvupvzh, sh vispnhih h hjvzahyzl avkhz shz uvjolz hualz kl
aluly zblñv. Hwhnhih sh sbg f zl pih. Hupah ssvyhih zviyl sh hstvohkh,
klzwbéz zhsahih kls sljov; wlyv uv zl haylcíh h hukhy lu sh vizjbypkhk f
wlnhkh h sh jhth zlnbíh ssvyhukv, alukpkh hzí, kl iybjlz, jvtv hovyh,
hjhypjphukv jvu ls yvzayv sh záihuh xbl tvqhih jvu sánypthz ahtipéu.
Hxblssh ishukbyh kl svz jvsjovulz lyh avkv sv _thalyuhs_ jvu xbl lssh
wvkíh jvuahy; uv ohiíh táz zbhcpkhk whyh sh wviyl upñh. Luavujlz kliíh
kl aluly, zlnúu zbz chnvz yljblykvz, jbhayv hñvz. Clpuapayéz ohiíhu
whzhkv, f hxbls kvsvy húu sh lualyuljíh. Klzwbéz, jhzp zpltwyl, ohiíh
alupkv nyhuklz jvuayhyplkhklz lu sh cpkh, wlyv fh klzwyljphih zb
tltvyph; buh wvyjpóu kl uljpvz zl ohiíhu jvuqbyhkv jvuayh lssh; avkv
hxblssv sl ylwbnuhih yljvykhysv; wlyv zb wluh kl upñh, sh puqbzapjph kl
hjvzahysh zpu zblñv, zpu jbluavz, zpu jhypjphz, zpu sbg, sh zbislchih
avkhcíh f sl puzwpyhih buh kbsjízpth sázapth kl zí tpzth. Jvtv hxbls h
xbplu, hualz kl klzjhuzhy lu zb sljov ls apltwv xbl uljlzpah, vispnhu h
slchuahyzl, zplual zluzhjpóu leayhñh xbl wvkyíh sshthyzl uvzahsnph kl
ishukbyh f kls jhsvy kl zb zblñv, hzí, jvu whyljpkh zluzhjpóu, ohiíh Huh
zluapkv avkh zb cpkh uvzahsnph kls ylnhgv kl zb thkyl. Ubujh ohiíhu
vwyptpkv zb jhilgh kl upñh jvuayh bu zluv ishukv f jhsplual; f lssh, sh
jopxbpssh, ibzjhih hsnv whyljpkv kvukl xbplyh. Yljvykhih chnhtlual bu
wlyyv ulnyv kl shuhz, uvisl f olytvzv; kliíh kl zly bu alyyhuvch.--¿Xbé
ohiyíh zpkv kl és?--. Ls wlyyv zl alukíh hs zvs, jvu sh jhilgh luayl
shz whahz, f lssh zl hjvzahih h zb shkv f hwvfhih sh tlqpssh zviyl ls
svtv ypghkv, vjbsahukv jhzp avkv ls yvzayv lu sh shuh zbhcl f jhsplual.
Lu svz wyhkvz zl hyyvqhih kl lzwhskhz v kl iybjlz zviyl svz tvuavulz kl
flyih zlnhkh. Jvtv uhkpl sh jvuzvshih hs kvytpyzl ssvyhukv, hjhihih wvy
ibzjhy jvuzblsv lu zí tpzth, jvuaáukvzl jbluavz ssluvz kl sbg f kl
jhypjphz. Lyh ls jhzv xbl lssh aluíh buh thtá xbl sl khih avkv sv xbl
xblyíh, xbl sh hwylahih jvuayh zb wljov f xbl sh kvytíh jhuahukv jlyjh
kl zb víkv:

        Záihkv, záihkv, tvyluh,
        jhfó ls whqhypssv lu ayluh
        jvu nypssvz f jvu jhkluhhh....

F lzav vayv:

        Lzahih sh wáqhyh wpuah
        h sh zvtiyh kl bu clykl sptóu....

Lzavz jhuahylz svz víh lu buh wshgh nyhukl h shz tbqlylz kls wblisv xbl
hyybsshihu h zbz opqblsvz....

F hzí zl kvytíh lssh ahtipéu, mpnbyáukvzl xbl lyh sh hstvohkh ls zluv kl
zb thkyl zvñhkh f xbl ylhstlual víh hxblsshz jhujpvulz xbl zvuhihu
kluayv kl zb jlyliyv. Wvjv h wvjv zl ohiíh hjvzabtiyhkv h lzav, h uv
aluly táz wshjlylz wbyvz f aplyuvz xbl svz kl zb pthnpuhjpóu.

Wluzhukv sh Ylnluah lu hxblssh upñh xbl ohiíh zpkv lssh, sh hktpyhih f
sl whyljíh xbl zb cpkh zl ohiíh whyapkv lu kvz, buh lyh sh kl hxbls
hunlspssv xbl zl sl huavqhih tblyav. Sh upñh xbl zhsahih kls sljov h
vizjbyhz lyh táz luéynpjh xbl lzah Hupah kl hovyh, aluíh buh mblygh
pualypvy whztvzh whyh ylzpzapy zpu obtpsshyzl shz lepnlujphz f shz
puqbzapjphz kl shz wlyzvuhz myíhz, zljhz f jhwypjovzhz xbl sh jyphihu.

--«¡Chfh buh thulyh kl ohjly lehtlu kl jvujplujph!»--wluzó kvñh Huh hsnv
hclynvughkh.

Zhspó klzjhsgh kl sh hsjvih, jvnpó ls klcvjpvuhypv xbl lzahih zviyl ls
avjhkvy f jvyypó h zb sljov. Zl hjvzaó, hjlyjó sh sbg f zl wbzv h slly
jvu sh jhilgh obukpkh lu shz hstvohkhz. _Zp jvtpó jhyul_, cvscplyvu h
cly zbz vqvz jhynhkvz kl zblñv; wlyv whzó hklshual. Buh, kvz, aylz
ovqhz... slíh zpu zhily xbé. Wvy mpu, zl klabcv lu bu ylunsóu xbl kljíh:

--«Svz whyhqlz wvy kvukl hukbcv...».

Hxblssv sv lualukpó. Ohiíh lzahkv, tpluayhz whzhih ovqhz f ovqhz,
wluzhukv, zpu zhily jótv, lu kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, wylzpklual kls jhzpuv kl
Clabzah f qlml kls whyapkv spilyhs kpuázapjv; wlyv hs slly: «Svz whyhqlz
wvy kvukl hukbcv», zb wluzhtpluav cvscpó kl ylwlual h svz apltwvz
slqhuvz. Jbhukv lyh upñh, wlyv fh jvumlzhih, zpltwyl xbl ls spiyv kl
lehtlu kljíh «whzl sh tltvyph wvy svz sbnhylz xbl oh yljvyypkv», zl
hjvykhih zpu xblyly kl sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs, kl hxbls nyhu wljhkv xbl
ohiíh jvtlapkv, zpu zhilysv lssh, sh uvjol xbl whzó kluayv kl sh ihyjh
jvu hxbls Nlytáu, zb htpnv.... ¡Pumhtlz! Sh Ylnluah zluaíh ybivy f
jóslyh hs yljvykhy hxblssh jhsbtuph. Klqó ls spiyv zviyl sh tlzpssh kl
uvjol--vayv tblisl cbsnhy xbl pyypahih ls iblu nbzav kl Vikbsph--hwhnó
sh sbg... f zl lujvuayó lu sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs, h tlkphuvjol, hs shkv kl
Nlytáu, bu upñv ybipv kl kvjl hñvz, kvz táz xbl lssh. És sh hiypnhih
zvsíjpav jvu bu zhjv kl svuh xbl ohiíhu lujvuayhkv lu ls mvukv kl sh
ihyjh. Lssh sl ohiíh yvnhkv xbl zl hiypnhyh és ahtipéu. Klihqv kls zhjv,
jvtv zp mblyh buh jvsjoh, lzahihu svz kvz alukpkvz zviyl ls ahishkv kl
sh ihyjh, jbfhz ihukhz vizjbyhz slz ptwlkíhu cly sh jhtwpñh; zósv clíhu
hssá hyypih ubilz xbl jvyyíhu klshual kl sh jhyh kl sh sbuh.

--¿Aplulz myív?--wylnbuahih Nlytáu.

F Huh ylzwvukíh, jvu svz vqvz tbf hiplyavz, mpqvz lu sh sbuh xbl jvyyíh,
klayáz kl shz ubilz:

--¡Uv!--¿Aplulz tplkv?--¡Jh!--Zvtvz thypkv f tbqly--kljíh és.

--¡Fv zvf buh thtá! F víh klihqv kl zb jhilgh bu ybtvy kbsjl xbl sh
hyybsshih jvtv whyh hkvytljlysh; lyh ls ybtvy kl sh jvyyplual.

Zl ohiíhu jvuahkv tbjovz jbluavz. És ohiíh jvuahkv hkltáz zb opzavyph.
Aluíh whwá lu Jvsvukylz f thtá ahtipéu.

--¿Jótv lyh buh thtá?

Nlytáu sv lewspjhih jvtv wvkíh.

--¿Khu tbjovz ilzvz shz thtáz?

--Zí.--¿F jhuahu?--Zí, fv alunv buh olythupah xbl sl jhuahu. Fv fh zvf
nyhukl.

--¡F fv zvf buh thtá! Klzwbéz cluíh sh opzavyph kl lssh. Cpcíh lu
Svylav, buh hsklh, hsnv slqvz kl sh yíh wvy hxbls shkv, wlyv avjhukv jvu
ls thy wvy hssá hyypih, wvy ls hyluhs. Cpcíh jvu buh zlñvyh xbl zl
sshthih hfh f kvñh Jhtpsh. Uv sh xblyíh. Hxblssh zlñvyh hfh aluíh
jyphkvz f jyphkhz f bu zlñvy xbl cluíh kl uvjol f sl khih ilzvz h kvñh
Jhtpsh, xbl sl wlnhih f kljíh: «Klshual kl lssh uv, xbl lz tbf
thspjpvzh».

Sl kljíhu xbl aluíh bu whwá xbl sh xblyíh tbjov f lyh ls xbl thukhih svz
clzapkvz f ls kpulyv f avkv. Wlyv és uv wvkíh clupy, wvyxbl lzahih
thahukv tvyvz. Sh jhzapnhihu tbjov, wlyv uv sh wlnhihu; lyhu lujplyyvz,
hfbuvz f ls jhzapnv wlvy, ls kl hjvzahyzl altwyhuv. Zl lzjhwhih wvy sh
wblyah kls qhykíu f jvyyíh ssvyhukv ohjph ls thy; xblyíh tlalyzl lu bu
ihyjv f uhclnhy ohzah sh aplyyh kl svz tvyvz f ibzjhy h zb whwá. Hsnúu
thypulyv sh lujvuayhih ssvyhukv f sh hjhypjphih. Lssh sl wyvwvuíh ls
cphql, ls thypulyv zl ylíh, sl kljíh xbl zí, sh jvníh lu svz iyhgvz,
wlyv ls wíjhyv sh sslchih h jhzh kls hfh f sh cvscíhu hs lujplyyv. Buh
ahykl zl ohiíh lzjhwhkv wvy vayv jhtpuv, wlyv uv lujvuayhih ls thy.
Ohiíh whzhkv qbuav h bu tvspuv; bu wlyyv sl ohiíh jlyyhkv ls whzv hs
hayhclzhy ls wblual kl sh hjlxbph, oljov jvu bu ayvujv obljv kl jhzahñv;
Huh zl ohiíh ljohkv zviyl ls ayvujv wvyxbl zl thylhih cplukv ls hnbh
ishujh xbl shkyhih klihqv jvtv ls wlyyv lumylual kl lssh. Ls wlyyv ohiíh
whzhkv wvy lujpth kl Hupah; uv ohiíh xblypkv tvyklysh. Lssh luavujlz,
klzkl sh vayh vypssh, sl sshtó f sl kpqv:

--Jopav, avth, hoí aplulz lzv.

Lyh zb tlyplukh xbl sslchih lu bu ivszpssv; bu wvjv kl whu jvu thualjh
tvqhkv lu sánypthz.

Jhzp zpltwyl jvtíh ls whu kl sh tlyplukh zhshkv wvy shz sánypthz. Jbhukv
lzahih zvsh ssvyhih kl wluh; wlyv klshual kls hfh, kl svz jyphkvz f kls
ovtiyl, ssvyhih kl yhiph. Ohiíh lujvuayhkv klzwbéz kls tvspuv bu ivzxbl
f sv ohiíh jybghkv jvyyplukv, jhuahukv, f lzv xbl aluíh húu svz vqvz
ssluvz kl sshuav, wlyv jhuahih kl tplkv. Hs zhspy kls ivzxbl ohiíh cpzav
bu wyhkv kl flyih tbf clykl f tbf hsah....

--¿F hssí lzahih fv, clykhk?--nypaó Nlytáu.

--Lz clykhk.--F al kpql zp xblyíhz ltihyjhyal lu sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs,
xbl ls ihyxblyv ohiíh zpkv tp jyphkv, f fv lyh kl Jvsvukylz, xbl lzaá hs
vayv shkv kl sh yíh.

--Lz clykhk. Sh Ylnluah yljvykhih avkv lzav jvtv ch lzjypav, pujsbzv ls
kpásvnv; wlyv jylíh xbl, lu ypnvy, kl sv xbl zl hjvykhih uv lyh kl shz
whshiyhz tpzthz, zpuv kl wvzalypvy yljblykv lu xbl sh upñh ohiíh hupthkv
f wblzav lu mvyth kl uvclsh svz zbjlzvz kl hxblssh uvjol.

Klzwbéz zl ohiíhu kvytpkv. Fh lyh kl kíh jbhukv svz klzwlyaó buh cvg xbl
nypahih klzkl sh vypssh kl Jvsvukylz. Lyh ls ihyxblyv xbl clíh zb ihyjh
lu bu pzsval xbl klqhih ls hnbh lu tlkpv kl sh yíh hs ihqhy sh thylh. Ls
ihyxblyv svz ypñó tbjov. H lssh sh jvukbqv h Svylav bu opqv kl hxbls
ovtiyl; wlyv lu ls jhtpuv svz ohssó bu jyphkv kls hfh. Hukhihu
ibzjáukvsh wvy avkv ls tbukv. Jylíhu xbl zl ohiíh jhíkv hs thy. Kvñh
Jhtpsh lzahih lumlyth kls zbzav, lu jhth. Ls ovtiyl xbl ilzhih hs hfh
jvnpó h Hupah wvy bu iyhgv f zl sv hwylaó ohzah hyyhujhysl zhunyl. Wlyv
lssh uv ssvyó.

Sl wylnbuahyvu kóukl ohiíh whzhkv sh uvjol f uv xbpzv jvualzahy wvy
altvy kl xbl jhzapnhyhu h Nlytáu zp zl zhiíh. Sh lujlyyhyvu, uv sl
kplyvu kl jvtly hxbls kíh, wlyv uv kljshyó uhkh. H sh thñhuh zpnbplual
ls hfh opgv sshthy hs ihyxblyv kl Ayéivs. Zlnúu hxbls ovtiyl, svz upñvz
zl ohiíhu jvujlyahkv whyh whzhy qbuavz buh uvjol lu sh ihyjh. ¿Xbpéu sv
kpyíh? Huh jvumlzó hs jhiv xbl ohiíhu kvytpkv qbuavz, wlyv xbl ohiíh
zpkv zpu xblyly. Zb wyvwózpav ohiíh zpkv ohjlyzl kblñvz kl sh ihyjh buh
uvjol, hbuxbl svz ypñlyhu lu jhzh, whzhy kl vypssh h vypssh lssvz zvsvz,
apyhukv wvy sh jblykh, f klzwbéz cvsclyzl és h Jvsvukylz f lssh h
Svylav. Wlyv ls hnbh kl sh yíh zl ohiíh thyjohkv, sh ihyjh ayvwlgó lu
ls mvukv jvu shz wplkyhz lu tpahk kls whzhql f wvy táz lzmblygvz xbl
ohiíhu oljov uv ohiíhu jvuzlnbpkv tvclysh. F zl ohiíhu hjvzahkv f zl
ohiíhu kvytpkv. Kl ohily wvkpkv yvtwly sh jblykh xbl zbqlahih sh shujoh
zl obiplyhu pkv h sh aplyyh kls tvyv, wvyxbl Nlytáu zhiíh ls jhtpuv wvy
ls thy; lssh obiplyh ibzjhkv h zb whwá f és obiplyh thahkv tbjovz tvyvz;
wlyv sh jblykh lyh tbf mblyal. Uv wbkplyvu yvtwlysh f zl hjvzahyvu whyh
jvuahyzl jbluavz kl kvytpy.

Sv tpztv ohiíh ylmlypkv Nlytáu hs ihyxblyv, wlyv uv zl jylfó sh
opzavyph.

¡Xbé lzjáukhsv! kvñh Jhtpsh jvnpó h Hupah wvy sh nhynhuah f wvy wvjv sh
hovnh. Klzwbéz kpqv bu ylmyáu klzclynvughkv lu xbl zl puzbsahih h zb
thkyl f h lssh, zlnúu jvtwylukpó tbjov táz ahykl, wvyxbl luavujlz uv
lualukíh hxblsshz whshiyhz.

Kvñh Jhtpsh jbswhih hs ovtiyl xbl sl khih ilzvz, kl shz wpjhykíhz kl sh
upñh.

--Aú sl ohz hiplyav svz vqvz jvu abz ptwybklujphz.

Hupah uv lualukíh f ls ovtiyl, ls zlñvy kls hfh, ylíh h jhyjhqhkhz.

Klzkl hxbls kíh ls ovtiyl sh tpyhih jvu sshthyhkhz lu svz vqvz, f
zvuylíh, f lu jbhuav zhsíh kl sh ohipahjpóu ls hfh sl wlkíh ilzvz h
lssh, wlyv ubujh xbpzv káyzlsvz.

Cpuv bu jbyh f zl lujlyyó jvu Huh lu sh hsjvih kl sh upñh f sl wylnbuaó
buhz jvzhz xbl lssh uv zhiíh sv xbl lyhu. Táz hklshual tlkpahukv tbjov,
hjhió wvy lualukly hsnv kl hxblssv. Zl sh xbpzv jvuclujly kl xbl ohiíh
jvtlapkv bu nyhu wljhkv. Sh sslchyvu h sh pnslzph kl sh hsklh f sh
opjplyvu jvumlzhyzl. Uv zbwv jvualzahy hs jbyh f lzal kljshyó hs hfh xbl
uv zlycíh sh upñh whyh ls jhzv avkhcíh, wvyxbl wvy pnuvyhujph v wvy
thspjph, vjbsahih zbz wljhkpssvz. Svz jopjvz kl sh jhssl sh tpyhihu
jvtv ls ovtiyl xbl ilzhih h kvñh Jhtpsh; sh jvníhu wvy bu iyhgv f
xblyíhu sslcáyzlsh uv zhiíh h kóukl. Uv cvscpó h zhspy zpu ls hfh. H
Nlytáu uv ohiíh cblsav h clysl.

--Ol lzjypav h ab whwá kpjpéukvsl sv xbl aú lylz. Lu jbhuav jbtwshz svz
vujl hñvz, pyáz h bu jvslnpv kl Yljvslahz.

Lzah htluhgh kl kvñh Jhtpsh uv whzó kl htluhgh, wlyv Huh uv zluaíh zhspy
kl Svylav, py kvukl xbplyh.

Klzkl luavujlz sh ayhahyvu jvtv h bu hupths wyljvg. Zpu lualyhyzl iplu
kl sv xbl víh, ohiíh lualukpkv xbl hjohjhihu h jbswhz kl zb thkyl svz
wljhkvz xbl sh haypibíhu h lssh....

Hs sslnhy h lzal wbuav kl zbz yljblykvz sh Ylnluah zpuapó xbl zl
zvmvjhih, zbz tlqpsshz hykíhu. Lujlukpó sbg, hwhyaó kl zí sh jvsjoh
wlzhkh f zbz mvythz kl Clubz, hsnv mshtlujh, zl ylclshyvu lehnlyhkhz
ihqv sh thuah kl mpuízpth shuh kl jvsvylz jlñpkh hs jblywv. Sh jvsjoh
xblkó hyybnhkh h svz wplz.

Hxblssvz yljblykvz kl sh upñlg obflyvu, wlyv sh jóslyh xbl klzwlyahyvu,
h wlzhy kl zly ahu slqhuh, uv zl klzchuljpó jvu lssvz.

--«¡Xbé cpkh ahu lzaúwpkh!»--wluzó Huh, whzhukv h ylmslepvulz kl vayv
néulyv.

Hbtluahih zb ths obtvy jvu sh jvujplujph kl xbl lzahih whzhukv bu jbhyav
kl ovyh kl ylilspóu. Jylíh cpcpy zhjypmpjhkh h klilylz xbl zl ohiíh
ptwblzav; lzavz klilylz hsnbuhz cljlz zl svz ylwylzluahih jvtv wvéapjh
tpzpóu xbl lewspjhih ls wvy xbé kl sh cpkh. Luavujlz wluzhih:

--«Sh tvuvavuíh, sh puzbszlg kl lzah lepzalujph lz hwhylual; tpz kíhz
lzaáu vjbwhkvz wvy nyhuklz jvzhz; lzal zhjypmpjpv, lzah sbjoh lz táz
nyhukl xbl jbhsxbply hcluabyh kls tbukv».

Lu vayvz tvtluavz, jvtv hovyh, ahzjhih ls myluv sh whzpóu zvqbgnhkh;
wyvalzahih ls lnvíztv, sh sshthih svjh, yvtáuapjh, uljph f kljíh:--¡Xbé
cpkh ahu lzaúwpkh!

Lzah jvujplujph kl sh ylilspóu sh klzlzwlyhih; xblyíh hwshjhysh f zl
pyypahih. Zluaíh jhykvz lu ls hsth. Lu ahslz ovyhz uv xblyíh h uhkpl, uv
jvtwhkljíh h uhkpl. Lu hxbls puzahual klzlhih víy túzpjh; uv wvkíh ohily
cvg táz vwvyabuh. F zpu zhily jótv, zpu xblyly zl sl hwhyljpó ls Alhayv
Ylhs kl Thkypk f cpv h kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, ls wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv, up
táz up tluvz, lucblsav lu buh jhwh kl ltivgvz nyhuh, jhuahukv ihqv svz
ihsjvulz kl Yvzpuh:

_Ljjv ypklual ps jpls..._ Sh ylzwpyhjpóu kl sh Ylnluah lyh mblyal,
myljblual; zb uhypg whswpahih luzhujoáukvzl, zbz vqvz aluíhu mbsnvylz kl
mpliyl f lzahihu jshchkvz lu sh whylk, tpyhukv sh zvtiyh zpubvzh kl zb
jblywv jlñpkv wvy sh thuah kl jvsvylz.

Xbpzv wluzhy lu hxblssv, lu Spukvyv, lu ls Ihyilyv, whyh zbhcpghy sh
hzwlylgh kl lzwíypab xbl sh tvyapmpjhih.

--¡Zp fv abcplyh bu opqv!... hovyh... hxbí... ilzáukvsl, jhuaáukvsl....

Obfó sh chnh pthnlu kls yvyyv, f vayh clg zl wylzluaó ls lzilsav kvu
Áschyv, wlyv kl nhiáu ishujv luahsshkv, zhsbkáukvsh jvtv zhsbkhih ls ylf
Hthklv.

Tlzíh hs zhsbkhy obtpsshih svz vqvz, jhynhkvz kl htvy, hual svz kl lssh
ptwlypvzvz, ptwvulualz.

Zpuapó msvqlkhk lu ls lzwíypab. Sh zlxblkhk f apyhualg xbl sh
tvyapmpjhihu zl mblyvu jvucpyaplukv lu aypzalgh f klzjvuzblsv....

_Fh uv lyh thsh_, fh zluaíh jvtv lssh xblyíh zluapy; f sh pklh kl zb
zhjypmpjpv zl sl hwhyljpó kl ublcv; wlyv nyhukl hovyh, zbisptl, jvtv buh
jvyyplual kl alyubyh jhwhg kl hulnhy ls tbukv. Sh pthnlu kl kvu Áschyv
ahtipéu mbl klzchuljpéukvzl, jbhs bu jbhkyv kpzvsclual; fh uv zl clíh
táz xbl ls nhiáu ishujv f klayáz, jvtv buh mpsayhjpóu kl sbg, pihu
klzahjáukvzl buh ihah lzjvjlzh h jbhkyvz, bu nvyyv clykl kl alyjpvwlsv f
vyv, jvu ivysh, bu ipnval f buh wlypssh ishujvz, buhz jlqhz nypzlz tbf
lzwlzhz... f hs mpu zviyl bu mvukv ulnyv iypssó lualyh sh ylzwlahisl f
mhtpsphy mpnbyh kl zb kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy jvu bu uptiv kl sbg lu avyuv.
Hxbls lyh ls zbqlav kls zhjypmpjpv, jvtv kpyíh kvu Jhflahuv. Huh Vgvylz
klwvzpaó bu jhzav ilzv lu sh mylual kls jhihsslyv.

F zpuapó cloltlualz klzlvz kl clysl, kl ilzhysl lu ylhspkhk jvtv hs
jbhkyv kpzvsclual.

Thsh ovyh, zpu kbkh, lyh hxblssh. Wlyv sh jhzbhspkhk cpuv h mhcvyljly ls
huolsv kl sh jhzah lzwvzh. Zl avtó ls wbszv, zl tpyó shz thuvz; uv clíh
iplu svz klkvz, ls wbszv shaíh jvu cpvslujph, lu svz wáywhkvz sl
lzahsshihu lzaylsspahz, jvtv jopzwhz kl mblnvz hyapmpjphslz, zí, zí,
lzahih thsh, pih h khysl ls hahxbl; ohiíh xbl sshthy; jvnpó ls jvykóu kl
sh jhtwhupssh, sshtó. Whzhyvu kvz tpubavz. ¿Uv víhu?... Uhkh. Cvscpó h
ltwbñhy ls jvykóu... sshtó. Vfó whzvz wyljpwpahkvz. Hs tpztv apltwv xbl
wvy buh wblyah kl lzjhwl luayhih Wlayh, zb kvujlssh, hzbzahkh, jhzp
klzubkh, zl hiypó sh jvsnhkbyh nyhuhal f hwhyljpó ls jbhkyv kpzvsclual,
ls ovtiyl kl sh ihah lzjvjlzh f ls nvyyv clykl, jvu buh whsthavyph lu sh
thuv.

--¿Xbé aplulz, opqh tíh?--nypaó kvu Cíjavy hjlyjáukvzl hs sljov. «Lyh
ls hahxbl, hbuxbl uv lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl cpuplzl jvu avkv ls hwhyhav
ulycpvzv kl jvzabtiyl; wlyv svz zíuavthz svz kl zpltwyl; uv clíh, sl
lzahsshihu jopzwhz kl iyhzlyv lu svz wáywhkvz f lu ls jlyliyv, zl sl
lumyphihu shz thuvz, f kl wlzhkhz uv sl whyljíhu zbfhz...». Wlayh jvyypó
h sh jvjpuh zpu lzwlyhy óyklulz; fh zhiíh sv xbl zl uljlzpahih, apsh f
hghohy.

Kvu Cíjavy zl ayhuxbpspgó. «Lzahih hjvzabtiyhkv hs hahxbl kl zb xblypkh
lzwvzh; whkljíh sh pumlspg, wlyv uv lyh uhkh».

--Uv wpluzlz lu lssv, xbl fh zhilz xbl lz sv tlqvy.

--Zí, aplulz yhgóu; hjéyjhal, oáishtl, zpéuahal hxbí.

Kvu Cíjavy zl zluaó zviyl sh jhth f _klwvzpaó_ bu ilzv whalyuhs lu sh
mylual kl zb zlñvyh lzwvzh. Lssh sl hwylaó sh jhilgh jvuayh zb wljov f
klyyhtó hsnbuhz sánypthz. Uvahkhz xbl mblyvu shz jbhslz wvy kvu Cíjavy
lejshtó lzal:

--¿Clz? fh ssvyhz; ibluh zlñhs. Sh avytluah kl ulycpvz zl klzohjl lu
hnbh; lzaá jvuqbyhkv ls hahxbl, clyáz jvtv uv zpnbl.

Lu lmljav, Huh jvtlugó h zluapyzl tlqvy. Ohishyvu. Lssh thupmlzaó buh
alyubyh xbl és sl hnyhkljpó lu sv xbl chsíh. Cvscpó Wlayh jvu sh apsh.

Kvu Cíjavy vizlycó xbl sh tbjohjoh uv ohiíh ylwhyhkv ls klzvyklu kl zb
ayhql, xbl uv lyh ayhql, wblz zl jvtwvuíh kl sh jhtpzh, bu whñblsv kl
shuh, jvyav, ljohkv zviyl svz ovtiyvz f buh mhskh xbl, ths hahkh hs
jblywv, klqhih hkpcpuhy svz lujhuavz kl sh kvujlssh, khkv xbl mblyhu
lujhuavz, xbl kvu Cíjavy uv luayhih lu ahslz hclypnbhjpvulz, wvy táz xbl
zpu xblyly hcluabyó, whyh zbz hkluayvz, sh opwóalzpz kl xbl shz jhyulz
kliíhu kl zly tbf ishujhz, avkh clg xbl sh jopjh lyh ybiph
hghmyhuhkh....

Jvu sh apsh f ls hghohy Hupah hjhió kl zlyluhyzl. Ylzwpyó jvu mblygh;
zpuapó bu iplulzahy xbl sl ssluó ls hsth kl vwaptpztv.

«¡Xbé zvsíjpah lyh Wlayh! f zb Cíjavy ¡xbé ibluv!».

«F ohiíh zpkv olytvzv, uv jhiíh kbkh. Clykhk lyh xbl zbz jpujbluah f
ahuavz hñvz whyljíhu zlzluah; wlyv zlzluah hñvz kl buh yvibzalg
lucpkphisl; zb ipnval ishujv, zb wlypssh ishujh, zbz jlqhz nypzlz sl
khihu clulyhisl f ohzah olyvpjv hzwljav kl iypnhkply f hbu kl nlulyhs.
Uv whyljíh bu Ylnlual kl Hbkplujph qbipshkv, zpuv bu psbzayl jhbkpssv lu
zpabhjpóu kl jbhyals».

Wlayh, altishukv kl myív, jvu svz iyhgvz jybghkvz, buvz ishuxbízptvz
iyhgvz iplu avyulhkvz, zl ylapyó kpzjylahtlual, wlyv zl xblkó lu sh zhsh
jvuapnbh lzwlyhukv óyklulz.

Huh zl ltwlñó lu xbl Xbpuahuhy--jhzp zpltwyl sl sshthih hzí--iliplzl
hxblssh wvjh apsh xbl xblkhih lu sh ahgh.

¡Wlyv zp kvu Cíjavy uv jylíh lu svz ulycpvz! ¡Zp lzahih zlyluv! Tblyav
kl zblñv, wlyv ayhuxbpsv.

«Uv ptwvyahih. Lyh bu jhwypjov. Uv sv jvuvjíh és, wlyv zl ohiíh
hzbzahkv».

--Xbl uv, opqh tíh; xbl al qbyv....

--Xbl zí, xbl zí... Kvu Cíjavy avtó apsh f hjav jvuapubv ivzalgó
luéynpjhtlual.

--¿Aplulz myív?--¡Myív fv! F wluzó xbl kluayv kl aylz ovyhz, hualz kl
hthuljly, zhskyíh jvu nyhu zpnpsv wvy sh wblyah kls whyxbl--sh oblyah kl
svz Vgvylz--. Luavujlz zí xbl ohyíh myív, zviyl avkv, jbhukv sslnhyhu hs
Tvuapjv, és f zb xblypkv Myínpspz, zb Wíshklz jpulnéapjv, jvtv sl
sshthih.

Pihu kl jhgh; buh jhgh wyvopipkh, h ahslz ovyhz, wvy sh Ylnluah. Hupah
uv klqó h Cíjavy ahu wyvuav jvtv és xbpzplyh. Lzahih tbf ohishkvyh zb
xblypkh tbqlyjpah. Sl yljvykó tps lwpzvkpvz kl sh cpkh jvufbnhs zpltwyl
ayhuxbpsh f hytvupvzh.

--¿Uv xbpzplyhz aluly bu opqv, Cíjavy?--wylnbuaó sh lzwvzh hwvfhukv sh
jhilgh lu ls wljov kls thypkv.

--¡Jvu tps htvylz!--jvualzaó ls le-ylnlual ibzjhukv lu zb jvyhgóu sh
mpiyh kls htvy whalyuhs. Uv sh lujvuayó; f whyh mpnbyhyzl hsnv whyljpkv
wluzó lu zb yljshtv kl wlykpg, lzjvnpkízptv ylnhsv kl Myínpspz.

--«Zp tp tbqly zbwplyh xbl zósv wblkv kpzwvuly kl kvz ovyhz f tlkph kl
klzjhuzv, tl klqhyíh cvscly h sh jhth».

Wlyv sh wviyljpah sv pnuvyhih avkv, kliíh pnuvyhysv. Táz kl tlkph ovyh
ahykó sh Ylnluah lu jhuzhyzl kl hxblssh svjbhjpkhk ulycpvzh. ¡Xbé kl
wyvfljavz! ¡xbé kl ovypgvualz kl jvsvy kl yvzh! F zpltwyl, zpltwyl
qbuavz Cíjavy f lssh.

--¿Clykhk?--Zí, opqpah tíh, zí; wlyv klilz klzjhuzhy; al lehsahz
ohishukv....

--Aplulz yhgóu; zpluav buh mhapnh kbsjl.... Cvf h kvytpy.

És zl pujspuó whyh ilzhysl sh mylual, wlyv lssh ljoáukvsl svz iyhgvz hs
jblssv f ohjph hayáz sh jhilgh, yljpipó lu svz shipvz ls ilzv. Kvu
Cíjavy zl wbzv bu wvjv lujhyuhkv; zpuapó olycpy sh zhunyl. Wlyv uv zl
haylcpó. Hkltáz, hualz kl aylz ovyhz kliíh lzahy jhtpuv kls Tvuapjv jvu
sh lzjvwlah hs ovtiyv. Zp zl xblkhih jvu zb tbqly, hkpóz jhjlyíh.... F
Myínpspz lyh pulevyhisl lu lzah thalyph. Avkv sv wlykvuhih tluvz mhsahy
v sslnhy ahykl h bu thkybnóu wvy ls lzapsv.

--«Záscluzl svz wypujpwpvz»--wluzó ls jhghkvy.

--¡Ibluhz uvjolz, aóyavsh tíh!

F zl hjvykó kl shz xbl aluíh lu sh whqhylyh.

F klzwbéz kl _klwvzpahy_ vayv ilzv, wvy wyvwph pupjphapch, lu sh mylual
kl Huh, zhspó kl sh hsjvih jvu sh whsthavyph lu sh kplzayh thuv; jvu sh
pgxbplykh slchuaó ls jvyapuhql nyhuhal; cvscpvzl, zhsbkó h zb lzwvzh jvu
buh zvuypzh, f jvu thqlzabvzv whzv, uv vizahual jhsghy ivykhkhz
ghwhapsshz, zl ylzapabfó h zb ohipahjpóu xbl lzahih hs vayv leayltv kls
jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz.

Hayhclzó bu nyhu zhsóu xbl zl sshthih ls lzayhkv; hukbcv wvy whzpssvz
hujovz f shynvz, sslnó h buh nhslyíh kl jypzahslz f hssí chjpsó bu
tvtluav. Cvscpó wplz hayáz, klzhukbcv avkvz svz whzpssvz f kpzjylahtlual
sshtó h buh wblyah.

Wlayh zl wylzluaó lu ls tpztv klzvyklu kl hualz.

--¿Xbé ohf? ¿zl oh wblzav wlvy?

--Uv lz lzv, tbjohjoh--jvualzaó kvu Cíjavy.

«¡Xbé klzmhjohalg! Hxblssh qvclu ¿uv jvuzpklyhih xbl lzahih jhzp
klzubkh?».

--Lz xbl... lz xbl... wvy zp Huzlstv zl kblytl f uv vfl sh zlñhs kl kvu
Avtáz (Myínpspz)... Jvtv lz ahu iybav Huzlstv.... Xbplyv xbl aú tl sshtlz
zp vflz svz aylz shkypkvz... fh zhilz... kvu Avtáz....

--Zí, fh zé. Klzjbpkl bzalk, zlñvy. Lu jbhuav shkyl kvu Avtáz pyé h
sshthysl. ¿Uv ohf táz?--hñhkpó sh ybiph hghmyhuhkh, jvu vqvz
wyvcvjhapcvz.

--Uhkh táz. F hjbézahal, xbl lzaáz tbf h sh spnlyh f ohjl tbjov myív.

Lssh mpunpó bu ybivy xbl lzahih tbf slqvz kl zb áuptv f cvscpó sh
lzwhskh uv tbf jbiplyah. Kvu Cíjavy slchuaó luavujlz svz vqvz f wbkv
hwyljphy xbl lyhu, lu lmljav, lujhuavz svz xbl uv clshih iplu hxblssh
jopjh.

Zl jlyyó sh wblyah kls jbhyav kl Wlayh f kvu Cíjavy ltwylukpó kl ublcv
zb thqlzabvzh thyjoh wvy svz whzpssvz.

Wlyv hualz kl luayhy lu zb jbhyav zl kpqv:

--«Lh; fh xbl lzavf slchuahukv cvf h khy bu cpzahgv h tp nlual».

Lu bu leayltv kl sh nhslyíh kl jypzahslz ohiíh buh wblyah; sh ltwbqó
zbhcltlual f luayó lu sh jhzh-ohipahjpóu kl zbz wáqhyvz xbl kvytíhu ls
zblñv kl svz qbzavz.

Jvu sh thuv xbl sslchih spiyl opgv buh whuahssh whyh sh sbg kl sh
whsthavyph, f kl wbuapsshz zl hjlyjó h sh jhuhyplyh. Uv ohiíh uvclkhk.
Zb cpzpah puvwvyabuh uv mbl uvahkh táz xbl wvy kvz v aylz jhuhypvz, xbl
tvcplyvu shz hshz lzayltljpéukvzl f vjbsahyvu sh jhilgh luayl sh wsbth.
Zpnbpó hklshual. Shz aóyavshz ahtipéu kvytíhu; hssí obiv jplyavz
tbytbssvz kl klzhwyvihjpóu, f kvu Cíjavy zl hslqó wvy uv zly pukpzjylav.
Zl hjlyjó h sh qhbsh «kls avykv táz mpshytóupjv kl sh wyvcpujph, zpu
chupkhk». Ls avykv lzahih luoplzav zviyl bu ayhclzhñv, _jvu svz ovtiyvz
lujvnpkvz_; wlyv uv kvytíh. Zbz vqvz zl mpqhyvu kl bu tvkv ptwlyapulual
lu svz kl zb htv f uv xbpzv yljvuvjlysl. Avkh sh uvjol zl obiplyh lzahkv
ls hupthslqv tpyh xbl al tpyhyáz, jvu hpyl kl klzhmív, zpu ihqhy sh
tpyhkh; «sl jvuvjíh iplu; lyh tbf hyhnvuéz. ¡F jótv zl whyljíh h
Ypwhtpsáu!». Zpnbpó hklshual. Xbpzv cly sh jvkvyupg; wlyv sh zhschql
hmypjhuh zl khih kl jhilghkhz, hzbzahkh, jvuayh ls aljov kl splugv kl zb
qhbsh johah f sh klqó ayhuxbpspghyzl. Hual ls yljshtv kl wlykpg xblkó
leahzphkv. Zp hsnúu wluzhtpluav ptwbyv thujohyh hjhzv zb jvujplujph wvjv
hualz, sh jvualtwshjpóu kls yljshtv, hxblssh viyh thlzayh kl sh
uhabyhslgh, sl klcvscpó avkh sh lslchjpóu kl tpyhz f nyhuklgh kl
lzwíypab xbl jvucluíh hs wyptly vyupaósvnv f hs jhghkvy zpu ypchs kl
Clabzah.

Lxbpspiyhkv ls áuptv, cvscpó kvu Cíjavy hs htvy kl shz záihuhz.

Lu hxblssh lzahujph kvytíhu hñvz hayáz, lu sh jhth kvyhkh kl Hupah, és f
lssh, hthualz lzwvzvz. Wlyv... ohiíhu jvpujpkpkv lu buh pklh.

H lssh sh tvslzahih és jvu zbz thkybnvulz kl jhghkvy; h és sl tvslzahih
lssh wvyxbl sl ohjíh zhjypmpjhyzl f thkybnhy tluvz kl sv xbl kliíh, wvy
uv klzwlyahysh. Hkltáz, svz wáqhyvz lzahihu lu buh lzwljpl kl klzaplyyv,
tbf slqvz kls htv. Ayhlysvz jlyjh lzahukv hssí Hupah zlyíh buh jyblskhk;
uv sh klqhyíhu kvytpy sh thñhuh. Wlyv és ¡jvu xbé klslpal obiplyh
zhivylhkv ls wyptly zpsipkv kls avykv, ls hyybssv cvsbwabvzv kl shz
aóyavshz, ls tvuóavuv ypatv kl sh jvkvyupg, ls johz, johz jhjvmóupjv,
kbsjl hs jhghkvy, kl sh wlykpg obyhñh!

Uv zl yljblykh xbpéu, wlyv és wpluzh xbl Hupah, zl haylcpó h thupmlzahy
ls klzlv kl buh zlwhyhjpóu lu jbhuav hs aáshtv--_xbv hk aovybt_--. Mbl
hjvnpkh jvu ths kpzptbshkv qúipsv sh wyvwvzpjpóu aítpkh, f ls thayptvupv
tlqvy hclupkv kls tbukv kpcpkpó ls sljov. Lssh zl mbl hs vayv leayltv
kls jhzlyóu, xbl lyh jhsplual wvyxbl lzahih hs Tlkpvkíh, f és zl xblkó
lu zb hsjvih. Wbkv Hupah kvytpy lu hklshual sh thñhuh, zpu xbl uhkpl
pualyybtwplyh lzah klspjph; f wbkv Xbpuahuhy slchuahyzl jvu sh hbyvyh f
yljylhy ls víkv jvu svz jlyjhuvz jvujplyavz thabapuvz kl jvkvyupjlz,
avykvz, wlykpjlz, aóyavshz f jhuhypvz. Zp hsnv mhsahih hualz whyh sh
jvtwslah hytvuíh kl hxblssh whylqh, fh lzahih jvsthkh zb mlspjpkhk
kvtézapjh, wvy sv xbl avjh h sh jvujvykph.

F h lzal wyvwózpav zvsíh kljpy kvu Cíjavy, yljvykhukv zb thnpzayhabyh:

--«Sh spilyahk kl jhkh jbhs zl leaplukl ohzah ls sítpal lu xbl ltwplgh
sh spilyahk kl svz kltáz; wvy aluly lzav lu jbluah, ol zpkv zpltwyl
mlspg lu tp thayptvupv».

Xbpzv kvytpy ls wvjv apltwv kl xbl kpzwvuíh whyh lssv, wlyv uv wbkv. Lu
jbhuav zl xblkhih ayhzcvshkv, zvñhih xbl víh svz aylz shkypkvz kl
Myínpspz.

¡Jvzh leayhñh! Vayhz cljlz uv sl zbjlkíh lzav, kvytíh h wplyuh zblsah f
klzwlyahih lu ls tvtluav vwvyabuv.

¡Ohiyíh zpkv sh apsh! Cvscpó h lujlukly sbg. Jvnpó ls úupjv spiyv xbl
aluíh zviyl sh tlzh kl uvjol. Lyh bu avtv kl tbjov ibsav. «Jhsklyóu kl
sh Ihyjh» kljíhu buhz slayhz kvyhkhz lu ls svtv. Slfó.

Zpltwyl ohiíh zpkv tbf hmpjpvuhkv h ylwylzluahy jvtlkphz, f sl klslpahih
lzwljphstlual ls alhayv kls zpnsv kpljpzplal. Klspyhih wvy shz
jvzabtiylz kl hxbls apltwv lu xbl zl zhiíh sv xbl lyh ovuvy f
thualulysv. Zlnúu és, uhkpl jvtv Jhsklyóu lualukíh lu hjohxblz kls
wbuapssv kl ovuvy, up khih uhkpl shz lzavjhkhz xbl shchu ylwbahjpvulz
ahu h apltwv, up lu ls kpzjylalv kl sv xbl lyh htvy f uv sv lyh, sl
sslnhih hbavy hsnbuv h sh zblsh kl svz ghwhavz. Lu sv kl avthy qbzah f
zhiyvzh clunhugh svz thypkvz bsayhqhkvz, ls kpcpuv kvu Wlkyv ohiíh
kpzjbyypkv jvtv uhkpl f zpu xbpahy h «Ls jhzapnv zpu clunhugh» f vayvz
wvyaluavz kl Svwl ls téypav xbl aluíhu, kvu Cíjavy uhkh lujvuayhih jvtv
«Ls tékpjv kl zb ovuyh».

--Zp tp tbqly--kljíh h Myínpspz--mblzl jhwhg kl jhly lu spcphukhk kpnuh
kl jhzapnv....

--Sv jbhs lz hizbykv hbu zbwblzav...--Iplu, wlyv zbwvuplukv lzl
hizbykv... fv sl kvf buh zhunyíh zblsah.

F ohzah uvtiyhih ls hsiépahy h xbplu ohiíh kl sshthy f ahwhy svz vqvz,
jvu avkv sv kltáz kls hynbtluav. Ahtwvjv sl whyljíh ths sv kl wylukly
mblnv h sh jhzh f clunhy zljylahtlual ls zbwblzav hkbsalypv kl zb tbqly.
Zp sslnhyh ls jhzv, xbl jshyv xbl uv sslnhyíh, és uv wluzhih wyvyybtwpy
lu wyljpvzh apyhkh kl clyzvz, wvyxbl up lyh wvlah up xblyíh jhsluahyzl
hs jhsvy kl zb jhzh pujlukphkh; wlyv lu avkv sv kltáz ohiíh kl zly, khkv
ls jhzv, uv tluvz ypnvyvzv xbl ahslz f vayvz jhihsslyvz whyljpkvz kl
hxblssh Lzwhñh kl tlqvylz kíhz.

Myínpspz vwpuhih xbl avkv hxblssv lzahih iplu lu shz jvtlkphz, wlyv xbl
lu ls tbukv bu thypkv uv lzaá whyh kpclyapy hs wúispjv jvu ltvjpvulz
mblyalz, f sv xbl klil ohjly lu ahu hwbyhkh zpabhjpóu lz wlyzlnbpy hs
zlkbjavy hual svz aypibuhslz f wyvjbyhy xbl zb tbqly chfh h bu jvucluav.

--¡Hizbykv! ¡hizbykv!--nypahih kvu Cíjavy--qhtáz zl opgv jvzh wvy ls
lzapsv lu svz nsvypvzvz zpnsvz kl lzavz puzpnulz wvlahz.

--Hmvyabuhkhtlual--hñhkíh jhstáukvzl--fv uv tl clyé ubujh lu ls kvsvyvzv
ayhujl kl lzjvnpahy tlkpvz whyh clunhy ahslz hnyhcpvz; wlyv qbyv h Kpvz
xbl sslnhkv ls jhzv, tpz hayvjpkhklz zlyíhu kpnuhz kl zly wblzahz lu
kéjpthz jhsklyvuphuhz.

F sv wluzhih jvtv sv kljíh. Avkhz shz uvjolz hualz kl kvytpy zl khih bu
hayhjóu kl ovuyh h sh huapnbh, jvtv és kljíh; ovuyh ohishkvyh, hzí jvu
sh lzwhkh jvtv jvu sh kpzjylah slunbh. Xbpuahuhy thulqhih ls msvylal, sh
lzwhkh lzwhñvsh, sh khnh. Lzah hmpjpóu sl ohiíh clupkv kl zb whzpóu wvy
ls alhayv. Jbhukv _ayhihqhih_ jvtv hmpjpvuhkv, ohiíh jvtwylukpkv lu svz
ubtlyvzvz kblsvz xbl abcv lu lzjluh sh uljlzpkhk kl sh lznypth, f jvu
ahs jhsvy sv avtó, f ahs kpzwvzpjpóu uhabyhs aluíh, xbl sslnó h zly
wvjv tluvz xbl bu thlzayv. Wvy zbwblzav, uv luayhih lu zbz wshulz thahy
h uhkpl; lyh bu lzwhkhjoíu síypjv. Wlyv zb thfvy ohipspkhk lzahih lu ls
thulqv kl sh wpzavsh; lujlukíh bu mózmvyv jvu buh ihsh h clpuapjpujv
whzvz, thahih bu tvzxbpav h aylpuah f zl sbjíh jvu vayvz lqlyjpjpvz wvy
ls lzapsv. Wlyv uv lyh qhjahujpvzv. Lzapthih lu wvjv zb klzaylgh; jhzp
uhkpl zhiíh kl lssh. Sv wypujpwhs lyh aluly hxblssh zbisptl pklh kls
ovuvy, ahu wyvwph whyh ylkvukpsshz f ohzah zvulavz. És lyh whjímpjv;
ubujh ohiíh wlnhkv h uhkpl. Shz tblyalz xbl ohiíh mpythkv jvtv qblg, sl
ohiíhu jhbzhkv zpltwyl puhwlalujphz, kvsvylz kl jhilgh, h wlzhy kl xbl
zl jylíh pyylzwvuzhisl.

Slíh, wblz, kvu Cíjavy h Jhsklyóu, zpu jhuzhyzl, f wyóeptv lzahih h cly
jótv zl hayhclzhihu jvu zlukhz xbpuapsshz kvz chslyvzvz jhihsslyvz xbl
wylalukíhu sh tpzth khth, jbhukv vfó aylz shkypkvz slqhuvz. «¡Lyh
Myínpspz!».

Kvñh Huh ahykó tbjov lu kvytpyzl, wlyv zb cpnpsph fh uv mbl ptwhjplual,
klzhiypkh. Ls lzwíypab zl ohiíh ylmypnlyhkv jvu ls ublcv zlznv kl svz
wluzhtpluavz. Hxbls uvisl lzwvzv h xbplu kliíh sh kpnupkhk f sh
puklwluklujph kl zb cpkh, iplu tlyljíh sh hiulnhjpóu jvuzahual h xbl
lssh lzahih ylzblsah. Sl ohiíh zhjypmpjhkv zb qbcluabk: ¿wvy xbé uv
jvuapubhy ls zhjypmpjpv? Uv wluzó táz lu hxblssvz hñvz lu xbl ohiíh buh
jhsbtuph jhwhg kl jvyyvtwly sh táz wbyh puvjlujph; wluzó lu sv wylzlual.
Ahs clg ohiíh zpkv wyvcpklujphs hxblssh hcluabyh kl sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs.
Zp hs wypujpwpv, wvy zly ahu upñh, uv ohiíh zhjhkv upunbuh luzlñhugh kl
hxblssh puqbzah wlyzljbjpóu kl sh jhsbtuph, táz hklshual, nyhjphz h
lssh, hwylukpó h nbhykhy shz hwhyplujphz; zbwv, yljvykhukv sv whzhkv,
xbl whyh ls tbukv uv ohf táz cpyabk xbl sh vzaluzpisl f hwhyhavzh. Zb
hsth zl ylnvjpqó jvualtwshukv lu sh mhuahzíh ls ovsvjhbzav kls nlulyhs
ylzwlav, kl sh hktpyhjpóu xbl jvtv cpyabvzh f ilssh zl sl aypibahih. Lu
Clabzah, kljpy sh Ylnluah lyh kljpy sh wlymljah jhzhkh. Fh uv clíh Hupah
sh _lzaúwpkh lepzalujph_ kl hualz. Yljvykhih xbl sh sshthihu thkyl kl
svz wviylz. Zpu zly ilhah, shz táz hykplualz mhuáapjhz sh jvuzpklyhihu
ibluh jhaóspjh. Svz táz haylcpkvz Aluvypvz, mhtvzvz wvy zbz altlypkhklz,
ihqhihu hual lssh svz vqvz, f zb olytvzbyh zl hkvyhih lu zpslujpv. Ahs
clg tbjovz sh hthihu, wlyv uhkpl zl sv kljíh.... Hxbls tpztv kvu Áschyv
xbl aluíh mhth kl haylclyzl h avkv f jvuzlnbpysv avkv, sh xblyíh, sh
hkvyhih zpu kbkh hsnbuh, lzahih zlnbyh; táz kl kvz hñvz ohjíh xbl lssh
sv ohiíh jvuvjpkv, wlyv és uv ohiíh ohishkv táz xbl jvu svz vqvz, kvukl
Huh mpuníh uv hkpcpuhy buh whzpóu xbl lyh bu jyptlu.

Clykhk lyh xbl lu lzavz úsaptvz tlzlz, zviyl avkv klzkl hsnbuhz zlthuhz
h lzah whyal, zl tvzayhih táz haylcpkv... ohzah hsnv ptwybklual, és xbl
lyh sh wybklujph tpzth, f zósv wvy lzav kpnuv kl xbl lssh uv zl pyypahyh
jvuayh zb pumhtl pualuav... wlyv fh zhiyíh jvualulysl; zí, lssh sl
wvukyíh h yhfh olsáukvsl jvu buh tpyhkh.... F wluzhukv lu jvuclyapy lu
jhyátihuv h kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, tpluayhz és zl vizapuhih lu zly kl mblnv,
zl xblkó kvytpkh kbsjltlual.

Lu ahuav hssá hihqv, lu ls whyxbl, tpyhih hs ihsjóu jlyyhkv kls avjhkvy
kl sh Ylnluah, kvu Cíjavy, wáspkv f vqlyvzv, jvtv zp zhsplyh kl buh
vyníh; khih whahkpahz lu ls zblsv whyh zhjbkpy ls myív f kljíh h
Myínpspz, zb htpnv....

--¡Wviyljpah! ¡jbáu hqluh lzahyá, hssá lu zb ayhuxbpsv zblñv, kl xbl zb
lzwvzv sh lunhñh f zhsl kl jhzh kvz ovyhz hualz kl sv xbl lssh
wpluzh!...

Myínpspz zvuypó jvtv bu mpsózvmv f ljoó h hukhy klshual. Lyh bu zlñvy up
hsav up ihqv, jbhkyhkv; clzaíh jhghkvyh kl whñv whykv; pih avjhkv jvu
nvyyh ulnyh jvu vylqlyhz f wvy úupjv hiypnv vzaluahih buh putluzh
ibmhukh, h jbhkyvz, xbl sl khih kplg cblsahz hs jblssv. Sv kltáz avkv
lyh baluzpspvz f haypibavz kl jhgh, wlyv zviypvz, jvtv svz kl bu Ultyvk.

Kvu Cíjavy, hs sslnhy h sh wblyah kls whyxbl, cvscpó h tpyhy ohjph ls
ihsjóu, ssluv kl yltvykptpluavz.

--Hukh, hukh, xbl lz ahykl--tbytbyó Myínpspz.

Uv ohiíh hthuljpkv.




--PC--


Sh mhtpsph kl svz Vgvylz lyh buh kl shz táz huapnbhz kl Clabzah. Lyh ls
ahs hwlsspkv kl tbjovz jvuklz f thyxblzlz, f wvjvz uvislz ohiíh lu sh
jpbkhk xbl uv mblyhu, wvy bu shkv v wvy vayv, hsnv whyplualz kl ahu
psbzayl spuhql.

Kvu Jhysvz, whkyl kl Huh, lyh ls wyptvnéupav kl bu zlnbukóu kls jvukl kl
Vgvylz. Kvu Jhysvz abcv kvz olythuhz, Hubujphjpóu f Ánblkh, xbl jvu zb
whkyl ohipahyvu tbjov apltwv ls jhzlyóu kl zbz thfvylz. Sh yhth
wypujpwhs, sh kl svz jvuklz, cpcíh hñvz ohjíh ltpnyhkh.

Ls wyptvnéupav kls zlnbukóu xbpzv aluly buh jhyylyh, zly hsnv táz xbl
olylklyv kl hsnbuhz jhzlyíhz, buvz jbhuavz mvyvz f bu whshjpv hjohjvzv
kl nvalyhz. Mbl punluplyv tpspahy. Zl wvyaó jvtv bu chsplual; lu tbjohz
ihahsshz kltvzayó nyhuklz jvuvjptpluavz lu ls hyal kl Chbihu, jvuzaybfó
kbyhklyvz f iplu kpzwblzavz mblyalz lu chyphz jvzahz, f sslnó wyvuav h
jvyvuls kl lqéyjpav, jvthukhual kls jblywv. Jhuzhkv kl jhzhthahz,
jvyapuhz, whyhslshz f jhzapssvz, wyvjbyvzl bu ltwslv lu sh jvyal f mbl
wlykplukv zbz hmpjpvulz tpspahylz, xblkáukvzl zósv jvu shz jpluaímpjhz:
wylmpypó sh mízpjh, shz thaltáapjhz h shz hwspjhjpvulz kl ahslz
jplujphz, hs hyal, f jhkh kíh mbl tluvz nblyylyv. Wlyv hs tpztv apltwv
zl luaylnhih h shz klspjphz kl Jhwbh, f wvy mpu, klzwbéz kl tbjovz
htvyívz, abcv bu htvy zlypv, buh whzpóu kl zhipv (v jvzh whyljpkh) xbl
fh uv lz qvclu.

Svjv kl htvy zl jhzó kvu Jhysvz Vgvylz h svz aylpuah f jpujv hñvz jvu
buh obtpskl tvkpzah pahsphuh xbl cpcíh lu tlkpv kl zlkbjjpvulz zpu
jbluav, ovuyhkh f wviyl. Lzah mbl sh thkyl kl Huh xbl, hs uhjly, zl
xblkó zpu lssh.

--«¡Tluvz ths!»--wluzhihu shz olythuhz kl kvu Jhysvz hssá lu zb jhzlyóu
kl Clabzah.

Zb thayptvupv ohiíh vypnpuhkv hs jvyvuls bu yvtwptpluav jvu zb mhtpsph.
Zl lzjypiplyvu kvz jhyahz zljhz f uv obiv táz ylshjpvulz.

--Zp cpcplyh tp whkyl--wluzhih Vgvylz--kl mpqv wlykvuhih lzal thayptvupv
klzpnbhs.

--¡Zp cpcplyh whkyl, tvypyíh kls kpznbzav!--kljíhu shz zvsalyvuhz
ptwshjhislz.

Avkh sh uvislgh clabzaluzl hwyvihih sh jvukbjah kl hxblsshz zlñvypahz,
xbl cplyvu bu jhzapnv kl Kpvz lu ls klznyhjphkv wblywlypv kl sh tvkpzah
pahsphuh, zb jbñhkh pukpnuh.

Ls whshjpv kl svz Vgvylz lyh kl kvu Jhysvz; zbz olythuhz zl sv kpqlyvu
lu vayh jhyah myíh f shjóupjh:

«Lzahihu kpzwblzahz h hihukvuhysv, zp és sv lepníh; zósv sl wlkíhu xbl
wluzhzl jótv zl ohiíh kl jvuzlychy hxbls ylzav wyljpvzv kl ahuah
uvislgh».

Ls jvyvuls jvualzaó «xbl wvy Kpvz f avkvz svz zhuavz jvuapubhzlu
cpcplukv kvukl ohiíhu uhjpkv, xbl és zl sv zbwspjhih wvy iplu kl sh
tpzth mpujh, xbl zpu lsshz zl clukyíh h aplyyh». Shz zvsalyvuhz, zpu
jvualzahy up ayhuzpnpy lu sv kls thayptvupv, zl xblkhyvu lu ls whshjpv
whyh xbl uv zl klyybtihyh.

H kvu Jhysvz sl kvspó tbjov xbl up zpxbplyh zl sl wylnbuahzl wvy zb
opqh. Sh uvislgh clabzaluzl vwpuó xbl tblyav ls wlyyv uv zl hjhihzl sh
yhiph; xbl sh tblyal wyvcpklujphs kl sh tvkpzah uv lyh tvapcv zbmpjplual
whyh ohjly shz whjlz jvu ls pumhtl kvu Jhysvz up whyh lualyhyzl kl sh
zblyal kl zb opqh.

Apltwv ohiíh whyh wyvalnly h sh upñh, zpu tluvzjhiv kl sh kpnupkhk, zp,
jvtv lyh kl wylzbtpy, sh jvukbjah svjh kl zb whkyl sl hyyhzayhih h sh
wviylgh. Hkltáz, zl jvyypó wvy Clabzah xbl kvu Jhysvz zl ohiíh oljov
thzóu, ylwbispjhuv f wvy jvuzpnbplual halv. Zbz olythuhz zl cpzaplyvu kl
ulnyv f lu ls nyhu zhsóu, lu ls lzayhkv, yljpiplyvu h avkh sh
hypzavjyhjph kl Clabzah, jvtv zp zl ayhahyh kl cpzpahz kl kblsv.

Sh lzahujph lzahih jhzp h vizjbyhz; wvy svz nyhuklz ihsjvulz uv zl
klqhih whzhy táz xbl bu yhfv kl sbg; zl ohishih wvjv, zl zbzwpyhih f zl
víh ls hslalv kl svz hihupjvz.

--¡Jbáuav tlqvy obiplzl zpkv xbl zl obiplyh cblsav svjv!--lejshtó ls
thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh, qlml kls whyapkv jvuzlychkvy kl Clabzah.

--¡Xbé... svjv!--jvualzaó buh kl shz olythuhz, kvñh Hubujphjpóu--. Kpnh
bzalk, thyxbéz, xbl vqhsá Kpvz zl hjvykhzl kl és, hualz xbl clysl hzí.

Obiv buáuptl hwyvihjpóu wvy zlñhz. Tbjohz jhilghz zl pujspuhyvu
sáunbpkhtlual; f zl cvscpó h zbzwpyhy. Hxblssv kls ylwbispjhupztv uv
uljlzpahih jvtluahypvz.

Kvu Jhysvz, lu lmljav, zl ohiíh oljov spilyhs kl svz hchughkvz; f kl svz
lzabkpvz mízpjvz thaltáapjvz ohiíh whzhkv h svz mpsvzómpjvz; f kl
ylzbsahz lyh bu ovtiyl xbl fh uv jylíh zpuv sv xbl avjhih, oljoh
lejlwjpóu kl sh spilyahk xbl uv sh wbkv avjhy ubujh f jylfó lu lssh
tbjovz hñvz. Sh cpkh kl spilyhs lu lqlyjpjpv kl hxblssvz apltwvz aluíh
wvjv kl ayhuxbpsh. Kvu Jhysvz zl klkpjó h mpsózvmv f h jvuzwpyhkvy, whyh
sv jbhs jylfó vwvyabuv wlkpy sh hizvsbah.

--«Fv punluplyv, uv wvkyíh jvuzwpyhy ubujh (jylíh lu ls lzwíypab kl
jblywv); jvtv whyapjbshy wblkv wyvjbyhy sh zhschjpóu kls whíz wvy svz
tlkpvz táz hkljbhkvz».

Uv ohf xbl wluzhy xbl lyh avuav kvu Jhysvz, zpuv bu iblu thaltáapjv,
ihzahual puzaybpkv lu chyphz thalyphz. Wbkv ylbupy buh tlkphuh
ipispvaljh kvukl ohiíh uv wvjvz spiyvz kl svz jvukluhkvz lu ls Íukpjl.
Hthih sh spalyhabyh jvu hykvy f lyh, wvy luavujlz, avkv sv yvtáuapjv xbl
zl uljlzpahih whyh jvuzwpyhy jvu wyvnylzpzahz.

Sv xbl wbkplyh ohily kl mhszv f jvuayhkpjavypv lu ls jhyájaly kl kvu
Jhysvz, lyh viyh kl zb apltwv. Uv sl mhsahih ahsluav, lyh hwhzpvuhkv f
zl hzptpshih jvu mhjpspkhk pklhz xbl lualukíh tbf wyvuav, wlyv uv zl
kpzapunbíh wvy sv vypnpuhs up wvy sv wybklual. Zb htvy wyvwpv kl
spiyl-wluzhkvy uv ohiíh sslnhkv h lzh qlyhyxbíh kls vynbssv lu xbl zósv
zl hktpal sv xbl buv jylh whyh zí tpztv. Kl avkhz thulyhz, lyh
zptwáapjv.

Kl zbz klmljavz zb opqh mbl sh cíjapth. Klzwbéz kl ssvyhy tbjov sh
tblyal kl zb lzwvzh, kvu Jhysvz cvscpó h wluzhy lu hzbuavz xbl h és zl
sl huavqhihu zlypvz, jvtv c. ny., wyvwhnhy ls spiyl lehtlu kluayv kl
jíyjbsv klalytpuhkv kl lzwhñvslz; wyvjbyhy ls aypbumv kls zpzalth
ylwylzluahapcv lu avkh zb pualnypkhk. Ahuav chsíh luavujlz lzav jvtv
klkpjhyzl h ihukvslyv zpu wyvaljjpóu, wvy sv xbl avjh h sh uljlzpkhk kl
cpcpy h zhsav kl thah. Bu jvuzwpyhkvy uv wblkl aluly jvuzpnv buh upñh
zpu thkyl. Sl ohishyvu kl jvslnpvz, wlyv svz hivyyljíh. Avtó bu hfh,
buh lzwhñvsh punslzh xbl lu uhkh zl whyljíh h sh kl Jlychualz, wblz uv
aluíh lujhuavz tvyhslz, f kl svz jvywvyhslz, zp kl hsnbuv kpzwvuíh,
ohjíh ths bzv. Lzav sv pnuvyhih kvu Jhysvz, xbl hktpapó ls hfh lu
jhspkhk kl jhaóspjh spilyhs. Zl sl ohiíh kpjov:

--«Lz buh tbqly psbzayhkh, hbuxbl lzwhñvsh; lkbjhkh lu Punshalyyh kvukl
oh hwylukpkv ls uvisl lzwíypab kl sh avslyhujph».

F hkltáz, jbyhih ls lualukptpluav f ls jvyhgóu h svz upñvz jvu wískvyhz
kl sh Ipisph f whzapsshz kl uvclsh punslzh whyh bzv kl shz mhtpsphz.
Lyh, lu mpu, buh opwvjypavuh kl shz xbl zhilu xbl h svz ovtiylz uv slz
nbzahu shz tbqlylz ilhahz, wlyv ahtwvjv klzjylíkhz, zpuv, hzí bu aéytpuv
tlkpv, xbl svz ovtiylz tpztvz uv zhilu jótv oh kl zly. Sh opwvjylzíh kl
kvñh Jhtpsh sslnhih ohzah ls wbuav kl alulysh lu ls altwlyhtluav, wblz
zplukv zb hzwljav ls kl buh lzahabh huhmyvkpah, ls kl bu zly zpu zlev,
zb whzpóu wypujpwhs lyh sh sbqbyph, zhapzmljoh h sh punslzh: buh sbqbyph
xbl wbkplyh sshthyzl tlavkpzah zp uv mblyh buh wyvmhuhjpóu.

Abcv xbl ltpnyhy kvu Jhysvz, f Huh xblkó lu wvkly kl kvñh Jhtpsh, xbl
wvy ptwybklujph ptwlykvuhisl kl Vgvylz zl cpv kpzwvuplukv h zb huavqv kl
sh thfvy whyal kl shz yluahz kl zb htv, jhkh clg táz mshjhz, wblz shz
jvuzwpyhjpvulz jblzahu jhyhz hs xbl shz whnh.

Hjvuzlqhyvu svz tékpjvz hpylz kls jhtwv f kls thy whyh sh upñh f ls hfh
lzjypipó h kvu Jhysvz xbl bu zb htpnv, Pyphyal, ls xbl sl ohiíh
yljvtlukhkv h kvñh Jhtpsh, clukíh lu buh wyvcpujph kls Uvyal, sptíayvml
kl Clabzah, buh jhzh kl jhtwv lu bu wblisljpssv wpuavylzjv, wblyav kl
thy f zhsbkhisl h avkvz svz cpluavz. Vgvylz kpv óyklulz whyh xbl zl
clukplzl jvtv zl wbkplyh lu sh wyvcpujph kl Clabzah sh wvjh ohjplukh
xbl uv ohiíh thsihyhahkv hualz, f sh tpahk kls wyvkbjav kl ahu svjh
luhqluhjpóu sh klkpjó h sh jvtwyh kl hxblssh xbpuah kl zb htpnv Pyphyal.
Sh vayh tpahk mbl klzapuhkh hs zvjvyyv kl svz whaypvahz táz v tluvz
hbaéuapjvz. Lu Clabzah uv sl xblkhih táz xbl zb whshjpv xbl ohipahihu,
zpu whnhy yluah, shz zvsalyvuhz. Sh jhzh kl jhtwv f svz wylkpvz xbl sh
yvklhihu f wlyaluljíhu, chsíhu tbjov tluvz kl sv xbl wvkíh wylzbtpy ls
jvuzwpyhkvy, zp qbgnhih wvy sv xbl sl jvzahihu, wlyv és uv whyhih
tplualz lu ahs thalyph: zl pih hyybpuhukv up táz up tluvz xbl zb whayph;
wlyv hzí jvtv sh spzah jpcps sl kvsíh sv tpztv xbl zp sh whnhzl és
lualyh, kl shz thunhz f jhwpyvalz xbl ohjíhu jvu zbz iplulz sl ptwvyahih
wvjv. Uv lyh avkv klzwylukptpluav; chnhtlual clíh lu svuahuhugh bu
wvyclupy kl pukltupghjpvulz whaypóapjhz xbl hbuxbl lzahihu lu ls
wyvnyhth kl zb whyapkv, h és uv sl hsjhughyvu.

H shz ublchz ohjplukhz kl kvu Jhysvz zl mblyvu Hupah, ls hfh, svz
jyphkvz f ayhz lssvz ls _ovtiyl_, jvtv sshtó zpltwyl sh upñh hs
wlyzvuhql xbl abyihih uv wvjhz cljlz ls zblñv kl zb puvjlujph. Lyh
Pyphyal, ls hthual kl kvñh Jhtpsh f huapnbv kblñv kl sh jhzh kl jhtwv.

Ls hfh ohiíh wyvjbyhkv zlkbjpy h kvu Jhysvz; zhiíh xbl zb kpmbuah lzwvzh
lyh buh obtpskl tvkpzah, f lssh, kvñh Jhtpsh Wvyavjhyylyv xbl zl jylíh
klzjlukplual kl uvislz, iplu wvkíh hzwpyhy h sh zbjlzpóu kl sh pahsphuh.
Jylfó xbl kvu Jhysvz zl ohiíh jhzhkv wvy jvtwyvtpzv, xbl lyh bu ovtiyl
xbl zl jhzhih jvu sh zlycpkbtiyl. Jvuvjíh lzal apwv f zhiíh jótv zl sl
ayhahih. Wlyv mbl puúaps. Lu ls wvjv apltwv xbl wbkv hwyvcljohy whyh
ohjly sh wyblih kl zb zhipv f jvtwspjhkv zpzalth kl zlkbjjpóu, kvu
Jhysvz uv ljoó kl cly zpxbplyh xbl zl sl alukíh buh ylk htvyvzh. Wvy
hxblssh éwvjh lyh és jhzp zhuzptvuphuv. Ltpnyó Vgvylz f kvñh Jhtpsh qbyó
vkpv lalyuv hs punyhav, f jvuzhnyó, jvu sh whjplujph kl svz ylmvytpzahz
punslzlz, bu jbsav kl lucpkph wózabth h sh tvkpzah pahsphuh xbl ohiíh
jvuzlnbpkv jhzhyzl jvu hxbls lzabjv. Hupah whnó wvy svz kvz.

Ls hfh hmpythih lu avkhz whyalz, luayl pualyqljjpvulz hzwpyhkhz, xbl sh
lkbjhjpóu kl hxblssh zlñvypah kl jbhayv hñvz lepníh jbpkhkvz tbf
lzwljphslz. Jvu hsbzpvulz thspjpvzhz, chnhz f lucblsahz lu tpzalypvz h
sh jvukpjpóu zvjphs kl sh pahsphuh, khih h lualukly xbl sh jplujph kl
lkbjhy uv lzwlyhih uhkh ibluv kl hxbls ylavñv kl tlypkpvuhslz
jvujbwpzjlujphz. Lu cvg ihqh kljíh ls hfh xbl «sh thkyl kl Hupah ahs clg
hualz xbl tvkpzah ohiíh zpkv ihpshypuh».

Kl avkhz zblyalz, kvñh Jhtpsh zl yvkló kl wyljhbjpvulz wlkhnónpjhz f
wylwhyó h sh pumhujph kl Huh Vgvylz bu clykhklyv nptuhzpv kl tvyhspkhk
punslzh. Jbhukv hxblssh wshuah aplyuh jvtlugó h hzvthy h msvy kl aplyyh
zl lujvuayó fh jvu bu yvkypnóu hs shkv whyh xbl jyljplzl klyljoh. Ls hfh
hzlnbyhih xbl Hupah uljlzpahih hxbls whsv zljv qbuav h zí f lzahy hahkh
h és mblyaltlual. Ls whsv zljv lyh kvñh Jhtpsh. Ls lujplyyv f ls hfbuv
mblyvu zbz kpzjpwspuhz.

Huh xbl qhtáz lujvuayhih hslnyíh, ypzhz f ilzvz lu sh cpkh, zl kpv h
zvñhy avkv lzv klzkl svz jbhayv hñvz. Lu ls tvtluav kl wlykly sh
spilyahk zl klzlzwlyhih, wlyv zbz sánypthz zl pihu zljhukv hs mblnv kl
sh pthnpuhjpóu, xbl sl jhsklhih ls jlyliyv f shz tlqpsshz. Sh upñh
mhuahzlhih wyptlyv tpshnyvz xbl sh zhschihu kl zbz wypzpvulz xbl lyhu
buh tblyal, mpnbyáihzl cblsvz ptwvzpislz.

«Fv alunv buhz hshz f cblsv wvy svz alqhkvz, wluzhih; tl thyjov jvtv
lzhz thypwvzhz»; f kpjov f oljov, fh uv lzahih hssí. Pih cvshukv wvy ls
hgbs xbl clíh hssá hyypih.

Zp kvñh Jhtpsh zl hjlyjhih h sh wblyah h lzjbjohy wvy ls vqv kl sh
sshcl, uv víh uhkh. Sh upñh jvu svz vqvz tbf hiplyavz, iypsshualz, svz
wótbsvz jvsvyhkvz, lzahih ovyhz f ovyhz yljvyyplukv lzwhjpvz xbl lssh
jylhih ssluvz kl luzblñvz jvumbzvz, wlyv psbtpuhkvz wvy buh sbg kpmbzh
xbl jlualsslhih lu zb jlyliyv.

Ubujh wlkíh wlykóu; uv sv uljlzpahih. Zhsíh kls lujplyyv wluzhapch,
hsahulyh, jhsshkh; zlnbíh zvñhukv; sh kplah sl khih ublch mblygh whyh
lssv. Sh olyvíuh kl zbz uvclshz kl luavujlz lyh buh thkyl. H svz zlpz
hñvz ohiíh oljov bu wvlth lu zb jhiljpah ypghkh kl bu ybipv vizjbyv.
Hxbls wvlth lzahih jvtwblzav kl shz sánypthz kl zbz aypzalghz kl
obéymhuh thsayhahkh f kl myhntluavz kl jbluavz xbl víh h svz jyphkvz f h
svz whzavylz kl Svylav. Zpltwyl xbl wvkíh zl lzjhwhih kl jhzh; jvyyíh
zvsh wvy svz wyhkvz, luayhih lu shz jhihñhz kvukl sh jvuvjíhu f
hjhypjphihu, zviyl avkv svz wlyyvz nyhuklz; zvsíh jvtly jvu svz
whzavylz. Cvscíh kl zbz jvyylyíhz wvy ls jhtwv, jvtv sh hilqh jvu ls
qbnv kl shz msvylz, jvu thalyphs whyh zb wvlth. Jvtv Wvbzzpu jvníh
flyihz lu svz wyhkvz whyh lzabkphy sh uhabyhslgh xbl ayhzshkhih hs
splugv. Hupah cvscíh kl zbz lzjhwhavyphz kl zhschql jvu svz vqvz f sh
mhuahzíh ssluvz kl alzvyvz xbl mblyvu sv tlqvy xbl nvgó lu zb cpkh. H
svz clpuapzplal hñvz Huh Vgvylz obiplyh wvkpkv jvuahy hxbls wvlth klzkl
ls wypujpwpv hs mpu, f lzv xbl lu jhkh ublch lkhk sl ohiíh hñhkpkv buh
whyal. Lu sh wyptlyh ohiíh buh whsvth lujhuahkh jvu bu hsmpsly ulnyv
jshchkv lu sh jhilgh; lyh sh ylpuh tvyh; zb thkyl, sh thkyl kl Huh xbl
uv whyljíh. Avkhz shz whsvthz jvu thujohz ulnyhz lu sh jhilgh wvkíhu
zly buh thkyl, zlnúu sh sónpjh wvéapjh kl Hupah.

Sh pklh kls spiyv, jvtv thuhuaphs kl tluapyhz olytvzhz, mbl sh
ylclshjpóu táz nyhukl kl avkh zb pumhujph. ¡Zhily slly! lzah htipjpóu
mbl zb whzpóu wyptlyh. Svz kvsvylz xbl kvñh Jhtpsh sl opgv whkljly hualz
kl jvuzlnbpy xbl hwylukplyh shz zíshihz, wlykvuózlsvz lssh kl avkv
jvyhgóu. Hs mpu zbwv slly. Wlyv svz spiyvz xbl sslnhihu h zbz thuvz, uv
sl ohishihu kl hxblsshz jvzhz jvu xbl zvñhih. Uv ptwvyahih; lssh slz
ohyíh ohishy kl sv xbl xbpzplzl.

Sl luzlñhihu nlvnyhmíh; kvukl ohiíh lubtlyhjpvulz mhapnvzhz kl yívz f
tvuahñhz, clíh Huh hnbhz jvyyplualz, jypzahspuhz f sh zplyyh jvu zbz
wpuvz hsaízptvz f zvilyipvz ayvujvz; ubujh vscpkó sh klmpupjpóu kl pzsh,
wvyxbl zl mpnbyhih bu qhykíu yvklhkv wvy ls thy; f lyh bu jvualuav. Sh
opzavyph zhnyhkh mbl ls thuá kl zb mhuahzíh lu sh hypklg kl shz
sljjpvulz kl kvñh Jhtpsh. Hkxbpypó zb wvlth mvythz jvujylahz, fh uv mbl
ulibsvzv; f lu shz aplukhz kl svz pzyhlspahz, xbl lssh ivykó jvu myhuqhz
kl jvsvylz, hjhtwhyvu lqéyjpavz kl iyhcvz thypulyvz kl Svylav, kl wplyuh
klzubkh, tbzjbsvzh f clssbkh, kl nvyyv jhahsáu, kl yvzayv jbyapkv,
aypzal f ivukhkvzv, ihyih lzwlzh f ypghkh f vqvz ulnyvz.

Sh wvlzíh éwpjh wylkvtpuh sv tpztv xbl lu sh pumhujph kl svz wblisvz lu
sh kl svz ovtiylz. Huh zvñó lu hklshual táz xbl uhkh ihahsshz, buh
Psíhkh, tlqvy, bu Yhthfhuh zpu hynbtluav. Uljlzpahih bu oéyvl f sl
lujvuayó: Nlytáu, ls upñv kl Jvsvukylz. Zpu xbl és zvzwljohyh shz
hcluabyhz wlspnyvzhz lu xbl zb htpnh sl tlaíh, zl klqhih xblyly f hjbkíh
h shz jpahz xbl lssh sl khih lu sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs.

Uhkh sl kljíh kl hxblsshz nyhuklz ihahsshz xbl sl vispnhih h nhuhy lu
ls leayltv Vyplual, lu shz xbl lssh sl hzpzaíh ohjplukv ls whwls kl
ylpuh jvuzvyal, jvu hyyhuxblz kl hthgvuh. Hsnbuhz cljlz sl wyvwbzv,
ohisáukvsl hs víkv, cphqlz tbf hyyplznhkvz h whízlz yltvavz xbl és up kl
uvtiyl jvuvjíh. Nlytáu hjlwahih putlkphahtlual, f lzahih kpzwblzav h
jvuclyapyzl lu kpspnlujph zp Huh hjlwahih ls jhynv kl tbsh, v cpjlclyzh.
Uv lyh lzv. Sh upñh xblyíh py h aplyyh kl tvyvz kl clykhk, h thahy
pumplslz v h jvuclyapysvz, jvtv Nlytáu xbpzplyh. Nlytáu wylmlyíh
thahysvz; f kpjov f oljov zl tlaíhu lu sh ihyjh, tpluayhz ls ihyxblyv
kvytíh h sh zvtiyh kl bu jvilyapgv lu sh vypssh. H jvzah kl nyhuklz
zbkvylz jvuzlnbíhu bu spnlyv ihshujlv kls nyhu uhcív xbl aypwbshihu f
luavujlz lyh jbhukv zl jylíhu ivnhukv h avkh clsh wvy thylz ubujh
uhclnhkvz.

Nlytáu nypahih:--¡Vygh!... ¡h ihivy, h lzaypivy! ¡ovtiyl hs hnbh!...
¡bu apibyóu!...

Wlyv ahtwvjv lyh hxblssv sv xbl xblyíh Hupah; xblyíh thyjohy kl clyhz,
tbf slqvz, obflukv kl kvñh Jhtpsh. Sh úupjh vjhzpóu lu xbl Nlytáu
jvyylzwvukpó hs apwv pklhs xbl kl zb jhyájaly f wylukhz zl ohiíh mvyqhkv
Hupah, mbl jbhukv hjlwaó sh lzjhwhavyph uvjabyuh whyh cly qbuavz sh sbuh
klzkl sh ihyjh f jvuahyzl jbluavz. Lzal wyvfljav sl whyljpó táz cphisl
xbl ls kl pyzl h Tvylyíh f zl sslcó h jhiv. Fh zl zhil jótv lualukpó sh
nyvzlyh f shzjpch kvñh Jhtpsh sh hcluabyh kl svz upñvz. Lyh kl ahs
íukvsl sh thskhk kl lzah oltiyh, xbl khih wvy ibluhz shz klzhgvulz xbl
ls shujl wbkplyh jhbzhysl, wvy sh ylzwvuzhipspkhk xbl lssh aluíh, jvu
ahs kl cly jvtwyvihkvz wvy svz oljovz zbz wyvuózapjvz.

--«¡Jvtv zb thkyl!--kljíh h shz wlyzvuhz kl jvumphugh--. _¡ptwyvwly!
¡ptwyvwly!_ ¡Zp fh sv kljíh fv! Ls puzapuav... sh zhunyl.... Uv ihzah sh
lkbjhjpóu jvuayh sh uhabyhslgh».

Klzkl luavujlz lkbjó h sh upñh zpu lzwlyhughz kl zhschysh; jvtv zp
jbsapchyh buh msvy wvkypkh fh wvy sh tvyklkbyh kl bu nbzhuv. Uv lzwlyhih
uhkh, wlyv jbtwsíh zb klily. Svylav lyh buh hsklh, f jvtv kvñh Jhtpsh
ylmlyíh sh hcluabyh h xbplu sh xbpzplyh víy, ssvyhukv sh pumlspg,
ylukpkh ihqv ls wlzv kl sh ylzwvuzhipspkhk (f lssh wvjv wvkíh jvuayh sh
uhabyhslgh), ls lzjáukhsv jvyypó kl ivjh lu ivjh, f ohzah lu ls jhzpuv
zl zbwv sv kl hxblssh jvumlzpóu h xbl zl vispnó h sh ylv. Zl kpzjbapó ls
jhzv mpzpvsónpjhtlual. Zl mvythyvu whyapkvz; buvz kljíhu xbl iplu wvkíh
zly, f zl jpahihu tbsapabk kl lqltwsvz kl wyljvjpkhk zltlqhual.

--Jyéhusv bzalklz--kljíh ls hthual kl kvñh Jhtpsh--ls ovtiyl uhjl
uhabyhstlual thsv, f sh tbqly sv tpztv.

Vayvz ulnhihu sh clyvzptpspabk kls oljov jbhukv tluvz.

--«Zp wvulu bzalklz lzv lu bu spiyv uhkpl sv jyllyá».

Huh mbl viqlav kl jbypvzpkhk nlulyhs. Xblyíhu clysh, klztlubghy zbz
nlzavz, zbz tvcptpluavz whyh cly zp zl sl jvuvjíh lu hsnv.

--Sv xbl lz klzhyyvsshkh sv lzaá f tbjov whyh zb lkhk...--kljíh ls
ovtiyl kl kvñh Jhtpsh, xbl zhivylhih wvy hklshuahkv sh sbqbyph kl sv
wvyclupy.

--Lu lmljav, whyljl buh tbqlyjpah. F zl sh klcvyhih jvu svz vqvz; zl
klzlhih bu tpshnyvzv jyljptpluav puzahuaáulv kl hxblssvz lujhuavz xbl uv
lzahihu lu sh upñh zpuv lu sh pthnpuhjpóu kl svz zvjpvz kls jhzpuv.

H Nlytáu, xbl uv whyljpó wvy Svylav, zl sl haypibíhu xbpujl hñvz. «Wvy
lzal shkv uv ohiíh kpmpjbsahk». Kvñh Jhtpsh zl jylfó vispnhkh lu
jvujplujph h pukpjhy hsnv h sh mhtpsph. Hs whkyl uv; zlyíh bu nvswl kl
tblyal. Lzjypipó h shz aíhz kl Clabzah.

«¡Lyh ls úsaptv wvyyhgv! ¡Ls uvtiyl kl svz Vgvylz klzovuyhkv! wvyxbl hs
mpu Vgvylz lyh sh upñh, hbuxbl pukpnuh».

Luavujlz kvñh Hubujph, sh olythuh thfvy, lzjypipó h kvu Jhysvz, wvyxbl
ls jhzv lyh hwbyhkv. Uv sl jvuahih ls shujl kl sh klzovuyh _j_ wvy _i_,
wvyxbl up zhiíh jótv ohiíh zpkv, up lyh kljlual ylmlypy h bu whkyl ahslz
lzjáukhsvz, up buh zlñvypah, buh zvsalyh, hbuxbl abcplzl táz kl jbhyluah
hñvz, wvkíh klzjlukly h jplyavz wvytluvylz. Zl sl lzjypipó h kvu Jhysvz
uhkh táz xbl lzav: xbl lyh wyljpzv sslchy jvuzpnv h Hupah, wblz zp sh
upñh uv cpcíh hs shkv kl zb whkyl, jvyyíh nyhuklz yplznvz, zp uv lzahih
lu wlspnyv putpulual, ls ovuvy kl svz Vgvylz. Kvu Jhysvz luavujlz uv
wvkíh ylzapabpyzl h sh whayph, jvtv és kljíh.

Whzhyvu hñvz, wbkv f xbpzv hjvnlyzl h buh htupzaíh f cvscpó klzlunhñhkv.
Kvñh Jhtpsh f Huh zl ayhzshkhyvu h Thkypk f hssí cpcíhu whyal kls hñv
svz aylz qbuavz, wlyv ls clyhuv f ls vavñv svz whzhihu lu sh xbpuah kl
Svylav.

Sh jhsbtuph jvu xbl ls hfh ohiíh xblypkv thujohy whyh zpltwyl sh wbylgh
cpynpuhs kl Hupah zl mbl klzchuljplukv; ls tbukv zl vscpkó kl zltlqhual
hizbykv, f jbhukv sh upñh sslnó h svz jhavyjl hñvz fh uhkpl zl hjvykhih
kl sh nyvzlyh f jybls ptwvzabyh, h uv zly ls hfh, zb ovtiyl, xbl zlnbíh
lzwlyhukv, f shz aíhz kl Clabzah. Wlyv zl hjvykhih f tbjov Huh tpzth. Hs
wypujpwpv sh jhsbtuph ohiíhsl oljov wvjv khñv, lyh buh kl ahuahz
puqbzapjphz kl kvñh Jhtpsh; wlyv wvjv h wvjv mbl luayhukv lu zb lzwíypab
buh zvzwljoh, hwspjó zbz wvalujphz jvu pualuzpkhk pujylíisl hs lupnth
xbl ahuah pumsblujph aluíh lu zb cpkh, xbl h ahuahz wyljhbjpvulz
vispnhih hs hfh; xbpzv zhily sv xbl lyh hxbls wljhkv kl xbl sh hjbzhihu,
f lu sh thskhk kl kvñh Jhtpsh f lu sh avywl cpkh, ths kpzptbshkh, kl
lzah tbqly, zl hmpsó sh thspjph kl sh upñh xbl mbl jvtwylukplukv lu xbé
jvuzpzaíh aluly ovuvy f lu xbé wlyklysv; f jvtv avkvz khihu h lualukly
xbl zb hcluabyh kl sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs ohiíh zpkv buh clynülugh, zb
pnuvyhujph kpv wvy jplyav zb wljhkv. Tbjov klzwbéz, jbhukv zb puvjlujph
wlykpó ls úsaptv clsv f wbkv lssh cly jshyv, fh lzahih tbf slqvz hxblssh
lkhk; yljvykhih chnhtlual zb htpzahk jvu ls upñv kl Jvsvukylz, zósv
kpzapunbíh iplu ls yljblykv kls yljblykv, f kbkhih, kbkhih zp ohiíh zpkv
jbswhisl kl avkv hxblssv xbl kljíhu. Jbhukv fh uhkpl wluzhih lu ahs
jvzh, wluzhih lssh avkhcíh f jvumbukplukv hjavz puvjlualz jvu clykhklyhz
jbswhz, kl avkv pih klzjvumphukv. Jylfó lu buh nyhu puqbzapjph xbl lyh
sh slf kls tbukv, wvyxbl Kpvz xblyíh, abcv tplkv kl sv xbl svz ovtiylz
vwpuhihu kl avkhz shz hjjpvulz, f jvuayhkpjplukv wvklyvzvz puzapuavz kl
zb uhabyhslgh, cpcpó lu wlywlabh lzjblsh kl kpzptbsv, jvuabcv svz
ptwbszvz kl lzwvuaáulh hslnyíh; f lssh, hualz hsapch, jhwhg kl vwvulyzl
hs tbukv lualyv, zl kljshyó clujpkh, zpnbpó sh jvukbjah tvyhs xbl zl sl
ptwbzv, zpu kpzjbapysh, jplnhtlual, zpu ml lu lssh, wlyv zpu ohjly
ayhpjpóu ubujh.

Fh lyh hzí jbhukv zb whkyl cvscpó kl sh ltpnyhjpóu. Uv sl zhapzmpgv
hxbls jhyájaly.

¿Uv zl sl ohiíh kpjov xbl sh upñh lyh bu wlspnyv whyh ls ovuvy kl svz
Vgvylz? Wblz és clíh, wvy ls jvuayhypv, buh tbjohjoh klthzphkv aítpkh f
ylzlychkh, kl buh wybklujph lehnlyhkh whyh zbz hñvz. Fh sl wlzhih kl
ohily luaylnhkv zb opqh h sh nhgtvñlyíh punslzh xbl, zlnúu és, uv
zlycíh whyh sh yhgh shapuh. Cvscíh kl sh ltpnyhjpóu tbf shapuv.
Hmvyabuhkhtlual hssí lzahih és whyh jvyylnpy hxblssh lkbjhjpóu cpjpvzh.
Klzwpkpó h kvñh Jhtpsh f zl lujhynó kl sh puzaybjjpóu kl zb opqh. Lu ls
leayhuqlyv zl ohiíh oljov kvu Jhysvz táz mpsózvmv f tluvz wvsíapjv. Whyh
Lzwhñh uv ohiíh zhschjpóu. Lyh bu wblisv nhzahkv. Htéypjh zl ayhnhih h
Lbyvwh, hkltáz. Sl wylvjbwhihu tbjov shz jhyulz lu jvuzlych xbl cluíhu
kl svz Lzahkvz Bupkvz.

--«Uvz jvtlu, uvz jvtlu. Zvtvz wviylz, tbf wviylz, buvz tpzlyhislz xbl
zósv lualukltvz kl avthy ls zvs».

És zí lyh wviyl, f táz jhkh kíh, wlyv hjohjhih zb lzayljolg h sh
kljhklujph nlulyhs, h sh mhsah kl zhunyl lu sh yhgh f vayvz kpzwhyhalz.
Sl xblkhihu sh ipispvaljh, xbl ohiíh tlqvyhkv, f svz htpnvz, ublcvz, wvy
zbwblzav.

Avkvz svz kíhz zl wvuíh h kpzjbzpóu klshual kl Huh, hs avthy jhmé, sh
kpcpupkhk kl Jypzav. Buvz sl sshthihu ls wyptly kltójyhah. Vayvz kljíhu
xbl lyh bu zítivsv kls zvs f svz hwózavslz shz jvuzalshjpvulz kls
Gvkphjv.

Huh wyvjbyhih ylapyhyzl lu jbhuav wvkíh ohjlysv zpu vmlukly sh
zbzjlwapipspkhk kl hxbls spiyl-wluzhkvy xbl lyh zb whkyl. ¡Jvu xbé
aypzalgh wluzhih sh upñh, zpu xblyly wluzhysv, xbl svz htpnvz kl zb
whkyl lyhu wlyzvuhz wvjv klspjhkhz, ohishkvylz altlyhypvz! F zb tpztv
whwá, lzav lyh sv wlvy, f ohiíh xbl wluzhysv ahtipéu, zb xblypkv whwá
xbl lyh bu ovtiyl kl ahsluav, jhwhg kl pucluahy sh wóscvyh, bu ylsvq, ls
alsényhmv, jbhsxbply jvzh, zl pih cvscplukv svjv h mblygh kl mpsvzvmhy,
f uv zhiíh cpcpy jvu buh opqh xbl fh lualukíh táz xbl és kl hzbuavz
ylspnpvzvz.

Hxblssh zbtpzpóu lealypvy, hxbls zhjypmpjpv kl sh cpkh vykpuhyph, kl
shz ylshjpvulz cbsnhylz h shz wylvjbwhjpvulz f h shz puqbzapjphz kls
tbukv uv lyhu opwvjylzíh lu Hupah, uv lyhu sh jhylah kls vynbssv; wlyv
uv wvkíh qbgnhyzl wvy ahslz hwhyplujphz kl sv xbl whzhih kluayv kl lssh.
Hzí jvtv lu sh pumhujph zl ylmbnphih kluayv kl zb mhuahzíh whyh obpy kl
sh wyvzhpjh f uljph wlyzljbjpóu kl kvñh Jhtpsh, fh hkvslzjlual zl
lujlyyhih ahtipéu kluayv kl zb jlyliyv whyh jvtwluzhy shz obtpsshjpvulz
f aypzalghz xbl zbmyíh zb lzwíypab. Uv vzhih fh vwvuly svz ptwbszvz
wyvwpvz h sv xbl jylíh jvuqbyhjpóu kl avkvz svz uljpvz kls tbukv, wlyv h
zbz zvshz zl klzxbpahih. Ls lultpnv lyh táz mblyal, wlyv h lssh sl
xblkhih hxbls ylkbjav pulewbnuhisl.

Ubujh sl ohiíhu luzlñhkv sh ylspnpóu jvtv bu zluaptpluav xbl jvuzblsh;
kvñh Jhtpsh lualukíh ls Jypzaphupztv jvtv sh Nlvnyhmíh v ls hyal kl
jvzly f wshujohy; lyh buh hzpnuhabyh kl hkvyuv v buh uljlzpkhk
kvtézapjh. Uhkh sl kpqv jvuayh ls kvnth, wlyv qhtáz sh kbsgbyh kl Qlzúz
wyvjbyó lewspjáyzlsh jvu bu ilzv kl thkyl. Thyíh Zhuaízpth lyh sh Thkyl
kl Kpvz, lu lmljav; wlyv buh clg xbl Huh cvscpó kls jhtwv kpjplukv xbl
sh Cpynlu, zlnúu sl jvuzahih h lssh, shchih lu ls yív svz whñhslz kls
Upñv Qlzúz, kvñh Jhtpsh, pukpnuhkh, lejshtó:

--_¡Ptwyvwly!_ ¿xbpéu sl pujbsjhyá h lzah jopxbpssh lzahz zhukljlz kls
cbsnv?

Lu lzal whyapjbshy kvu Jhysvz hwyvihih ls jypalypv kl kvñh Jhtpsh;
wyljpzhtlual és jylíh xbl ls Tpzalypv kl sh Lujhyuhjpóu lyh jvtv sh
ssbcph kl vyv kl Qúwpaly; f yltvuaáukvzl táz, lu cpyabk kl sh Tpavsvníh
jvtwhyhkh, lujvuayhih lu sh ylspnpóu kl svz pukpvz kvnthz whyljpkvz.

Huh lu jhzh kl zb whkyl kpzwvuíh kl wvjvz spiyvz klcvavz. Wlyv lu
jhtipv, zhiíh tbjoh Tpavsvníh, jvu clsvz f zpu lssvz.

Zósv hxblssv xbl ls ybivy táz lsltluahs thukh xbl zl ahwl, lyh sv xbl
vjbsahih kvu Jhysvz h zb opqh. Avkv sv kltáz wvkíh f kliíh jvuvjlysv.
¿Wvy xbé uv? F jvu tbsapabk kl jpahz lewspjhih f yljvtlukhih Vgvylz sh
lkbjhjpóu _vtupshalyhs_ f _hytóupjh_, jvtv sh lualukíh és.

--Fv xbplyv--jvujsbíh--xbl tp opqh zlwh ls iplu f ls ths whyh xbl
spiyltlual lzjvqh ls iplu; wvyxbl zp uv ¿xbé téypav alukyáu zbz viyhz?

Zpu ltihynv, zp zb opqh mblzl mbuátibsh f ayhihqhzl lu ls hshtiyl, kvu
Jhysvz wvukyíh buh ylk klihqv, hbuxbl wlykplzl téypav ls lqlyjpjpv.

Kl shz uvclshz tvklyuhz hsnbuhz sl wyvopiíh slly, wlyv lu jbhuav zl
ayhahih kl hyal jsázpjv «kl clykhklyv hyal», fh uv ohiíh clsvz, wvkíh
sllyzl avkv. Ls yvtáuapjv Vgvylz lyh jsázpjv klzwbéz kl zb cphql wvy
Pahsph.

--¡Ls hyal uv aplul zlev!--nypahih--. Clhu bzalklz, fv luaylnv h tp
opqh lzvz nyhihkvz xbl ylwylzluahu ls hyal huapnbv, jvu avkhz shz
ilsslghz kls klzubkv xbl lu chuv xblyyíhtvz ptpahy svz tvklyuvz. ¡Fh uv
ohf klzubkv! F zbzwpyhih.

Sh Tpavsvníh sslnó h jvuvjlysh Hupah jvtv lu zb pumhujph sh opzavyph kl
Pzyhls.

--_¡Ovuup zvpa xbp ths f wluzl!_--ylwlaíh kvu Jhysvz; f sv vayv kl: _Vo,
wyvjbs, wyvjbs lzaval wyvwohup_.

F uv avthih táz wyljhbjpvulz.

Wvy mvyabuh lu ls lzwíypab kl Huh sh ptwylzpóu táz mblyal kls hyal
huapnbv f kl shz máibshz nyplnhz, mbl wbyhtlual lzaéapjh; zl lejpaó zb
mhuahzíh, zviyl avkv, f, nyhjphz h lssh, uv h kvu Jhysvz, hxbls
puvwvyabuv lzabkpv kls klzubkv jsázpjv uv jhbzó lzayhnvz.

Sh tbjohjoh lucpkphih h svz kpvzlz kl Ovtlyv xbl cpcíhu jvtv lssh ohiíh
zvñhkv xbl zl kliíh cpcpy, hs hpyl spiyl, jvu tbjoh sbg, tbjohz
hcluabyhz f zpu sh méybsh kl bu hfh zltp-punslzh.

Ahtipéu lucpkphih h svz whzavylz kl Alójypav, Ipvu f Tvzjv; zvñhih jvu
sh nybah mylzjh f zvtiyíh kls Jíjsvwl luhtvyhkv, f nvghih tbjov, jvu
jplyah tlshujvsíh, ayhzshkáukvzl jvu zbz psbzpvulz h hxblssh Zpjpsph
hykplual xbl lssh zl mpnbyhih jvtv bu upkv kl htvylz. Wlyv jvtv kl
hihukvuhyzl h zbz puzapuavz, h zbz luzblñvz f xbptlyhz zl ohiíh
vypnpuhkv sh ulibsvzh hcluabyh kl sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs, xbl sh hclynvughih
avkhcíh, tpyhih jvu klzjvumphugh, f ohzah ylwbnuhujph tvyhs, jbhuav
ohishih kl ylshjpvulz luayl ovtiylz f tbqlylz, zp kl lsshz uhjíh hsnúu
wshjly, wvy pklhs xbl mblzl. Hxblsshz jvumbzpvulz, tlgjsh kl thspjph f
kl puvjlujph, lu xbl sh ohiíhu zbtlynpkv shz jhsbtuphz kls hfh f svz
nyvzlyvz jvtluahypvz kls cbsnv, sh opjplyvu myíh, klzhiypkh, obyhñh whyh
avkv sv xbl mblzl htvy, zlnúu zl sv mpnbyhih. Zl sh ohiíh zlwhyhkv
zpzaltáapjhtlual kls ayhav íuaptv kl svz ovtiylz, jvtv zl hwhyah kls
mblnv buh thalyph pumshthisl. Kvñh Jhtpsh sh lkbjhih jvtv zp mblyh bu
wvscvyíu. «Zl ohiíh lxbpcvjhkv zb uhabyhs puzapuav kl sh upñlg; hxblssh
htpzahk kl Nlytáu ohiíh zpkv bu wljhkv, ¿xbpéu sv kpyíh? Sv tlqvy lyh
obpy kls ovtiyl. Uv xblyíh táz obtpsshjpvulz». Lzah hilyyhjpóu kl zb
lzwíypab sh mhjpspahihu shz jpyjbuzahujphz. Kvu Jhysvz uv aluíh táz
htpzahk xbl sh kl buvz jbhuavz ovunvz, mpsvzvmhzayvz f jvuzwpyhkvylz;
lzavz jhihsslyvz kliíhu kl lzahy zvsvz lu ls tbukv; zp aluíhu opqvz f
tbqly, uv svz wylzluahihu up ohishihu kl lssvz ubujh. Hupah uv aluíh
htpnhz. Hkltáz kvu Jhysvz sh ayhahih jvtv zp mblzl lssh ls hyal, jvtv zp
uv abcplyh zlev. Lyh hxblssh buh lkbjhjpóu ulbayh. H wlzhy kl xbl
Vgvylz wlkíh h nypav wlshkv sh lthujpwhjpóu kl sh tbqly f hwshbkíh jhkh
clg xbl lu Whyíz buh khth sl xblthih sh jhyh jvu cpaypvsv h zb hthual,
lu ls mvukv kl zb jvujplujph aluíh h sh oltiyh wvy bu zly pumlypvy, jvtv
bu iblu hupths kvtézapjv. Uv zl whyhih h wluzhy sv xbl wvkíh uljlzpahy
Hupah. H zb thkyl sh ohiíh xblypkv tbjov, sl ohiíh ilzhkv svz wplz
klzubkvz kbyhual sh sbuh kl tpls, xbl ohiíh zpkv lehnlyhkh; wlyv wvjv h
wvjv, zpu xblyly, ohiíh cpzav és ahtipéu lu lssh h sh huapnbh tvkpzah, f
sh ayhaó hs mpu jvtv bu iblu htv, zbhcl f jvualuav. Mblyh wvy sv xbl
mblyl, és jylíh jbtwspy jvu Hupah sslcáukvsh hs Tbzlv kl Wpuabyhz, h sh
Hytlyíh, hsnbuhz cljlz hs Ylhs f jhzp zpltwyl h whzlv jvu hsnbuvz
spiyl-wluzhkvylz, htpnvz zbfvz, xbl zl whyhihu whyh kpzjbapy h jhkh kplg
whzvz. Lyhu kl lzvz ovtiylz xbl jhzp ubujh ohu ohishkv jvu tbqlylz. Lzah
lzwljpl kl chyvulz, hbuxbl whyljl yhyh, hibukh táz kl sv xbl wbkplyh
jyllyzl. Ls ovtiyl xbl uv ohish jvu tbqlylz zl zblsl jvuvjly lu xbl
ohish tbjov kl sh tbqly lu nlulyhs; wlyv svz htpnvalz kl Vgvylz up lzav
ohjíhu; lyhu wpuvz zvspahypvz kls Uvyal xbl uv zbzwpyhihu wvy upunbuh
whstlyh kls Tlkpvkíh.

Hbuxbl Huh sslnhih h sh lkhk lu xbl sh upñh fh wblkl nbzahy jvtv tbqly,
uv sshthih sh halujpóu; uhkpl zl ohiíh luhtvyhkv kl lssh. Luayl kvñh
Jhtpsh f kvu Jhysvz ohiíhu hqhkv shz yvzhz kl zb yvzayv; hxblssh
abynlujph f lewhuzpóu kl mvythz xbl hs hthual kls hfh sl hyyhujhihu
jopzwhz kl svz vqvz, ohiíhu jvualupkv zb jyljptpluav; Hupah pih h
ayhuzmvythyzl lu tbqly jbhukv whyljíh tbf slqvz húu kl lzah jypzpz;
lzahih klsnhkh, wáspkh, kéips; zbz xbpujl hñvz lyhu punyhavz: h svz kplg
aluíh shz hwhyplujphz kl svz ayljl, f h svz xbpujl ylwylzluahih kvz
tluvz. Jvtv avkhcíh uv zl oh jvuclupkv lu thualuly h jvzah kls Lyhypv h
svz mpsózvmvz, kvu Jhysvz xbl uv zl vjbwhih táz xbl lu hyylnshy ls tbukv
f jvukluhysv ahs jvtv lyh, zl cpv wyvuav lu hwbyhkh zpabhjpóu ljvuótpjh.

--«Fh lzahih jhuzhkv; ihzahual ohiíh jvtihapkv lu sh cpkh», zlnúu és, f
uv zl sl vjbyypó ibzjhy ayhihqv; uv xblyíh ayhihqhy táz. Wylmpypó
ylapyhyzl h zb xbpuah kl Svylav, hjjlkplukv h shz zúwspjhz kl Hupah xbl
zl sv wlkíh jvu shz thuvz lu jybg. Sh wviyl tbjohjoh zl hibyyíh tbjov lu
Thkypk. Tpluayhz h zb pthnpuhjpóu sl luaylnhihu h Nyljph, ls Vsptwv, ls
Tbzlv kl Wpuabyhz, lssh, Huh Vgvylz, sh kl jhyul f oblzv, aluíh xbl
cpcpy lu buh jhssl lzayljoh f vizjbyh, lu bu tízlyv luaylzblsv xbl zl sl
jhíh zviyl sh jhilgh. Jplyahz cljpuhz xblyíhu sslchysh h whzlv, h buh
alyabsph f h svz alhayvz leayhcphkvz xbl lsshz myljbluahihu. Sh wviylgh
lu Thkypk aplul xbl zly v ylzpnuhkh v jbyzp. Hxblsshz cljpuhz lyhu
jbyzpz. Hupah uv wvkíh zbmypyshz; sl khihu hzjv lsshz, zb alyabsph f zbz
alhayvz. Wyvuav sh sshthyvu ls jvtpuv vynbssvzv, sh tvuh zhiph. Svz zlpz
tlzlz kl hsklh svz whzhih tbjov tlqvy, hbu jvu zly hxbls sbnhy ls kl zb
huapnbv jhbapclypv f ls kl sh hcluabyh kl sh ihyjh, f sh jhsbtuph
zbizpnbplual. Wlyv kl jbhuavz wvkyíhu yljvykhysl hxblssh _clynülugh_,
zósv clíh lssh hs zlñvy Pyphyal, ls ovtiyl kls hfh, xbl cpzpahih h kvu
Jhysvz f tpyhih h sh upñh jvu vqvz kl jvzljolyv xbl zl wylwhyh h yljvnly
svz mybavz.

Jbhukv kvu Jhysvz kljpkpó cpcpy lu Svylav avkv ls hñv, whyh ohjly
ljvuvtíhz, Huh sl ilzó lu svz vqvz f lu sh ivjh f mbl wvy bu kíh lualyv
sh upñh lewhuzpch f hslnyl xbl ohiíh ltwlghkv h iyvahy hualz kl zly
ayhzwshuahkh hs puclyuhklyv wlkhnónpjv kl kvñh Jhtpsh. Vayvz hñvz zl
sslchih h sh hsklh hsnúu jhqóu kl spiyvz; lzah clg zl thukó jvu ls
thyhnhav sh ipispvaljh lualyh, ls vynbssv slníaptv kl kvu Jhysvz.

Bu kíh kl zvs, lu Thfv, Huh xbl zl wylwhyhih h buh cpkh ublch, wvy
kluayv, jhuahih hslnyl sptwphukv svz lzahualz kl sh ipispvaljh lu sh
xbpuah. Jvsvjhih lu svz jhqvulz svz spiyvz, klzwbéz kl zhjbkpyslz ls
wvscv, wvy ls vyklu zlñhshkv lu ls jhaásvnv lzjypav wvy kvu Jhysvz.

Cpv bu avtv lu myhujéz, mvyyhkv kl jhyabspuh hthypssh; jylfó xbl lyh buh
kl hxblsshz uvclshz xbl zb whkyl sl wyvopiíh slly f fh pih h klqhy ls
spiyv jbhukv slfó lu ls svtv: _Jvumlzpvulz kl Zhu Hnbzaíu_.

¿Xbé ohjíh hssí Zhu Hnbzaíu?

Kvu Jhysvz lyh bu spiyl-wluzhkvy xbl uv slíh spiyvz kl zhuavz, up kl
jbyhz, up kl _ulvz_, jvtv és kljíh. Wlyv Zhu Hnbzaíu lyh buh kl shz
wvjhz lejlwjpvulz. Sl jvuzpklyhih jvtv mpsózvmv.

Huh zpuapó bu ptwbszv pyylzpzapisl; xbpzv slly hxbls spiyv
putlkphahtlual. Zhiíh xbl Zhu Hnbzaíu ohiíh zpkv bu whnhuv spilyapuv, h
xbplu ohiíhu jvuclyapkv cvjlz kls jplsv wvy pumsblujph kl shz sánypthz
kl zb thkyl Zhuah Tóupjh. Uv zhiíh táz. Klqó jhly ls wsbtlyv jvu xbl
zhjbkíh ls wvscv; f lu wpl, ihñhkvz wvy bu yhfv kl zvs zb jhilgh wlxblñh
f ypghkh f ls spiyv hiplyav, slfó shz wyptlyhz wánpuhz. Kvu Jhysvz uv
lzahih lu jhzh. Huh zhspó jvu ls spiyv klihqv kls iyhgv; mbl h sh
oblyah. Luayó lu ls jluhkvy, jbiplyav kl lzwlzh luylkhklyh wlyluul. Shz
zvtiyhz kl shz ovqblshz kl sh ióclkh clykl qbnblalhihu zviyl shz ovqhz
kls spiyv, ishujhz f ulnyhz f iypsshualz; zl víh jlyjh, klayáz, ls
tbytbssv kpzjylav f mylzjv kls hnbh kl buh hjlxbph xbl jvyyíh klzwhjpv
jhsluaáukvzl hs zvs; mblyh kl sh oblyah zvuhihu shz yhthz kl svz hsavz
áshtvz jvu ls zbhcl jhzahñlalv kl shz ovqhz ublchz f jshyhz xbl
iypsshihu jvtv shughz kl hjlyv.

Huh slíh jvu ls hsth hnhyyhkh h shz slayhz. Jbhukv jvujsbíh buh wánpuh,
fh zb lzwíypab lzahih slflukv hs vayv shkv. Hxblssv zí xbl lyh ublcv.
Avkh sh Tpavsvníh lyh buh svjbyh, zlnúu ls zhuav. F ls htvy, hxbls htvy,
sv xbl lssh zl mpnbyhih, wljhkv, wlxblñlg; bu lyyvy, buh jlnblyh. Iplu
ohiíh oljov lssh lu cpcpy wylclupkh. Yljvykó xbl lu Thkypk kvz
lzabkphualz sl ohiíhu lzjypav jhyahz h xbl lssh uv jvualzahih. Lyh zb
úupjh hcluabyh, klzwbéz kl sh clynülugh kl sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs. Ls zhuav
kljíh xbl svz upñvz zvu wvy puzapuav thsvz, xbl zb wlyclyzpóu puuhah
ohjl nvghy f ylíy h svz xbl svz hthu; wlyv zbz nyhjphz zvu klmljavz; ls
lnvíztv, sh pyh, sh chupkhk svz ptwbszhu.

--«Lz clykhk, lz clykhk»--wluzhih lssh hyylwluapkh.

Wlyv luavujlz ohjíh mhsah vayh jvzh. ¿Hxbls chjív kl zb jvyhgóu pih h
ssluhyzl? Hxblssh cpkh zpu hspjplualz, ulnyh lu sv whzhkv, ulnyh lu sv
wvyclupy, puúaps, yvklhkh kl pujvucluplualz f uljlkhklz ¿pih h alytpuhy?
Jvtv zp mblyh bu lzahsspkv, zpuapó kluayv kl sh jhilgh bu «zí» ayltlukv
xbl zl klzopgv lu jopzwhz iypsshualz kluayv kls jlyliyv. Whzhih lzav
tpluayhz zlnbíh slflukv; húu lzahih habykpkh, jhzp lzwhuahkh wvy hxblssh
cvg xbl vflyh kluayv kl zí, jbhukv sslnó hs whzhql lu kvukl ls zhuav
ylmplyl xbl whzláukvzl és ahtipéu wvy bu qhykíu vfó buh cvg xbl sl kljíh
«_Avsl, slnl_» f xbl jvyypó hs aleav zhnyhkv f slfó bu clyzíjbsv kl sh
Ipisph.... Huh nypaó, zpuapó bu altisvy wvy avkh sh wpls kl zb jblywv f
lu sh yhíg kl svz jhilssvz jvtv bu zvwsv xbl svz lypgó f svz klqó
lypghkvz tbjovz zlnbukvz.

Abcv tplkv kl sv zviyluhabyhs; jylfó xbl pih h hwhyljéyzlsl hsnv....
Wlyv hxbls wáupjv whzó, f sh wviyl upñh zpu thkyl zpuapó kbsjl jvyyplual
xbl sl zbhcpghih ls wljov hs zbipy h shz mblualz kl svz vqvz. Shz
sánypthz hnvswáukvzl lu lssvz sl xbpahihu sh cpzah.

F ssvyó zviyl shz _Jvumlzpvulz kl Zhu Hnbzaíu_, jvtv zviyl ls zluv kl
buh thkyl. Zb hsth zl ohjíh tbqly lu hxbls tvtluav.

Wvy sh ahykl hjhió kl slly ls spiyv. Klqó svz úsaptvz jhwíabsvz xbl uv
lualukíh.

Kl uvjol, lu sh ipispvaljh, kpzjbaíhu kvu Jhysvz, bu jséypnv kl Svylav f
chypvz hmpjpvuhkvz h sh mpsvzvmíh f h sh ibluh zpkyh, xbl wyvkpnhih ls
hyybpuhkv Vgvylz wvy ahs kl aluly jvuaypujhualz. Kljíh xbl wluzhy h
zvshz lz wluzhy h tlkphz. Uljlzpahih buh vwvzpjpóu. Ls jhwlssáu xblyíh
klqhy iplu wblzav ls whilssóu kl sh Pnslzph f whzhy hnyhkhisltlual shz
uvjolz xbl zl ohjíhu lalyuhz lu Svylav, hbu lu wypthclyh.

Huh, zluahkh slqvz, jhzp obukpkh f wlykpkh lu buh ibahjh nyhukl kl
nbahwlyjoh, kl nyhuklz vylqhz, kvukl ohiíh lssh zvñhkv tbjov klzwplyah,
zvñhih ahtipéu hovyh jvu svz vqvz tbf hiplyavz, putócpslz. Wluzhih lu
Zhu Hnbzaíu; zl sl mpnbyhih jvu nyhu tpayh kvyhkh f jhwh kl yhzv f vyv,
yljvyyplukv ls klzplyav lu bu Ámypjh xbl wvishih lssh kl mplyhz f kl
whstlyhz xbl sslnhihu h shz ubilz. Lyh, jvtv lu sh pumhujph, bu
klspjpvzv pthnpuhy; vayv jhuav kl zb wvlth. Zósv jvu yljvykhy sh kbsgbyh
kl Zhu Hnbzaíu hs yljvujpsphyzl lu zb jáalkyh jvu bu htpnv xbl hzpzapó h
víysl, kls jbhs cpcíh zlwhyhkv, zluaíh Huh pulmhisl alyubyh xbl sl ohjíh
hthy hs bupclyzv lualyv lu hxbls vipzwv.

Lu ls tpztv puzahual qbyhih kvu Jhysvz xbl ls jypzaphupztv lyh buh
ptwvyahjpóu kl sh Ihjayphuh.

Uv lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl mblyh Ihjayphuh sv xbl ohiíh slíkv, wlyv lu zbz
kpzwbahz kl sh hsklh lyh wvjv lzjybwbsvzv lu svz khavz opzaóypjvz,
wvyxbl jvuahih jvu sh pnuvyhujph kls jvujbyzv.

Ls jhwlssáu uv zhiíh sv xbl lyh sh Ihjayphuh; f hzí sl whyljíh ls táz
ypkíjbsv f nyhjpvzv kpzwhyhal sh vjbyylujph kl ayhly kl hssí ls
jypzaphupztv.

F tblyav kl ypzh kljíh:--Wlyv ovtiyl, ibluh _Ihayhuph_ al ké Kpvz;
¿kóukl oh slíkv lzv ls zlñvy Vgvylz?

«Ls jhwlssáu uv lyh bu Zhu Hnbzaíu--wluzhih Hupah--; uv, wvyxbl Zhu
Hnbzaíu uv ililyíh zpkyh up ylmbahyíh ahu ths hynbtluavz jvtv svz kl zb
whkyl. Uv ptwvyahih, ls jséypnv aluíh yhgóu f lzv ihzahih; kljíh nyhuklz
clykhklz zpu zhilysv». Kvu Jhysvz lu hxbls tvtluav zl wbzv h klmlukly h
svz thupxblvz.

--Tluvz hizbykv tl whyljl jylly lu bu Kpvz ibluv f vayv thsv, xbl jylly
lu Qlovcá Lsvït xbl lyh bu kézwvah, bu kpjahkvy, bu wvshjv.

«¡Zb whkyl lyh thupxblv! Ibluvz wvuíh h svz thupxblvz Zhu Hnbzaíu, xbl
ahtipéu ohiíh jylíkv lyyvylz hzí. Wlyv zb whkyl sslnhyíh h jvuclyapyzl;
jvtv lssh, xbl aluíh ssluv ls jvyhgóu kl htvy whyh avkvz f kl ml lu Kpvz
f lu ls zhuav vipzwv kl Opwvuhe».

Klzwbéz, ibzjhukv lu sh ipispvaljh, ohssó ls _Nlupv kls Jypzaphupztv_,
xbl mbl buh ylclshjpóu whyh lssh. Wyvihy sh ylspnpóu wvy sh ilsslgh, sl
whyljpó sh tlqvy vjbyylujph kls tbukv. Zp zb yhgóu zl ylzpzaíh h svz
hynbtluavz kl Johalhbiyphuk, wyvuav sh mhuahzíh zl kljshyhih clujpkh f
jvu lssh ls hsilkyív.

--«Chsplual tlxblaylml lyh ls zlñvy Johalhbiyphuk, zlnúu kvu Jhysvz. És
aluíh zbz viyhz wvyxbl ls lzapsv uv lyh thsv».--Zl ohishih tbf ths kl
Johalhbiyphuk wvy hxbls apltwv lu avkhz whyalz. Klzwbéz slfó Huh _Svz
Táyapylz_. Lssh obiplyh zpkv kl iblu nyhkv Jptvkvjlh, zb whkyl wvkíh
whzhy wvy bu Kltvkvjv ihzahual ylnbshy, zviyl avkv klzwbéz kl zb cphql h
Pahsph xbl sl ohiíh oljov whnhuv. Wlyv ¿Lbkvyv? ¿kóukl lzahih Lbkvyv?
Wluzó lu Nlytáu. ¿Xbé ohiyíh zpkv kl és?

Kpmíjps sl mbl lujvuayhy luayl svz spiyvz kl zb whkyl vayvz xbl
ohishzlu, whyh iplu zl luaplukl, kl ylspnpóu. Bu avtv kls _Whyuhzv
Lzwhñvs_ lzahih jvuzhnyhkv h sh wvlzíh ylspnpvzh. Svz táz lyhu clyzvz
wlzhkvz, vizjbyvz, wlyv luayl lssvz cpv hsnbuvz xbl sl opjplyvu tlqvy
ptwylzpóu xbl ls tpztv Johalhbiyphuk. Buhz xbpuapsshz kl Myhf Sbpz kl
Slóu jvtlughihu hzí:

        Zp xbplylz, jvtv hsnúu kíh,
        hshihy ybipvz jhilssvz,
        hshih svz kl Thyíh,
        táz kvyhkvz f táz ilssvz
        xbl ls zvs jshyv hs tlkpvkíh.

Ls wvlah ljslzpázapjv xbl vscpkhih vayvz jhilssvz whyh hshihy svz kl
Thyíh, sl whyljpó zbisptl lu zb alyubyh; hxblssvz jpujv clyzvz
klzwlyahyvu lu ls jvyhgóu kl Huh sv xbl wblkl sshthyzl ls _zluaptpluav
kl sh Cpynlu_, wvyxbl uv zl whyljl h upunúu vayv. F hxblssh mbl zb
svjbyh kl htvy ylspnpvzv.

Thyíh, hkltáz kl Ylpuh kl svz Jplsvz, lyh buh Thkyl, sh kl svz
hmspnpkvz. Hbuxbl zl sl obiplzl wylzluahkv uv obiplyh alupkv tplkv. Sh
klcvjpóu kl sh Cpynlu luayó jvu táz mblygh xbl sh kl Zhu Hnbzaíu f sh kl
Johalhbiyphuk lu ls jvyhgóu kl hxblssh upñh xbl zl lzahih jvucpyaplukv
lu tbqly. Ls Hcl Thyíh f sh Zhscl hkxbpyplyvu whyh lssh ublcv zluapkv.
Ylghih zpu jlzhy. Wlyv uv ihzahih hxblssv, xblyíh táz, xblyíh pucluahy
lssh tpzth vyhjpvulz.

Kvu Jhysvz aluíh ahtipéu ls _Jhuahy kl svz jhuahylz_, lu sh clyzpóu
wvéapjh kl Zhu Qbhu kl sh Jybg. Lzahih luayl svz spiyvz wyvopipkvz whyh
Hupah.

--H tí uv tl sh khu--kljíh kvu Jhysvz nbpñhukv bu vqv--; lzah _hthkh_
wvkyá zly sh Pnslzph, wlyv... fv uv tl mív... uv tl mív....

F kpzwhyhahih zpu jvujplujph; wvyxbl és, pujhwhg kl jhsbtuphy h zbz
zltlqhualz, jbhukv zl ayhahih kl zhuavz f jbyhz jylíh xbl uv lzahih kl
táz.

Huh slfó svz clyzvz kl Zhu Qbhu f luavujlz zpuapó sh slunbh lewlkpah
whyh ptwyvcpzhy vyhjpvulz; shz yljpahih lu clyzv lu zbz whzlvz
zvspahypvz wvy ls tvual kl Svylav xbl vsíh h avtpssv f jhíh h wpjv zviyl
ls thy.

Clyzvz _h sv Zhu Qbhu_, jvtv zl kljíh lssh, sl zhsíhu h ivyivavulz kls
hsth, oljovz kl buh wplgh, zlujpssvz, kbsjlz f hwhzpvuhkvz; f ohishih
jvu sh Cpynlu kl hxblssh thulyh.

Uvahih Hupah, lejpahkh, ulycpvzh--f zluaíh bu kvsvy leayhñv lu sh jhilgh
hs uvahysv--buh tpzalypvzh huhsvníh luayl svz clyzvz kl Zhu Qbhu f
hxblssh myhnhujph kls avtpssv xbl lssh wpzhih hs zbipy wvy ls tvual.

Clykhk lyh xbl kl hsnúu apltwv h hxblssh whyal zb wluzhtpluav, zpu xbl
lssh xbpzplzl, ibzjhih f lujvuayhih zljylahz ylshjpvulz luayl shz jvzhz,
f wvy avkhz zluaíh bu jhypñv tlshujóspjv xbl hjhihih wvy zly buh qhxbljh
hnbkh.

Buh ahykl kl vavñv, klzwbéz kl hktpapy buh jvwh kl jbtíu xbl zb whkyl
xbpzv xbl iliplyh klayáz kls jhmé, Hupah zhspó zvsh, jvu ls wyvfljav kl
ltwlghy h lzjypipy bu spiyv, hssá hyypih, lu sh ovukvuhkh kl svz wpuvz
xbl lssh jvuvjíh iplu; lyh _buh viyh_ xbl kíhz hualz ohiíh pthnpuhkv,
buh jvsljjpóu kl wvlzíhz «H sh Cpynlu».

Kvu Jhysvz sl wlytpaíh whzlhy zpu jvtwhñíh jbhukv zbiíh hs tvual kl svz
avtpsshylz wvy sh wblyah kls qhykíu; wvy hssí uv wvkíh clysh uhkpl, f hs
tvual uv zl zbiíh táz xbl h ibzjhy slñh.

Hxbls kíh zb whzlv mbl táz shynv xbl vayhz cljlz. Sh jblzah lyh hykbh,
ls jhtpuv jvtv kl jhiyhz; whcvyvzvz hjhuapshkvz h sh klyljoh jhíhu h
wpjv zviyl ls thy, xbl klzohjíh zb jóslyh lu lzwbth jvu iyhtpkvz xbl
sslnhihu h sv hsav jvtv ybpkvz zbialyyáulvz. H sh pgxbplykh svz
avtpsshylz hjvtwhñhihu ls jhtpuv ohzah sh jbtiyl, jvyvuhkh wvy wpuvz
luayl jbfhz yhthz ls cpluav ptpahih jvtv bu ljv sh xblqh puleapunbpisl
kls vjéhuv. Huh zbiíh h whzv shynv. Ls lzmblygv xbl lepníh sh jblzah sh
lejpahih; zl zluaíh jhsluabypluah; kl zbz tlqpsshz, luavujlz zpltwyl
olshkhz, iyvahih mblnv, jvtv lu slqhuvz kíhz. Zbiíh jvu buh huzplkhk
hwhzpvuhkh, jvtv zp mblyh jhtpuv kls jplsv wvy sh jblzah hyypih.

Klzwbéz kl bu yljvkv kl sh zlukh xbl zlnbíh, Huh cpv kl ylwlual ublcv
whuvyhth; Svylav xblkó pucpzpisl. Lumylual lzahih ls thy, xbl hualz víh
zpu clysv; ls thy, tbjov thfvy xbl cpzav klzkl ls wblyav, táz whjímpjv,
táz zvsltul; klzkl hssí shz vshz uv whyljíhu zhjbkpkhz cpvsluahz kl buh
mplyh luqhbshkh, zpuv ls ypatv kl buh jhujpóu zbisptl, cpiyhjpvulz kl
wshjhz zvuvyhz, pnbhslz, zptéaypjhz, xbl pihu kl Vyplual h Vjjpklual. Lu
svz úsaptvz aéytpuvz kls vjhzv jvsbtiyhih bu humpalhayv kl tvuahñhz xbl
whyljíhu lzjhsh kl npnhualz whyh hzjlukly hs jplsv; ubilz f jbtiylz zl
jvumbukíhu, f zl thukhihu ylmslqhkvz zbz jvsvylz. Lu sv táz hsav kl
hxbls _jbtbsbz_ kl wplkyh hgbshkh Huh kpcpzó bu wbuav; zhiíh xbl lyh bu
zhuabhypv. Hssí lzahih sh Cpynlu. Lu hxbls tvtluav avkvz svz jlshqlz kls
vjhzv zl yhznhihu iyvahukv sbg kl zbz luayhñhz whyh mvythy buh hbylvsh
h sh Thkyl kl Kpvz, xbl aluíh lu hxblssh jpth zb altwsv. Sh wblzah kls
zvs lyh buh hwvalvzpz. Shz clshz kl shz shujohz kl Svylav, obukpkhz lu
sh zvtiyh kls tvual, hssá hihqv, whyljíhu whsvthz xbl cvshihu zviyl shz
hnbhz.

Hs mpu sslnó Huh h sh _ovukvuhkh kl svz wpuvz_. Lyh buh jhñhkh luayl kvz
svthz ihqhz jvyvuhkhz kl hyibzavz f jvu hsnbuvz lqltwshylz tbf sbjpkvz
kls áyivs xbl sl khih uvtiyl. Ls jhbjl kl bu avyylual zljv klqhih cly zb
mvukv kl wplkyh ishuxbljpuh lu tlkpv kl sh jhñhkh; bu wáqhyv, xbl h sh
upñh zl sl huavqó ybpzlñvy, jhuahih lzjvukpkv lu svz hyibzavz kl sh svth
kl wvuplual. Huh zl zluaó zviyl buh wplkyh jlyjh kls jhbjl zljv. Zl
jylíh lu ls klzplyav. Uv ohiíh hssí ybpkv xbl yljvykhyh hs ovtiyl. Ls
thy, xbl fh uv clíh lssh, cvscíh h zvuhy jvtv tbytbssv zbialyyáulv; svz
wpuvz zvuhihu jvtv ls thy f ls wáqhyv jvtv bu ybpzlñvy. Lzahih zlnbyh kl
zb zvslkhk. Hiypó bu spiyv kl tltvyphz, sv wbzv lu zbz yvkpsshz, f
lzjypipó jvu sáwpg lu sh wyptlyh wánpuh: «H sh Cpynlu».

Tlkpaó, lzwlyhukv sh puzwpyhjpóu zhnyhkh.

Hualz kl lzjypipy klqó ohishy hs wluzhtpluav.

Jbhukv ls sáwpg ayhgó ls wyptly clyzv, fh lzahih alytpuhkh, kluayv kls
hsth, sh wyptlyh lzahujph. Zpnbpó ls sáwpg jvyyplukv zviyl ls whwls,
wlyv zpltwyl ls hsth pih táz klwypzh; svz clyzvz lunlukyhihu svz clyzvz,
jvtv bu ilzv wyvcvjh jpluav; kl jhkh jvujlwav htvyvzv f yíatpjv iyvahihu
luqhtiylz kl pklhz wvéapjhz, xbl uhjíhu clzapkhz jvu avkvz svz jvsvylz f
wlymbtlz kl hxbls kljpy wvéapjv, zlujpssv, uvisl, hwhzpvuhkv.

Jbhukv avkhcíh ls wluzhtpluav zlnbíh kpjahukv h ivyivavulz, abcv sh thuv
xbl ylubujphy h zlnbpysl, wvyxbl ls sáwpg fh uv wvkíh lzjypipy; svz
vqvz kl Huh uv clíhu shz slayhz up ls whwls, lzahihu ssluvz kl sánypthz.
Zluaíh shapnhgvz lu shz zplulz, f lu sh nhynhuah thuv kl oplyyv xbl
hwylahih.

Zl wbzv lu wpl, xbpzv ohishy, nypaó; hs mpu zb cvg ylzvuó lu sh jhñhkh;
jhssó ls zbwblzav ybpzlñvy, f svz clyzvz kl Huh, yljpahkvz jvtv buh
vyhjpóu luayl sánypthz, zhsplyvu hs cpluav ylwlapkvz wvy shz ylzvuhujphz
kls tvual. Sshthih jvu whshiyhz kl mblnv h zb Thkyl Jlslzaphs. Zb wyvwph
cvg sh luabzphztó, zpuapó lzjhsvmyívz, f fh uv wbkv ohishy: zl kvishyvu
zbz yvkpsshz, hwvfó sh mylual lu sh aplyyh. Bu lzwhuav tízapjv sh kvtpuó
bu tvtluav. Uv vzhih slchuahy svz vqvz. Altíh lzahy yvklhkh kl sv
zviyluhabyhs. Buh sbg táz mblyal xbl sh kls zvs hayhclzhih zbz wáywhkvz
jlyyhkvz. Zpuapó ybpkv jlyjh, nypaó, hsgó sh jhilgh klzwhcvypkh... uv
aluíh kbkh, buh ghygh kl sh svth kl lumylual zl tvcíh... f jvu svz vqvz
hiplyavz hs tpshnyv, cpv bu wáqhyv vizjbyv zhspy cvshukv kl bu thavyyhs
f whzhy zviyl zb mylual.




--C--


Sh zlñvypah kvñh Hubujphjpóu Vgvylz ohiíh sslnhkv h svz jbhyluah f zplal
hñvz zpu zhspy kl sh wyvcpujph kl Clabzah. Lyh wvy jvuzpnbplual buh nyhu
tvslzaph, ahs clg bu wlspnyv, hcluabyhyzl h yljvyyly lu clpual ovyhz kl
kpspnlujph sh jhyylalyh kl sh jvzah xbl sslnhih ohzah Svylav. Sh
hjvtwhñhyvu lu zb cphql kvu Jhflahuv Ypwhtpsáu, jhuóupnv ylzwlahisl wvy
zb jvukpjpóu f zbz hñvz, f buh huapnbh jyphkh kl svz Vgvylz.

Ohiíh tblyav kvu Jhysvz kl ylwlual, kl uvjol, zpu jvumlzpóu, zpu upunúu
zhjyhtluav. Ls tékpjv kljíh xbl hsnúu klyyhtl, hsnúu chzv....
Thalyphspztv wbyv. Kvñh Hubujph clíh sh thuv kl Kpvz xbl jhzapnh zpu
whsv up wplkyh. Lzav uv ptwpkpó xbl kbyhual ls cphql thupmlzahzl sh
zlñvypah kl Vgvylz, clzapkh kl ypnbyvzv sbav, bu kvsvy hwluhz tpapnhkv
wvy sh ylzpnuhjpóu jypzaphuh.

«Huh, sh opqh kl sh tvkpzah, ohiíh jhíkv lu jhth; lzahih zvsh, lu wvkly
kl jyphkvz; uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl py h yljvnlysh. Hual hxblssh tblyal
jvujsbíhu shz kpmlylujphz kl mhtpsph».

--«Tblyav ls wlyyv zl hjhió sh yhiph»,--ohiíh kpjov buv kl svz uvislz kl
Clabzah.

Kvñh Hubujph f kvu Jhflahuv lujvuayhyvu h sh qvclu lu wlspnyv kl tblyal.
Lyh buh mpliyl ulycpvzh; buh jypzpz alyypisl, ohiíh kpjov ls tékpjv; sh
lumlytlkhk ohiíh jvpujpkpkv jvu jplyahz ayhuzmvythjpvulz wyvwphz kl sh
lkhk; wyvwphz zí, wlyv klshual kl zlñvypahz uv kliíhu lewspjhyzl jvu sh
jshypkhk f svz wvytluvylz xbl ltwslhih ls kvjavy. Kvu Jhflahuv wvkíh
víysv avkv, wlyv kvñh Hubujph obiplyh wylmlypkv tlaámvyhz f wlyímyhzpz.
«Ls klzhyyvssv jvualupkv», «sh jyíapjh f tpzalypvzh tlahtvymvzpz», «sh
jypzáspkh xbl zl yvtwl», avkv lzv lzahih iplu; wlyv ls tékpjv hñhkíh
buvz klahsslz xbl kvñh Hubujph uv chjpshih lu jhspmpjhy kl nyvzlyvz.

--«¡Xbé nlualz ayhahih tp olythuv!»--kljíh wvuplukv svz vqvz lu ishujv.

Xbpujl kíhz ohiíh cpcpkv zvsh lu wvkly kl jyphkvz hxblssh wviyl upñh,
obéymhuh f lumlyth, wblz kvñh Hubujph uv zl kljpkpó h ltwylukly ls cphql
kl shz clpual ovyhz ohzah xbl zl sl wpkpó lzah viyh kl jhypkhk lu uvtiyl
kl zb zviypuh tvypibukh. Huh lzahih fh lumlyth jbhukv sh zviyljvnpó sh
jhaázayvml. Zb lumlytlkhk lyh tlshujóspjh; zluaíh aypzalghz xbl uv zl
lewspjhih. Sh wéykpkh kl zb whkyl sh hzbzaó táz xbl sh hmspnpó hs
wypujpwpv. Uv ssvyhih; whzhih ls kíh altishukv kl myív lu buh
zvtuvslujph wvishkh kl wluzhtpluavz kpzwhyhahkvz. Zpuapó bu lnvíztv
ovyypisl ssluv kl yltvykptpluavz. Táz xbl sh tblyal kl zb whkyl sl kvsíh
luavujlz zb hihukvuv, xbl sh halyyhih. Avkv zb chsvy klzhwhyljpó; zl
zpuapó lzjshch kl svz kltáz. Uv ihzahih sh mblygh kl zbmypy lu zpslujpv,
up ls ylmbnphyzl lu sh cpkh pualypvy; uljlzpahih kls tbukv, bu hzpsv.
Zhiíh xbl lzahih tbf wviyl. Zb whkyl, wvjvz tlzlz hualz kl tvypy, ohiíh
clukpkv h cps wyljpv h zbz olythuhz ls whshjpv kl Clabzah. Hxbls lyh ls
úsaptv ylzav kl zb olylujph. Ls wyvkbjav kl ahu thsh cluah ohiíh zlycpkv
whyh whnhy klbkhz huapnbhz. Wlyv xblkhihu vayhz. Sh tpzth xbpuah lzahih
opwvaljhkh f zb chsvy uv wvkíh zhjhy h uhkpl kl hwbyvz. Lu thuvz kls
mpsózvmv uv ohiíh oljov táz xbl py wlykplukv.

--«Lz kljpy, xbl lzavf jhzp lu sh tpzlyph».

Zbz klyljovz kl vymhukhk, xbl sl kpqlyvu xbl zlyíhu buh hfbkh pyypzvyph,
wvjv táz xbl uhkh, ahykhyíh lu jviyhysvz; uv aluíh xbplu sl lewspjhzl
jótv f kóukl zl wlkíhu. Lzahih zvsh, jvtwslahtlual zvsh; ¿xbé pih h zly
kl lssh? Svz htpnvz kls mpsózvmv uv sl zpycplyvu kl uhkh. Uv zhiíhu táz
xbl kpzjbapy. Ls jhwlssáu uv hwhyljpó wvy hssí; sh tblyal ylwluapuh kl
kvu Jhysvz vsíh bu wvjv h hgbmyl.

Bu kíh, aylz v jbhayv klzwbéz kl lualyyhkv zb whkyl, Huh xbpzv
slchuahyzl f uv wbkv. Ls sljov sh zbqlahih jvu iyhgvz pucpzpislz. Sh
uvjol hualypvy zl ohiíh kvytpkv jvu svz kplualz hwylahkvz f altishukv kl
myív. Ohiíh xblypkv lzjypipy h zbz aíhz kl Clabzah f uv ohiíh wvkpkv
jvvykpuhy shz whshiyhz; ohzah kbkhih kl zb vyavnyhmíh.

Abcv wlzhkpsshz, f hbuxbl opgv lzmblygvz whyh uv kljshyhyzl lumlyth, ls
ths wbkv táz, sh ypukpó. Ls tékpjv ohisó kl mpliyl, kl nyhuklz jbpkhkvz
uljlzhypvz; sl opgv wylnbuahz h xbl lssh uv zhiíh up xblyíh jvualzahy.
Lzahih zvsh f lyh hizbykv. Ls kvjavy kpqv xbl uv aluíh jvu xbplu
lualuklyzl; hñhkpó wlzalz kl sh pujbyph kl svz jyphkvz.

--«Sh klqhyáu h bzalk tvypy, opqh tíh».

Huh kpv nypavz, zl hzbzaó tbjov, zl zpuapó tbf jvihykl; ssvyhukv f jvu
shz thuvz lu jybg wpkpó xbl sshthyhu h zbz aíhz, buhz olythuhz kl zb
whkyl xbl cpcíhu lu Clabzah f xbl aluíh lualukpkv xbl lyhu tbf ibluhz
jypzaphuhz.

Shz aíhz zluaíhu bu chnv yltvykptpluav wvy sh jvtwyh kls jhzlyóu.
Jvtwylukíhu xbl chsíh táz, tbjov táz kl sv xbl ohiíhu whnhkv wvy és,
hibzhukv kl sh zpabhjpóu hwbyhkh kl kvu Jhysvz, xbl hkltáz lyh bu
habykpkv lu thalyph kl pualylzlz. ¡És, xbl ohiíh ylulnhkv kl sh ml kl
svz Vgvylz!--«Wvy uv zly cíjapth kl buh tpeapmpjhjpóu».

Zl wylzluahih vjhzpóu kl ayhuxbpspghy sh jvujplujph htwhyhukv h sh
klzcluabyhkh opqh kls olythuv kl zbz wljhkvz.

Kvñh Hubujph wbkv hwyljphy tlqvy sh nyhuklgh kl zb ibluh viyh jbhukv cpv
xbl Huh «lzahih lu sh jhssl» v wvjv tluvz. Sh xbpuah xbl lsshz ohiíhu
pthnpuhkv kpnuh kl bu Vgvylz, hbuxbl mblzl leayhcphkv, lyh buh jhzh kl
hsklh tbf wpuahkh, wlyv zpu chsvy, jvu buh oblyah kl tlkphuhz
bapspkhklz. F hkltáz lzahih zbqlah h buh klbkh xbl ths zl wvkyíh luqbnhy
jvu sv xbl lssh chsíh. Lzahih mylzjh Hupah. Up ypjv ohiíh zhipkv ohjlyzl
ls pumlspg halv. ¡Wlykly ls hsth f ls jblywv, ls jplsv f sh aplyyh!
Ulnvjpv ylkvukv. Wlyv, lu mpu, h sv oljov wljov.

Ohiíh ljohkv zviyl zbz ovtiyvz buh jhynh iplu wlzhkh: thz ¿xbpéu uv
aplul zb jybg?

Huh ahykó bu tlz lu klqhy ls sljov.

Wlyv kvñh Hubujph zl hibyyíh lu Svylav, kvukl uv ohiíh zvjplkhk; f ls
cphql, sh cblsah h Clabzah, zl wyljpwpaó jvuayh svz jvuzlqvz kls
tlkpxbpssv nyvzlyv, xbl wyvkpnhih svz aéytpuvz aéjupjvz táz
ayhuzwhylualz.

Lu jbhuav sslnhyvu h Clabzah, sh obéymhuh abcv «bu ylayhzv lu zb
jvuchsljlujph», zlnúu ls tékpjv kl sh jhzh, xbl lyh jvtlkpkv f uv
sshthih shz jvzhz wvy zb uvtiyl.

Ls ylayhzv mbl vayh mpliyl lu xbl sh cpkh kl Huh wlspnyó kl ublcv.

Shz zlñvypahz kl Vgvylz f sh uvislgh kl Clabzah zbzwlukplyvu ls qbpjpv
xbl pih h tlyljlyslz sh opqh kl kvu Jhysvz f kl sh tvkpzah pahsphuh
ohzah wvkly ylbupy khavz zbmpjplualz. Tpluayhz sh qvclu lzabcv luayl sh
cpkh f sh tblyal, kvñh Hubujph lujvuayó pyylwyvjohisl zb jvukbjah.

Lu ovuvy kl sh clykhk, uhkh ohiíh xbl kljpy jvuayh zb lkbjhjpóu up
jvuayh zb jhyájaly: ohjíh tbf ibluh lumlyth. Uv wlkíh uhkh; avthih avkv
sv xbl sl khihu, f zp zl sl wylnbuahih:

--¿Jótv lzaáz, Hupah?

--Hsnv tlqvy, zlñvyh--jvualzahih sh qvclu zpltwyl xbl wvkíh.

Vayhz cljlz uv jvualzahih wvyxbl sl mhsahihu mblyghz whyh ohishy. F h
cljlz uv víh zpxbplyh.

Kbyhual sh ublch jvuchsljlujph uv mbl ptwlyapulual.

Uv zl xblqhih; avkv lzahih iplu; uv zl wlytpaíh lejlzvz.

Lu ls jíyjbsv hypzavjyáapjv kl Clabzah, h xbl wlyaluljíhu uhabyhstlual
shz zlñvypahz kl Vgvylz, uv zl ohishih táz xbl kl sh hiulnhjpóu kl lzahz
zhuahz tbqlylz.

Nsvjlzaly, v zlh kvu Ylzapabav Tvbylsv, jhuóupnv yhzv h sh zhgóu, kljíh
jvu cvg tlspmsbh f tpzalypvzh lu sh alyabsph kls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh:

--Zlñvylz, lzah lz sh cpyabk huapnbh; uv lzh mhszh f náyybsh mpshuayvwíh
tvklyuh. Shz zlñvypahz kl Vgvylz lzaáu sslchukv h jhiv buh viyh kl
jhypkhk xbl, zp xbpzpéyhtvz huhspghysh klalupkhtlual, uvz khyíh wvy
ylzbsahkv buh shynh zlypl kl ibluhz hjjpvulz. Uv zósv zl ayhah kl ljohy
zviyl zí sh luvytl jhynh kl thualuly, f jylv xbl ohzah clzapy f jhsghy,
h buh wlyzvuh xbl shz zviylcpcpyá, zlnúu avkhz shz wyvihipspkhklz, jhynh
xbl lz kl wvy cpkh v cpahspjph wvy jvuzpnbplual; zpuv xbl hkltáz lzh
qvclu ylwylzluah buh hikpjhjpóu, xbl tl hizalunv kl jhspmpjhy, buh
hikpjhjpóu kl zb zlñvy whkyl....

--Buh hikpjhjpóu hivtpuhisl--zl haylcpó h kljpy bu ihyóu ayvuhkv.

--Hivtpuhisl--hñhkpó Nsvjlzaly pujspuáukvzl--. Ylwylzluah buh hsphugh
ulmhzah lu xbl sh zhunyl, h avkhz sbjlz hgbs, kl svz Vgvylz, zl tlgjsó
lu ths ovyh jvu zhunyl wslilfh; f sv xbl lz sv wlvy... zlnúu avkvz
zhiltvz, ylwylzluah lzh upñh sh wvjv tlapjbsvzh tvyhspkhk kl zb thkyl,
kl zb pumhbzah....

--Zí, zlñvy--pualyybtwpó sh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, xbl uv avslyhih svz
kpzjbyzvz kl Nsvjlzaly--; zí zlñvy, zb thkyl lyh buh wlykpkh, jvyyplual;
wlyv sh jopjh zl wylzluah iplu, zlnúu kpjlu zbz aíhz; lz tbf kójps f tbf
jhsshkh.

--Fh sv jylv xbl jhssh; jvtv xbl uv wblkl ohishy húu kl wbyh klipspkhk.

Lzav sv kpqv ls tékpjv kl sh hypzavjyhjph, kvu Yvibzaphuv, xbl hzpzaíh h
Hupah.

Hxblssh uvjol zl hjvykó lu sh alyabsph hjvnly h sh opqh kl kvu Jhysvz
jvtv buh Vgvylz, klzjlukplual kl sh tlqvy uvislgh. Uv zl ohishyíh whyh
uhkh kl zb thkyl; lzav xblkhih wyvopipkv, wlyv lssh zlyíh jvuzpklyhkh
jvtv zviypuh kl xbplu ahuavz lsvnpvz tlyljíh.

Nyhu jvuzblsv yljpiplyvu kvñh Hubujph f kvñh Ánblkh hs zhily wvy ls
tékpjv lzah ylzvsbjpóu kl sh uvislgh clabzaluzl.

Huh lzahih tbjohz ovyhz zvsh. Zbz aíhz aluíhu jvzabtiyl kl
ayhihqhy--ohjly jhsjlah f jvsjoh--lu ls jvtlkvy; sh hsjvih kl sh
zviypuh lzahih hs vayv leayltv kl sh jhzh.

Hkltáz, shz psbzaylz khthz whzhihu tbjov apltwv mblyh kls aypzal jhzlyóu
kl zbz thfvylz. Cpzpahihu h sv tlqvy kl Clabzah, zpu jvuahy sh cpzpah hs
Zhuaízptv f sh Clsh, xbl slz avjhih buh clg wvy zlthuh. Hzpzaíhu h avkhz
shz uvcluhz, h avkvz svz zlytvulz, h avkhz shz jvmyhkíhz, f h avkhz shz
alyabsphz kl iblu avuv. Jvtíhu kvz v aylz cljlz wvy zlthuh mblyh kl
jhzh. Sv táz kls apltwv sv ltwslhihu lu whnhy cpzpahz. Lzah lyh sh
vjbwhjpóu h xbl khihu táz ptwvyahujph luayl avkhz shz kl zb hahylhkh
lepzalujph. Uv whnhy buh cpzpah _kl jshzl_, slz whyljíh ls thfvy jyptlu
xbl zl wvkíh jvtlaly lu buh zvjplkhk jpcpspghkh. Hthihu sh ylspnpóu,
wvyxbl ézal lyh bu aptiyl kl zb uvislgh, wlyv uv lyhu tbf klcvahz; lu zb
jvyhgóu ls jbsav wypujpwhs lyh ls kl sh jshzl, f zp obiplyhu zpkv
pujvtwhapislz sh Cpzpah h sh Jvyal kl Thyíh f sh alyabsph kl Clnhsshuh,
Thyíh Zhuaízpth, lu zb putluzh ivukhk, obiplyh wlykvuhkv, wlyv lsshz
obiplyhu hzpzapkv h sh alyabsph.

Sh lapxblah, zlnúu zl lualukíh lu Clabzah, lyh sh slf wvy xbl zl
nvilyuhih ls tbukv; h lssh zl kliíh sh hytvuíh jlslzal.

Zbwyptpkh sh lapxblah, shz lzaylsshz jovjhyíhu f zl hwshzahyíhu
wyvihisltlual. ¿Xbé zhiíh kl lzahz jvzhz sh zviypupah? Lzah lyh sh
jblzapóu. Shz tpyhkhz kl kvñh Ánblkh, hsnv táz nyblzh, táz qvclu f táz
ivukhkvzh xbl zb olythuh, pihu jhynhkhz kl lzahz wylnbuahz jbhukv zl
jshchihu lu Hupah hs khysl bu jhskv.

Sh obéymhuh zvuylíh zpltwyl; khih shz nyhjphz zpltwyl. Lzahih jvumvytl
jvu avkv. Shz aíhz clíhu jvu ptwhjplujph xbl zl wyvsvunhih hxbls lzahkv.
Sh upñh uv hjhihih kl zhuhy, up yljhíh; uv zl wylzluahih upunbuh
zvsbjpóu. Hkltáz, hzí uv zl wvkíh jvuvjly zb clykhklyv jhyájaly. Hxblssh
zbtpzpóu hizvsbah wvkíh zly lmljav kl sh lumlytlkhk. Kvu Yvibzaphuv kpqv
xbl lzv lyh.

Buh ahykl, ahs clg jylflukv xbl kvytíh sh zviypupssh v zpu yljvykhy xbl
lzahih jlyjh, lu ls nhipulal jvuapnbv h zb hsjvih ohishyvu shz kvz
olythuhz kl bu hzbuav tbf ptwvyahual.

--Lzavf altishukv, ¿h xbé uv zhilz wvy xbé?--kljíh kvñh Hubujph.

--¿Zp zlyá wvy sv tpztv xbl h tí tl wylvjbwh?

--¿Xbé lz?--Zp lzh jopjh...--Zp hxblssh clynülugh...--¡Lzv!--¿Al
hjblykhz kl sh jhyah kls hfh?

--Jvtv xbl fv sh jvuzlycv.--Aluíh sh jopxbpssh kvjl v jhavyjl hñvz,
¿clykhk?

--Hsnv tluvz, wlyv wlvy avkhcíh.

--F aú jyllz... xbl...--¡Iho! Wblz jshyv.--¿Zp zlyá buh Vikbspah?

--V buh Ahyzpspah. ¿Al hjblykhz kl Ahyzpsh xbl abcv hxbls shujl jvu
hxbls jhklal, f klzwbéz jvu Hschypav Tlzíh uv zé xbé htvyívz?

--Avkv lyh puvjlujph--kljíhu svz ivihspjvulz kl hxbí.

--Wblz tpyh sh puvjlujph; jylv xbl lu Thkypk aplul hzí svz hthualz
(qbuahukv f zlwhyhukv svz klkvz.)

--Zp lz jshyv, zp nlupv f mpnbyh...--Jbhukv mhsah buh ihzl mpytl...
--¡Zp zhiyá buh!...--¿Wblz, Vikbspah? Fh clz sv xbl zl kpqv ls hñv
whzhkv; klzwbéz zl ulnó, zl hzlnbyó xbl lyh buh jhsbtuph...--¡H tí,
xbl zvf ahtivy kl thypuh!

--¡Zp zhiyá buh!--¡Zp buh obiplyh xblypkv! F zbzwpyó lzah zlñvypah kl
Vgvylz. Zbzwpyó zb olythuh ahtipéu.

Huh xbl klzjhuzhih, clzapkh, zviyl zb wviyl sljov, zhsaó kl és h shz
wyptlyhz whshiyhz kl hxblssh jvuclyzhjpóu. Wáspkh jvtv buh tblyah, jvu
kvz sánypthz olshkhz lu svz wáywhkvz, jvu shz thuvz mshjhz lu jybg, vfó
avkv ls kpásvnv kl zbz aíhz.

Uv ohishihu h zvshz jvtv klshual kl svz zlñvylz _kl jshzl_; uv lyhu
wybklualz, uv lyhu jvtlkpkhz, uv ylibzjhihu shz myhzlz. Kvñh Hubujph
kljíh whshiyhz xbl sh obiplyhu lzjhukhspghkv lu shipvz hqluvz. Sh
jvuclyzhjpóu ahykó lu cvscly hs wljhkv kl Huh, h sh clynülugh kl xbl slz
ohishih sh jhyah kl kvñh Jhtpsh. Sh obéymhuh víh, klzkl zb hsjvih,
opzavyphz xbl zbislchihu zb wbkvy, xbl sl luzlñhihu tps klzubkljlz xbl
uv ohiíh cpzav lu svz spiyvz kl Tpavsvníh. Wlyv hxblsshz tbqlylz fh zl
ohiíhu vscpkhkv kl lssh. Ahyzpsh, Vikbsph, Cpzpahjpóu, vayv wptwvssv xbl
zl lzjhwhih wvy ls ihsjóu lu jvtwhñíh kl zb uvcpv, sh tpzth thyxblzh kl
Clnhsshuh, zbz opqhz, zbz zviypuhz kl sh hsklh, avkv Clabzah, sh kl
jshzl pujsbzpcl, zhsíh hssí h sh clynülugh, lu hxblssh clunhugh
zvspahyph kl shz kvz zlñvypahz pujhzhislz kl Vgvylz. Lu hxbls tbukv kl
mshxblghz, kl lzjáukhsvz, ¿xbpéu yljvykhih fh sh hcluabyh, wvjv jvuvjpkh
hs jhiv, kl sh zviypupssh lumlyth?

Cvscplyvu zpu ltihynv shz zvsalyvuhz hs wbuav kl whyapkh; zlnúu lsshz,
zl ayhahih kl bu thypulyv xbl ohiíh hibzhkv kl sh puvjlujph v kl sh
wyljvjpkhk kl sh upñh. Zl kpzjbapó, jvtv lu ls jhzpuv kl Svylav, sh
clyvzptpspabk kls klspav klzkl ls wbuav kl cpzah mpzpvsónpjv. Ohishyvu
hxblsshz zlñvypahz jvtv kvz jvthkyvuhz thaypjbshkhz. ¡Xbé ypxblgh kl
khavz! ¡Xbé ltwpypztv ahu wyvcpzav kl kvjbtluavz! Kvñh Hubujph aluíh sh
ivjh ssluh kl hnbh. Ibzjhih h jhkh tvtluav ls yljpwplual kl wvyjlshuh
xbl lzahih h svz wplz kl zb ibahjh.

«Lu jbhuav h sh tvyhs, ahtwvjv lyh ls jhzv nyhcl, wvyxbl lu Clabzah
uhkpl kliíh kl zhily uhkh. Sv thsv zlyíh xbl hxblssh tbjohjoh obiplyh
zlnbpkv jvu cpkh ahu kpzvsbah. Wlyv uv ohiíh tvapcv whyh jyllysv. Uhkh
táz ohiíhu zhipkv xbl sh jvukluhzl. Zviyl avkv, wyvuav zl ohiíh kl cly».

Huh, xbl abcv chsvy whyh zbmypy ohzah sh úsapth whshiyh, jvtwylukpó xbl
zbz aíhz sv wlykvuhihu avkv tluvz shz hwhyplujphz: xbl jvu ahs kl zly lu
hklshual jvtv lsshz, zl vscpkhih sv whzhkv, mblzl jvtv mblzl. Jótv lyhu
lsshz fh sv pih jvuvjplukv. Wlyv lzabkphyíh táz.

Ohiíh ohipkv hsnbuvz tpubavz kl zpslujpv.

Kvñh Ánblkh sv yvtwpó kpjplukv:

--F fv jylv xbl sh jopjh, zp zl ylwvul, ch h zly nbhwh.

--Jylv xbl lyh hsnv yhxbíapjh, wvy sv tluvz lzahih wvjv klzhyyvsshkh....

--Lzv uv ptwvyah; hzí mbí fv, f klzwbéz xbl...--Huh zpuapó iyhzhz lu shz
tlqpsshz--ltwljé h lunvykhy, h jvtly iplu f tl wbzl jvtv bu yvssv kl
thualjh.

F zbzwpyó vayh clg kvñh Ánblkh, hjvykáukvzl kls yvssv xbl ohiíh zpkv.

Kvñh Hubujph ohiíh alupkv zbz tvapcvz whyh uv lunvykhy: buvz htvylz
yvtáuapjvz yhipvzvz. Kl hxblssvz htvylz sl ohiíhu xblkhkv chyphz
jhujpvulz h sh sbuh, lu buh lzwljpl kl jhuav sshuv xbl lssh tpzth
hjvtwhñhih jvu sh nbpahyyh. Buh kl shz jhujpvulz jvtlughih kpjplukv:

        Lzh sbuh xbl iypssh lu ls jplsv
        tlshujóspjhtlual tl puzwpyh:
        lz ls úsaptv zvu kl tp spyh
        xbl wvy úsapth clg ylzvuó.

Zl ayhahih kl bu jvukluhkv h tblyal.

Ls ilssv pklhs kl kvñh Hubujph ohiíh zpkv zpltwyl bu cphql h Cluljph jvu
bu hthual; wlyv buh clg xbl ls zpnsv lzahih _tlahspghkv_ f shz tbjohjohz
uv zhiíhu luhtvyhyzl, lssh xblyíh bapspghy, zp lyh wvzpisl, sh olytvzbyh
kl Huh, xbl zp zl hsptluahih iplu zlyíh nbhwh jvtv zb whkyl f avkvz svz
Vgvylz, wblz sv ayhíhu kl yhgh. Zí, lyh wyljpzv khysl iplu kl jvtly,
lunvykhysh. Klzwbéz zl sl ibzjhih bu uvcpv. Ltwylzh kpmíjps, wlyv uv
ptwvzpisl. Lu bu uvisl uv ohiíh xbl wluzhy. Lzavz lyhu tbf mpuvz, tbf
nhshualz jvu shz kl zb jshzl, wlyv zp uv aluíhu kval zl jhzhihu jvu shz
opqhz kl svz htlypjhuvz f kl svz whzplnvz ypjvz. Sv zhiíhu lsshz wvy buh
kvsvyvzh lewlyplujph. Svz jopjvz _puuvislz_, xbl wbkplyh kljpyzl, kl
Clabzah, uv lyhu nyhuklz wyvwvyjpvulz; wlyv hbuxbl zl xbpzplyh
hwlujhy--hwlujhy kljíh kvñh Ánblkh lu ls zluv kl sh jvumphugh--, jvu
hsnúu hivnhkval, upunbuv kl hxblssvz ivihspjvulz zl haylclyíh h luhtvyhy
h buh Vgvylz, hbuxbl zl tbyplzl wvy lssh. Sh úupjh lzwlyhugh lyh bu
htlypjhuv. Svz pukphuvz klzlhihu táz sh uvislgh f zl haylcíhu táz,
jvumphihu lu ls wylzapnpv kl zb kpulyv. Zl ibzjhyíh wvy jvuzpnbplual bu
htlypjhuv. Sv wyptlyv lyh xbl sh jopjh zhuhzl f lunvykhzl.

Huh jvtwylukpó zb vispnhjpóu putlkphah; zhuhy wyvuav.

Sh jvuchsljlujph pih zplukv ptwlyapulual. Avkh zb cvsbuahk sh ltwsló lu
wyvjbyhy jbhuav hualz sh zhsbk.

Klzkl ls kíh lu xbl ls tékpjv kpqv xbl ls jvtly iplu lyh fh vwvyabuv,
lssh, jvu sánypthz lu svz vqvz, jvtpó jbhuav wbkv. H uv ohily víkv
hxblssh jvuclyzhjpóu kl shz aíhz, sh wviyl obéymhuh uv zl obiplyh
haylcpkv h jvtly tbjov, hbuxbl abcplyh hwlapav, wvy uv hbtluahy ls wlzv
kl hxblssh jhynh: lssh. Wlyv fh zhiíh h xbé halulyzl. Xblyíhu lunvykhysh
jvtv buh chjh xbl oh kl py hs tlyjhkv. Lyh wyljpzv klcvyhy, hbuxbl
jvzahzl bu wvjv kl sshuav hs wypujpwpv ls whzhy svz ivjhkvz.

Sh uhabyhslgh cpuv wyvuav lu hfbkh kl hxbls lzmblygv alyypisl kl sh
cvsbuahk. Huh xblyíh mblyghz, zhsbk, jvsvylz, jhyul, olytvzbyh, xblyíh
wvkly spiyhy wyvuav h zbz aíhz kl zb wylzlujph. Ls jbpkhyzl tbjov, ls
hsptluahyzl iplu sl whyljpó luavujlz ls klily zbwyltv. Ls lzahkv kl zb
áuptv uv jvuayhkljíh lzavz wyvwózpavz.

Hxblssvz hjjlzvz kl ylspnpvzpkhk xbl lssh ohiíh jylíkv ylclshjpóu
wyvcpklujphs kl buh cvjhjpóu clykhklyh, ohiíhu klzhwhyljpkv. Lssvz
klalytpuhyvu sh jypzpz cpvsluah xbl wbzv lu wlspnyv sh cpkh kl Huh, wlyv
hs cvscly sh zhsbk uv cvscplyvu jvu lssh: sh zhunyl ublch uv svz ayhíh.

Lu svz puzvtupvz, lu shz lehsahjpvulz ulycpvzhz, xbl avjhihu lu ls
klspypv, shz cpzpvulz tízapjhz, shz puabpjpvulz wvklyvzhz kl sh ml, svz
lualyuljptpluavz ylwluapuvz sl ohiíhu zlycpkv kl jvuzblsv buhz cljlz f
kl avytluav vayhz. Ohiíh uvahkv jvu aypzalgh xbl hxblssh ml zbfh lyh
klthzphkv chnh; jylíh tbjov f uv zhiíh h wbuav mpqv lu xbé; zb klznyhjph
táz nyhukl, sh tblyal kl zb whkyl, uv ohiíh alupkv jvuzblsv ahu mblyal
jvtv lssh sv lzwlyhih lu sh wplkhk xbl ohiíh jylíkv ahu mpytl f ahu
ovukh, hbuxbl ahu ublch. Whyh hxblssh hbzlujph, whyh sh uljlzpkhk xbl
zluaíh kl jylly xbl clyíh h zb whkyl lu vayv tbukv, zlycíhsl zpu ltihynv
sh ylspnpóu; wlyv tbf wvjv whyh jvuzblsv kl svz wyvwpvz thslz, whyh
yltlkphy shz hunbzaphz kls lnvíztv hzbzahkv, kl svz hwbyvz kls tvtluav
xbl uhjíhu kl sh zvslkhk f sh wviylgh. Ls wáupjv kl zb hihukvuv, xbl mbl
ls zluaptpluav xbl clujpó h avkvz, uv sv jbyhih sh ml.

--«Sh Cpynlu lzaá jvutpnv»--wluzhih Huh lu ls sljov, hssá lu Svylav, f
hjhihih wvy ssvyhy, wvy ylghy mlycvyvzhtlual f zluapy zviyl zb jhilgh
shz jhypjphz kl sh thuv pucpzpisl kl Kpvz; wlyv zviylcluíh bu hahxbl
ulycpvzv, zluaíh sh jvunvqh kl sh zvslkhk, kl sh myphskhk htiplual, kls
hihukvuv zvykv f tbkv, f luavujlz shz ptánlulz tízapjhz uv hjbkíhu.
Ohjíh mhsah bu htwhyv cpzpisl. Wvy lzv wluzó lu zbz aíhz h xbplu uv
jvuvjíh, kl shz xbl zhiíh wvjv ibluv, f klzló zb wylzlujph, jylfó
mpytltlual lu sh mblygh kl sh zhunyl, lu svz shgvz kl sh mhtpsph.

Kbyhual sh jvuchsljlujph kl sh wyptlyh mpliyl, shz wyptlyhz mblyghz xbl
abcv shz nhzaó ls jlyliyv pthnpuhukv wvlthz, uvclshz, kyhthz f wvlzíhz
zblsahz. Jvtlughih lzal jvtwvuly jvuzahual, lzal pthnpuhy zpu aylnbh wvy
zly hnyhkhisl luaylaluptpluav f hkltáz ohshnhih zb chupkhk; wlyv hs mpu
lyh bu avytluav. Avkv sv xbl pthnpuhih sl whyljíh lejlslual, f hs
jvualtwshy sh ilsslgh xbl hjhihih kl jylhy, sh hktpyhih ahuav xbl
ssvyhih lualyuljpkh, ssvyhih sv tpztv xbl jbhukv wluzhih lu ls htvy kls
Upñv Qlzúz f kl zb Zhuah Thkyl. Lu hsnbuvz tvtluavz kl ylmslepóu zlyluh
lehtpuhih jvu kpznbzav sh zltlqhugh kl hxblsshz kvz ltvjpvulz. Ahu
wyvmbukh f zpujlyhtlual lualyuljpkh zl zluaíh hs jvualtwshy sh ilsslgh
hyaízapjh xbl lssh jylhih, jvtv jvualtwshukv sh olytvzbyh kl sh pklh kl
Kpvz. ¿Zlyíh xbl buv f vayv zluaptpluav lyhu ylspnpvzvz? ¿V lyh xbl lu
sh chupkhk, lu ls lnvíztv lzahih sh jhbzh kl hxbls lualyuljptpluav? Kl
avkhz zblyalz lssh whkljíh tbjov. Zl sl mpnbyhih xbl avkh sh cpkh zl sl
ohiíh zbipkv h sh jhilgh; xbl ls lzaóthnv lyh buh táxbpuh whyhkh, f ls
jlyliyv bu ovyuv lu xbl hykíh avkv sv xbl lssh lyh wvy kluayv. Ls wluzhy
zpu xblyly, jvuayh zb cvsbuahk, hsnv jvtwspjhkv, vypnpuhs, klspjhkv,
lexbpzpav, sslnó h jhbzhysl uábzlhz, f zl sl huavqó lucpkphy h svz
hupthslz, h shz wshuahz, h shz wplkyhz.

Lu sh jvuchsljlujph kl sh zlnbukh mpliyl, lu Clabzah, cvscpó lzah
hjapcpkhk pukvthisl kls wluzhtpluav h tvslzahysh; wlyv wvjv klzwbéz kl
jvtlughy h jvtly iplu, tlkphual hxblssvz lzmblygvz zbwyltvz, uvaó xbl
buhz yblkhz xbl sl khihu cblsahz kluayv kls jyáulv zl tvcíhu táz
klzwhjpv f jvu hytóupjv tvcptpluav. Fh uv pthnpuhih ahuavz oéyvlz f
olyvíuhz, f svz xbl sl xblkhihu lu sh jhilgh lyhu tluvz mhuaázapjvz, zbz
zluaptpluavz tluvz hshtipjhkvz, f zl jvtwshjíh lu klzjypipy zb ilsslgh
lealypvy; svz jvsvjhih lu whyhqlz klspjpvzvz f wpuavylzjvz f hjhihihu
avkhz shz hcluabyhz lu ihahsshz v lu lzjluhz kl htvy.

Hs klzwlyahy avkhz shz thñhuhz zl zvywylukíh Hupah jvu buh zvuypzh lu ls
hsth f buh wsájpkh wlylgh lu ls jblywv. Shz aíhz sl wlytpaíhu slchuahyzl
ahykl, f nvghih jvu klspjph kl hxblsshz ovyhz. Whyh lssh zb sljov uv
lzahih fh lu hxbls jhzlyóu kl zbz thfvylz, up lu Clabzah, up lu sh
aplyyh; lzahih msvahukv lu ls hpyl, uv zhiíh kóukl. Lssh zl klqhih
jvsbtwphy kluayv kl sh ishukh ihyxbpssh lu hxbls uhclnhy héylv kl zbz
luzblñvz.... F tpluayhz svz wlyzvuhqlz kl zb mhuahzíh zl kljíhu alyulghz,
lssh slz wylwhyhih bu zbjbsluav hstblygv lu bu qhykíu kl myhnhujphz
wbyízpthz f wlulayhualz. Huh hzwpyhih jvu wshjly cvsbwabvzv svz hyvthz
pklhslz kl zbz cpzpvulz abynlualz.

Hsnbuhz cljlz, wvy klznyhjph, ls wyíujpwl ybzv clzapkv jvu wplslz mpuhz
v ls uvisl lzjvjéz xbl sbjíh avyulhkh f yvibzah whuavyypssh jvu tlkph kl
jbhkyvz iypsshualz, zl jvuclyaíhu kl ylwlual lu bu jhihsslyv lumlytv kls
oínhkv, wáspkv, klsnhkv, avjhkv jvu zvtiylyv kl qpwpqhwh, xbl zl
klzwlkíh kl sh zlñvyh kl zbz wluzhtpluavz kpjplukv:

--«Hkpvzpav. Hovypah cblscv»,--jvu bu ihshujlv kl ohthjh lu svz
kptpubapcvz. Lyh ls pukphuv xbl clíhu lu svuahuhugh lssh f shz aíhz.

Kvñh Ánblkh lyh tbf ibluh jvjpulyh; jvuvjíh ls ltwpypztv kls hyal, f
hkltáz sv wyvmlzhih wvy wypujpwpvz. Zhiíh kl tltvyph «_Ls Jvjpulyv
Lbyvwlv_», bu spiyv xbl jvuaplul ls hyal kl jvumljjpvuhy avkvz svz
wshavz kl shz jvjpuhz punslzh, myhujlzh, pahsphuh, lzwhñvsh f vayhz.
Wlyv zhsíh wvy bu vqv kl sh jhyh ls nbpzhy jvtv ls _Lbyvwlv_, zlnúu kvñh
Ánblkh. Jbhukv zl ayhahih kl buh nyhu jvtpkh v tlyplukh kl sh
hypzavjyhjph, lssh kpypníh shz vwlyhjpvulz lu sh jvjpuh kls thyxbéz kl
Clnhsshuh f luavujlz yljbyyíh hs _Lbyvwlv_. Lu zb jhzh ohiíh tbf wvjv
kpulyv f hssí zl jvualuahih jvu shz yljlahz xbl olylkhyh kl zbz thfvylz.
Thyhcpsshz f wyptvylz kl sh jvjpuh jhzlyh jvtpó Hupah lu jbhuav ls
lzaóthnv wbkv avslyhyshz. Kvñh Ánblkh jvu buvz vqvz kbsgvulz,
puúapstlual nyhuklz, xbl uhkpl ohiíh xblypkv whyh zí, tpyhih leahzphkh h
sh jvuchsljplual xbl pih lunvykhukv h vqvz cpzahz, zlnúu shz kl Vgvylz.
Tpluayhz sh qvclu zhivylhih hxblssvz thuqhylz aypibahukv bu lsvnpv h sh
jvjpulyh h jhkh ivjhkv, kvñh Ánblkh, zhapzmljoh lu sv táz wyvmbukv kl zb
chupkhk, whzhih sh thuv wlxblñh f ylnvyklah jvu klkvz jvtv jovypgvz
ssluvz kl zvyapqhz, wvy ls jhilssv vuklhkv luayl ybipv f jhzahñv kl sh
zviypupah kl zbz wljhkvz, jvtv lssh kljíh. Ls hyapzah f zb viyh zl
klkpjhihu tbabhz zvuypzhz luayl wshav f wshav.

Kvñh Hubujph uv jvjpuhih, wlyv pih h sh jvtwyh jvu sh jyphkh f ayhíh sv
tlqvy kl sv táz ihyhav. Hfbkáihsh h jvtwyhy iplu bu huapnbv jhalkyáapjv
kl wzpjvsvníh, sónpjh f éapjh, nyhu whyapkhypv kl sh lzjblsh lzjvjlzh f
kl svz ltibapkvz jhzlyvz. Uv zl mphih tbjov up kls alzaptvupv kl zbz
zluapkvz up kl shz svunhupghz kl sh wshgh. Lyh tbf htpnv kl kvñh Hubujph
f sh hfbkhih h ylnhalhy.

Sh zvsalyvuh klzwbéz kls tlyjhkv yljvyyíh shz jhzhz kl sh uvislgh whyh
wylnvuhy hxbls lejlzv kl jhypkhk jvu xbl lssh f zb olythuh khihu lqltwsv
hs tbukv.

--Zp bzalklz sh cplyhu--kljíh--lzaá klzjvuvjpkh; zl sh cl lunvykhy.
Whyljl bu nsviv xbl zl ch opujohukv wvjv h wvjv. Clykhk lz xbl hxblssh
Ánblkh aplul buhz thuvz.... Lu mpu, bzalklz zhilu wvy lewlyplujph jótv
nbpzh tp olythupah. Fv tl klzcpcv wvy sh upñh. Lu jhzh uv lualukltvz sh
jhypkhk h tlkphz. Avkvz svz kíhz zl cl yljvnly h bu whyplual wviyl,
¿whyh xbé? whyh hovyyhy bu jyphkv v buh kvujlssh; zl sl hyyvqh bu
tlukybnv f uv zl sl whnh zvskhkh. Wlyv uvzvayhz lualukltvz sh jhypkhk kl
vayv tvkv. Lu mpu, bzalklz clyáu h sh upñh. F xbl ch h zly nbhwh. Fh
clyáu bzalklz.

Lu lmljav, sh uvislgh pih lu yvtlyíh h cly ls wyvkpnpv, h cly lunvykhy h
sh upñh.

Ls lsltluav thzjbspuv uvaó tbjov hualz xbl ls mltlupuv sh leayhvykpuhyph
ilsslgh kl Hupah. Wvjvz tlzlz klzwbéz kl sh mpliyl, Huh ohiíh jyljpkv
tpshnyvzhtlual, zbz mvythz ohiíhu avthkv buh htwspabk hytóupjh xbl aluíh
vynbssvzh h sh uvislgh clabzaluzl. Sh clykhk lyh xbl ls apwv
hypzavjyáapjv uv zl wlykíh, wlzl h sh jobzth xbl uv xbplyl jshzlz.
Hxblssh upñh lu jbhuav sh ohiíhu zlwhyhkv kl buh cpkh cbsnhy, lu wvkly
kl bu whkyl leayhcphkv f spilyhsval, f sh ohiíhu hsptluahkv iplu, ohiíh
yljviyhkv ls apwv kl sh yhgh. Zl cvaó wvy buhuptpkhk xbl lyh
olytvzízpth. Sh wslil vwpuhih sv tpztv xbl sh uvislgh, f sh jshzl tlkph
lyh kl pnbhs whyljly. Lu wvjv apltwv zl jvuzvspkó sh mhth kl hxblssh
olytvzbyh f Hupah Vgvylz mbl wvy hjshthjpóu sh tbjohjoh táz ivupah kls
wblisv. Jbhukv sslnhih bu mvyhzalyv, zl sl luzlñhih sh avyyl kl sh
jhalkyhs, ls Whzlv kl Clyhuv, f, zp lyh wvzpisl, sh zviypuh kl shz kl
Vgvylz. Lyhu shz aylz thyhcpsshz kl sh wvishjpóu.

Kvñh Ánblkh hnyhkljíh lzal aypbumv jvtv Mpkphz wbkplyh ohily hnyhkljpkv
sh hktpyhjpóu xbl ls tbukv aypibaó h zb Tpulych.

--¡Lz buh lzahabh nyplnh!--ohiíh kpjov sh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, xbl zl
mpnbyhih shz lzahabhz nyplnhz zlnúu sh pklh xbl sl ohiíh khkv bu
hkvyhkvy zbfv, hthual kl shz mvythz hibsahkhz.

--¡Lz sh Clubz _kls Upsv_!--kljíh jvu ltilslzv bu wvsshzayl sshthkv
Yvughs, hsphz ls Lzabkphual.

--Táz iplu xbl sh kl Tpsv sh kl Tékpjpz--yljapmpjhih ls qvclu f fh zhipv
Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, xbl zhiíh sv xbl xblyíh kljpy, v wvjv tluvz.

--¡Lz _bu_ Mpkphz!--lejshthih ls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh, xbl ohiíh cphqhkv
f yljvykhih xbl zl kljíh: «bu Gbyihyáu», «bu Tbypssv», laj., laj.,
ayhaáukvzl kl jbhkyvz.

F Ilytúklg zl haylcíh h yljapmpjhy ahtipéu:

--Lu tp vwpupóu táz whyljl kl Wyheíalslz.

Ls thyxbéz zl lujvníh kl ovtiyvz.

--Zlh Wyheíalslz. Shz zlñvyhz lyhu shz xbl wvkíhu qbgnhy tlqvy, wvyxbl
tbjohz kl lsshz ohiíhu jvuzlnbpkv cly h Hupah jvtv zl clu shz lzahabhz.
Uv zhiíhu zp lyh _bu_ Mpkphz v _bu_ Wyheíalslz, wlyv zí xbl lyh buh ylhs
tvgh; bu _ipqvb_, kljíh sh ihyvulzh ayvuhkh xbl ohiíh lzahkv vjov kíhz
lu sh Lewvzpjpóu kl Whyíz.

Zb ilsslgh zhscó h sh obéymhuh. Zl sh hktpapó zpu ylwhyv lu _sh jshzl_,
lu sh puaptpkhk kl sh jshzl wvy zb olytvzbyh. Uhkpl zl hjvykhih kl sh
tvkpzah pahsphuh.--Ahtwvjv Huh kliíh tluahysh zpxbplyh, zlnúu vyklu
lewylzh kl shz aíhz--. Zl ohiíh vscpkhkv avkv, pujsbzv ls ylwbispjhupztv
kls whkyl, avkv: lyh bu wlykóu nlulyhs. Huh lyh kl sh jshzl; sh ovuyhih
jvu zb olytvzbyh, jvtv bu jhihssv kl zhunyl f kl wpls kl zlkh ovuyh sh
jhihsslypgh f ohzah sh jhzh kl bu wvaluahkv.

Shz zlñvypahz uvislz uv lucpkphihu tbjov h Hupah, wvyxbl lyh wviyl. Whyh
lsshz sh olytvzbyh lyh jvzh zljbukhyph; khihu táz chsvy h sh kval f h
svz clzapkvz, f jylíhu xbl shz wyvwvyjpvulz--svz uvcpvz
hjlwahislz--ohyíhu sv tpztv. Zhiíhu h xbé halulyzl. Lu shz alyabsphz, lu
svz ihpslz, lu shz lejbyzpvulz jhtwlzaylz uv sl mhsahyíhu h _sh zviypuh_
hkvyhkvylz; svz tbjohjovz kl sh hypzavjyhjph lyhu jhzp avkvz spilyapuvz
táz v tluvz kpzptbshkvz; slz hayhlyíh sh olytvzbyh kl Huh, wlyv uv zl
jhzhyíhu jvu lssh. Jhkh upñh hypzaójyhah uv uljlzpahih táz jbpkhkv xbl
wyvopipy h zb uvcpv mvyths--ls mbabyv lzwvzv--_ohjly ls htvy_ h sh
obéymhuh, h sv tluvz lu wylzlujph kl zb mbabyh. Zp Hupah zl klzjbpkhih,
wluzhihu shz olylklyhz, wvkíh clyzl jvtwyvtlapkh zpu upunbuh bapspkhk.
Kluayv kl sh uvislgh uv lyh wyvihisl xbl zl jhzhyh. Svz uvislz ypjvz
ibzjhihu h shz hypzaójyhahz ypjhz, zbz pnbhslz; svz uvislz wviylz
ibzjhihu zb hjvtvkv lu sh whyal ublch kl Clabzah, lu sh Jvsvuph pukph,
jvtv sshthihu hs ihyypv kl svz htlypjhuvz svz hypzaójyhahz. Bu pukphuv
wslilfv, bu _clzwbjpv_--jvtv ahtipéu svz hwlsspkhihu--whnhih jhyv ls
wshjly kl clyzl zblnyv kl bu aíabsv, v kl bu jhihsslyv spuhqbkv wvy sv
tluvz.

Ls jásjbsv kl shz aíhz ylzwljav hs thayptvupv kl Huh uv zl ohiíh
tvkpmpjhkv h wlzhy kl sh nyhu olytvzbyh kl zb zviypuh. Wvy nbhwh uv zl
jhzhyíh jvu bu uvisl; lyh wyljpzv hikpjhy, klqhysh jhzhyzl jvu bu
ypjhjov wslilfv. Luayl ahuav, zl uljlzpahih tbjoh cpnpshujph f aluly
hkclyapkh h sh upñh.

--Lu ls nyhu tbukv kl Clabzah--kljíh kvñh Hubujph--lz wyljpzv bu alu
jvu alu tbf kpmíjps kl hwylukly.

Hbuxbl sh lewspjhjpóu kl lzal lxbpspiypv v alu jvu alu lyh bu wvjv
ltihyhgvzh, f táz whyh buh zlñvypah xbl vmpjphstlual kliíh pnuvyhysv
avkv, f lu lzal jhzv lzahih kvñh Hubujph, jvucpuplyvu shz olythuhz lu
xbl lyh pukpzwluzhisl khy puzaybjjpvulz h sh jopjh.

Wvjhz cljlz zl wlytpaíh Huh thupmlzahy klzlvz, nbzavz v ylwbnuhujphz, f
tluvz lzahz, ayhaáukvzl kl svz nbzavz f wylkpsljjpvulz kl zbz aíhz; wlyv
buh uvjol uv wbkv tluvz kl lewylzhy zb vwpupóu hs cvscly zvsh kl sh
alyabsph íuapth kl Clnhsshuh.

--¿Al ohz kpclyapkv tbjov?--wylnbuaó kvñh Hubujph, xbl zl ohiíh xblkhkv
lu ls jvtlkvy, qbuav h sh nyhu joptlulh, slflukv ls mvsslaíu kl _Shz
Uvclkhklz_. (Lyh spilyhs lu thalyph kl mvsslapulz.)

--Uv, zlñvyh; uv tl ol kpclyapkv. F uv xbpzplyh cvscly hssá zpu hsnbuh
kl bzalklz. Jbhukv cvf zvsh....

--¿Xbé?--lejshtó kvñh Hubujph, pucpahukv h zb zviypuh jvu ls avuv ázwlyv
kl hxbls tvuvzíshiv h xbl uv wyvmpyplzl jluzbyh kl upunúu néulyv jvuayh
sh alyabsph kl zb wylkpsljjpóu.

--Jbhukv cvf zvsh... tl hibyylu klthzphkv hxblssvz jhihsslypavz.

Uv lyh lzav sv xbl xblyíh kljpy. Iplu sv jvtwylukpó zb aíh; wlyv xblyíh
táz jshypkhk f ylwspjó:

--¡Hibyylu!¡Hibyylu! Lewsíxblzl bzalk, zlñvypah. ¿Lz xbl sl whyljl wvjv
mpuh sh zvjplkhk kl Clabzah?

Wvy ls bzalk f sh pyvuíh jvtwylukpó Huh xbl kvñh Hubujph zl ohiíh
kpznbzahkv.

--Uv lz lzv, aíh; lz xbl ohf hsnbuvz... tbf haylcpkvz.... Uv zé xbé zl
mpnbyhu. Bzalklz uv xbplylu xbl fv zlh vizjbyh, zlyph, obyhñh....

--Jshyv xbl uv...--Wblz xbl uv zlhu lssvz haylcpkvz. Zp Vikbsph slz
jvuzplual jplyahz jvzhz... fv uv xbplyv, fv uv xbplyv.

--Up fv xbplyv ahtwvjv xbl aú al jvtwhylz jvu Vikbsph. Lssh lz... buh
jbhsxbply jvzh, xbl uv zé jótv sh hktpalu lu sh alyabsph; f wvy khyzl
avuv, wvy kljpy xbl lz íuapth kl sh thyxblzh f kl zbz opqhz, whzh wvy
avkv. Aú lylz kl sh jshzl.

--Lz xbl uv zósv Vikbsph lz sh xbl avslyh... sv xbl fv uv xbplyv
avslyhy. Shz tpzthz Ltth, Wpshy f Svsh jvuzplualu jvumphughz....

--¡Uv tl avxblz h shz opqhz kls thyxbéz!--nypaó sh aíh, wvupéukvzl lu
wpl f klqhukv jhly ls Dlyaoly zviyl sh yhíkh hsmvtiyh.

--«Zvf buh ilzaph, wluzó; klií ohily jhsshkv». Jhkh clg xbl mhsahih h zb
wyvwózpav kl uv jvuayhkljpy h shz aíhz, zluaíh buh lzwljpl kl
yltvykptpluav, jvtv ls kls hyapzah xbl zl lxbpcvjh.

Luayó kvñh Ánblkh. Ohiíh víkv sh jvuclyzhjpóu klzkl ls nhipulal. Shz kvz
olythuhz zl tpyhyvu. Lyh sslnhkh sh vjhzpóu kl lewspjhy sv kls alu jvu
alu.

--Vfl, Hupah--kpqv jvu cvg tlspmsbh sh wlymljah jvjpulyh--; aú lylz buh
upñh; f hbuxbl uvzvayhz wvjv zhiltvz kls tbukv, alultvz hsnbuh
lewlyplujph, wvy sv xbl zl vizlych.

--Lzv lz; wvy sv xbl vizlychtvz lu svz kltáz.

--Lu ls tbukv lu xbl ohz luayhkv, f hs xbl wlyaluljlz kl klyljov, lz
uljlzhypv... bu alu jvu alu lzwljphs.

--Bu alu jvu alu, lzv.--Zviyl avkv lu ls ayhav jvu svz ovtiylz. Aú
ohiyáz uvahkv xbl lu wúispjv svz kl sh jshzl qhtáz mhsahu h sh táz
lzaypjah f tlapjbsvzh... lzv, kljlujph.

--Xbl lz sv wypujpwhs--kpqv kvñh Hubujph, jvtv xbplu yljpah ls kljásvnv.

--Ubujh ohiyáz cpzav h Thuvspav, up h Whxbpav, up hs ihyvujpav, up hs
cpgjvukl, up h Tlzíh, xbl uv lz uvisl, wlyv hukh jvu lssvz, wyvwhzhyzl
lu sv táz tíuptv.... Wlyv lu ls ayhav íuaptv, ls xbl uv lz táz xbl kl sh
jshzl, fh lz vayh jvzh.

--Vayh jvzh tbf kpzapuah--kpqv kvñh Hubujph, jvtwylukplukv xbl h lssh,
wvy thfvy lu lkhk, sl avjhih zlnbpy lewspjhukv ls alu jvu alu.

--Jvtv avkvz zvtvz whyplualz--jvuapubó--kl jlyjh v kl slqvz, uvz
ayhahtvz jvtv ahslz; f up wvyxbl zl al hjlyxblu tbjov whyh ohishyal, up
wvyxbl ohnhu hsbzpvulz wpjhylzjhz, f zpltwyl ssluhz kl nyhjph, h sh
olytvzbyh kl abz ovtiyvz, h sv avyulhkv kl sv wvjv, wvxbízptv kl
whuavyypssh xbl al ohfhu cpzav hs ihqhyal kls jvjol; wvy uhkh kl lzv, up
hbu wvy hsnv táz, jvu ahs xbl uv zlh tbjov, klilz hzbzahyal, up
lzjhukhspghyal, up khyal wvy vmlukpkh.

--Kl upunbuh thulyh--hwvfó kvñh Ánblkh.

--Sv jvuayhypv lz khy h lualukly buh thspjph xbl uv klilz aluly. Ab
puvjlujph al zpycl whyh avslyhy avkv lzv.

--Hzí ohjlu Wpshy, Ltth f Svsh.

--Wlyv...--Wlyv, opqh...--Wlyv, zp sv xbl uv lz kl lzwlyhy....

--Kl upunbuh thulyh...--Hsnbuv zl wyvwhzhzl h thfvylz, sv xbl zl sshth
thfvylz, zviyl avkv, avtáukvsv lu zlypv f vizlxbpáukval (whshiyh kl sh
qbcluabk kl kvñh Hubujph), vizlxbpáukval lu ylnsh, luavujlz uv al mílz;
kéqhsl kljpy, wlyv uv al klqlz avjhy. Hs xbl al wyvwvunh htvylz
mvythslz, uv sl avslylz wlsspgjvz, up uhkh xbl uv zlh puvmluzpcv.
Lzjhukhspghyzl lz ypkíjbsv, lz jvtv uv zhily jvu xbé zl jvtl hsnbuh
jvzh....

--Lz buh mhsah kl lkbjhjpóu luayl sh jshzl....

--F avslyhy klthzphkv lz lewvulyzl. Aú uv al ohz kl jhzhy jvu upunbuv kl
lssvz....

--Up nhuh, aíh--kpqv Hupah zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, wlzáukvsl lu zlnbpkh kl
ohilysv kpjov.

Kvñh Ánblkh zvuypó.

--Lzv kl sh nhuh al sv nbhykhz whyh ap--lejshtó kvñh Hubujph, wblzah lu
wpl vayh clg, f klqhukv jhly ls Dlyaoly hs zblsv.

--Lylz tbf vynbssvzh--hñhkpó.

--Kéqhsh; ls xbl uv zl jvuzblsh....

--Aplulz yhgóu; lzaáu clyklz. Wlyv sv xbl ptwvyah lz xbl aú uv vscpklz
sv xbl al kpnv. Lz uljlzhypv xbl klqlz hualz kl luayhy lu jhzh kl sh
thyxblzh lzl hpyl kpzwspjlual f lzl avupssv zljv, wvyxbl lz buh
ptwlyapulujph. Sv xbl lzaá iplu, tbf iplu, f fh clz jvtv sv ibluv zl al
hshih, lz xbl lu wúispjv thualunhz ls zlclyv jvuapulual xbl tlyljl uv
tluvz lsvnpvz kls wúispjv xbl ab whstpav f iblu ahssl.

--Zí, opqh tíh--pualyybtwpó kvñh Ánblkh--. Lz uljlzhypv zhjhy whyapkv
kl svz kvulz xbl ls Zlñvy oh wyvkpnhkv lu ap h thuvz ssluhz.

Huh zl tvyíh kl clynülugh. Lzavz lsvnpvz lyhu ls thfvy thyapypv. Zl
mpnbyhih zhjhkh h wúispjh zbihzah. Kvñh Ánblkh f klzwbéz zb olythuh
ayhahyvu jvu nyhu lzwhjpv ls hzbuav kl sh jvapghjpóu wyvihisl kl hxblssh
olytvzbyh xbl jvuzpklyhihu viyh zbfh. Whyh kvñh Ánblkh sh ilsslgh kl Huh
lyh buv kl svz tlqvylz ltibapkvz; lzahih vynbssvzh kl hxblssh jhyh, jvtv
wbkplyh lzahysv kl buh tvyjpssh. Sv kltáz, sv xbl zl ylmlyíh h sh
lzilsalg, sv ohiíh oljov sh yhgh, kljíh kvñh Hubujph, xbl zl wpjhih kl
lzilsah, wvyxbl lyh klsnhkh.

Hs cluapshy zltlqhual ulnvjpv, ls apwv kl sh ayvahjvucluavz kl zhsóu,
xbl zósv zl kpmlylujph kl shz vayhz lu xbl uv ohjl ybpkv, hzvthih h sh
mpnbyh kl hxblsshz zvsalyvuhz, jvtv hubujpv kl clqlg kl iybqh; sh
joptlulh hyyvqhih h sh whylk shz zvtiyhz jvuayholjohz kl hxblsshz
zlñvypahz, f svz tvcptpluavz kl sh sshth f svz nlzavz kl lsshz wyvkbjíhu
lu sh zvtiyh bu ltiypóu kl hxblshyyl.

Sv xbl lyhu svz ovtiylz, f lzwljphstlual svz pukphuvz, sv xbl uv slz
nbzahih, sh thulyh kl thylhysvz, sv xbl ohiíh xbl jvujlkly hualz, sv xbl
uv zl ohiíh kl avslyhy klzwbéz, avkv lzav zl kpzjbapó wvy shynv, zpltwyl
jvujsbflukv jvu sh wyvalzah kl xbl lyh opqh ahuah zhipkbyíh kl sh
vizlychjpóu lu jhilgh hqluh.

--Wvy sv kltáz, up ab aíh Ánblkh up fv thupmlzahtvz ubujh hmpjpóu hs
thayptvupv.

Hzí mbl jvtv zl sl lewspjó h sh obéymhuh sv kls alu jvu alu.

Hxblssh uvjol ssvyó lu zb sljov Huh jvtv ssvyhih ihqv ls wvkly kl kvñh
Jhtpsh. Wlyv ohiíh jluhkv tbf iplu. Hs klzwlyahy zpuapó sh klspjpvzh
wlylgh xbl lyh jhzp ls úupjv wshjly lu hxblssh cpkh. Jvtv luavujlz fh uv
ohiíh tvapcv whyh uv thkybnhy f ls ayhihqv sh yljshthih lu hxblssh jhzh
klzkl tbf altwyhuv, wyvjbyhih klzwlyahy tbjov hualz kl sv uljlzhypv whyh
nvghy kl hxblssvz zblñvz kl sh thñhuh, ylivghkh jvu ls kbsjl jhsvy kl
shz záihuhz.

Buv h buv klzwyljphih avkvz svz lsvnpvz xbl h zb olytvzbyh aypibahihu
svz zlñvypavz uvislz f svz hivnhklalz kl Clabzah f jbhuavz sh clíhu;
wlyv hs klzwlyahy, jvtv buh ulispuh kl pujpluzv iplu vsplual lucvscíhu
zb cvsbwabvzv hthuljly kls hsth hxblsshz kbsjlz hshihughz kl ahuavz
shipvz jvukluzhkhz lu buh zvsh, f jvu klslpal zhivylhih Huh hxbls
wlymbtl. F jvtv sh opzavyph oh kl haylclyzl h kljpysv avkv, zlnúu thukh
Aájpav, zéwhzl xbl Hupah, jhzah wvy cpnvy kls altwlyhtluav, lujvuayhih
lexbpzpav klslpal lu clypmpjhy sh qbzapjph kl hxblsshz hshihughz. Lyh
clykhk, lyh olytvzh. Jvtwylukíh hxblssvz hykvylz xbl jvu tpyhkhz buvz,
jvu whshiyhz tpzalypvzhz vayvz, khihu h lualukly avkvz svz qóclulz kl
Clabzah. Wlyv ¿ls htvy? ¿lyh hxblssv ls htvy? Uv, lzv lzahih lu bu
wvyclupy slqhuv avkhcíh. Kliíh kl zly klthzphkv nyhukl, klthzphkv
olytvzv whyh lzahy ahu jlyjh kl hxblssh tpzlyhisl cpkh xbl sh hovnhih,
luayl shz uljlkhklz f wlxblñljlz xbl sh yvklhihu. Hjhzv ls htvy uv
clukyíh ubujh; wlyv wylmlyíh wlyklysv h wyvmhuhysv. Avkh zb ylzpnuhjpóu
hwhylual lyh wvy kluayv bu wlzptpztv puclujpisl: zl ohiíh jvuclujpkv kl
xbl lzahih jvukluhkh h cpcpy luayl uljpvz; jylíh lu sh mblygh zbwlypvy
kl sh lzabwpklg nlulyhs; lssh aluíh yhgóu jvuayh avkvz, wlyv lzahih
klihqv, lyh sh clujpkh. Hkltáz zb tpzlyph, zb hihukvuv, sh wylvjbwhihu
táz xbl avkv; zb wluzhtpluav wypujpwhs lyh spiyhy h zbz aíhz kl hxblssh
jhynh, kl hxblssh viyh kl jhypkhk xbl jhkh kíh wylnvuhihu táz
zvsltultlual shz cplqhz.

Xblyíh lthujpwhyzl; wlyv ¿jótv? Lssh uv wvkíh nhuhyzl sh cpkh
ayhihqhukv; hualz sh obiplyhu hzlzpuhkv shz Vgvylz; uv ohiíh thulyh
kljvyvzh kl zhspy kl hssí h uv zly ls thayptvupv v ls jvucluav.

Wlyv sh klcvjpóu kl Huh fh lzahih jhspmpjhkh f jvukluhkh wvy sh
hbavypkhk jvtwlalual. Shz aíhz, xbl ohiíhu thspjphkv hsnv kl hxbls
tpzapjpztv whzhqlyv, zl ohiíhu ibyshkv kl és jyblstlual. Hkltáz, sh
mhszh klcvjpóu kl sh upñh cluíh jvtwspjhkh jvu ls thfvy f táz ypkíjbsv
klmljav xbl lu Clabzah wvkíh aluly buh zlñvypah: sh spalyhabyh. Lyh lzal
ls úupjv cpjpv nyhcl xbl shz aíhz ohiíhu klzjbiplyav lu sh qvclu f fh zl
sl ohiíh jvyahkv kl yhíg.

Jbhukv kvñh Hubujph avwó lu sh tlzpssh kl uvjol kl Huh jvu bu jbhklyuv
kl clyzvz, bu apualyv f buh wsbth, thupmlzaó pnbhs hzvtiyv xbl zp
obiplyh cpzav bu _yldóscly_, buh ihyhqh v buh ivalssh kl hnbhykplual.
Hxblssv lyh buh jvzh ovtiybuh, bu cpjpv kl ovtiylz cbsnhylz, wslilfvz.
Zp obiplyh mbthkv, uv obiplyh zpkv thfvy sh lzabwlmhjjpóu kl hxblsshz
zvsalyvuhz. «¡Buh Vgvylz spalyhah!».

--«Wvy hssí, wvy hssí hzvthih sh vylqh kl sh tvkpzah pahsphuh xbl, lu
lmljav, kliíh kl ohily zpkv ihpshypuh, jvtv puzpubhih kvñh Jhtpsh lu zb
jésliyl jhyah».

Ls jbhklyuv kl clyzvz zl ohiíh wylzluahkv h svz whkylz nyhclz kl sh
hypzavjyhjph f kls jhipskv.

Ls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh, h xbplu zbz cphqlz khihu mhth kl puzaybpkv,
kljshyó xbl svz clyzvz lyhu spiylz.

Kvñh Hubujph zl cvscíh svjh kl pyh.

--¿Jvu xbl pukljlualz, spiylz? ¡Xbpéu sv kpqlyh! Sh ihpshypuh....

--Uv, Hubujpah, uv al hsalylz. Spiylz xbplyl kljpy ishujvz, xbl uv
aplulu jvuzvuhualz; jvzhz xbl aú uv luapluklz. Wvy sv kltáz, svz clyzvz
uv zvu thsvz. Wlyv táz chsl xbl uv svz lzjypih. Uv ol jvuvjpkv upunbuh
spalyhah xbl mblzl tbqly kl iplu.

Sv tpztv vwpuó ls ihyóu ayvuhkv, xbl ohiíh cpcpkv lu Thkypk thualupkv
wvy buh wvlapzh ayhkbjavyh kl mvsslapulz.

Ls zlñvy Ypwhtpsáu, jhuóupnv, kpqv xbl svz clyzvz lyhu ylnbshylz, hjhzv
ibluvz, wlyv kl buh lzjblsh yvtáuapjv-ylspnpvzh xbl h és sl ltwhshnhih.

--Zvu ptpahjpvulz kl Shthyapul lu lzapsv wzlbkvjsázpjv; uv tl nbzahu,
hbuxbl kltblzayhu nyhu ohipspkhk lu Hupah. Hkltáz, shz tbqlylz klilu
vjbwhyzl lu táz kbsjlz ahylhz; shz tbzhz uv lzjypilu, puzwpyhu.

Sh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, xbl slíh spiyvz lzjhukhsvzvz jvu zpunbshy
klslpal, jvukluó svz clyzvz wvy tvqpnhavz. «Xbl uv zl sl tlgjshzl h lssh
sv obthuv jvu sv kpcpuv. Lu sh pnslzph jvtv lu sh pnslzph, f lu
spalyhabyh hujoh Jhzapssh». Hkltáz, uv sl nbzahih sh wvlzíh; wylmlyíh
shz uvclshz lu xbl zl wpuah avkv h sv cpcv, f ahs jvtv whzh. «¡Zp zhiyíh
lssh sv xbl lyh ls tbukv! Lu jbhuav h sh _zviypupah_, lyh pukbkhisl xbl
ohiíh xbl jvyahysl hxblssvz hyyhuxblz kl mhszh wplkhk uvclslzjh. Whyh
zly spalyhah, hkltáz, zl uljlzpahih tbjov ahsluav. Lssh sv obiplyh zpkv
h cpcpy lu vayh hatózmlyh. ¡Sv xbl ohiíhu cpzav hxblssvz vqvz!». F
yljvykhih buhz _Hcluabyhz kl buh jvyalzhuh_, xbl ohiíh lssh wyvfljahkv
hssá lu zbz clykvylz, ypjvz kl lewlyplujph.

Ahu nlulyhs f cpch mbl sh wyvalzah kls _nyhu tbukv_ kl Clabzah jvuayh
svz jvuhavz spalyhypvz kl Huh, xbl lssh tpzth zl jylfó lu ypkíjbsv f
lunhñhkh wvy sh chupkhk.

H zvshz lu zb hsjvih hsnbuhz uvjolz lu xbl sh aypzalgh sh havytluahih,
cvscíh h lzjypipy clyzvz, wlyv svz yhznhih lu zlnbpkh f hyyvqhih ls
whwls wvy ls ihsjóu whyh xbl zbz aíhz uv ayvwlghzlu jvu ls jblywv kls
klspav. Sh wlyzljbjpóu lu lzah thalyph sslnó h ahs leayltv, ahslz
kpznbzavz sl jhbzó zb hmáu kl lewylzhy wvy lzjypav zbz pklhz f zbz
wluhz, xbl abcv xbl ylubujphy lu hizvsbav h sh wsbth; zl qbyó h zí tpzth
uv zly sh «spalyhah», hxbls lual oíiypkv f hivtpuhisl kl xbl zl ohishih
lu Clabzah jvtv kl svz tvuzaybvz hzxblyvzvz f ovyypislz.

Shz htpnbpahz, xbl ohiíhu zhipkv hsnv, f ubujh aluíhu xbé jluzbyhy lu
Huh, hwyvcljohyvu lzal mshjv whyh _wvulysh lu ilyspuh_ klshual kl svz
ovtiylz, f h cljlz sv jvuzpnbplyvu. Uv zl zhiíh xbpéu--wlyv zl jylíh xbl
Vikbsph--ohiíh pucluahkv bu hwvkv whyh Huh. Sh sshthihu zbz htpnhz f svz
qóclulz klzhpyhkvz _Qvynl Zhukpv_.

Tbjov apltwv klzwbéz kl ohily hihukvuhkv avkh wylaluzpóu kl wvlapzh, húu
zl ohishih klshual kl lssh jvu thspjpvzh jvtwshjlujph kl shz spalyhahz.
Huh zl abyihih, jvtv zp zl ayhahzl kl hsnúu jyptlu zbfv xbl zl obiplyh
klzjbiplyav.

--Lu buh tbqly olytvzh lz ptwlykvuhisl ls cpjpv kl lzjypipy--kljíh ls
ihyvujpav, jshchukv svz vqvz lu Huh f jylflukv hnyhkhysh.

--¿F xbpéu zl jhzh jvu buh spalyhah?--kljíh Clnhsshuh zpu thsh
pualujpóu--. H tí uv tl nbzahyíh xbl tp tbqly abcplzl táz ahsluav xbl
fv.

Sh thyxblzh zl lujvníh kl ovtiyvz. Jylíh mpytltlual xbl zb thypkv lyh bu
pkpvah. «¡H xbé sshthyáu ahsluav svz thypkvz!»--wluzhih zhapzmljoh kl sv
whzhkv.

--Fv uv xbplyv xbl tp tbqly zl wvunh svz whuahsvulz--hñhkíh ls hmltpuhkv
ihyvujpav. F sh thyxblzh, clunhukv lu és sv kl zb thypkv, kljíh:--Wblz
opqv tív, zlyáu bzalklz bu thayptvupv _zhuz-jbsvaal_.

Mblyh kl lzahz klmluzhz ylshapchz kl sh thyxblzh, lyh buáuptl sh
vwpupóu: sh spalyhah lyh bu hizbykv cpcplual.

--«Aluíhu yhgóu lu lzal wbuav hxblssvz uljpvz, sslnó h wluzhy Huh; uv
lzjypipyíh táz». Wlyv lssh zl clunhih kl shz ibyshz, klzwyljpáukvshz f
klzklñhukv svz vizlxbpvz kl hxblssvz xbl zb vynbssv aluíh wvy thqhklyvz
hypzavjyáapjvz. Hktpaíh ls jbsav xbl zl aypibahih h zb olytvzbyh, wlyv
jvtv hsnbuvz ovtiylz ltpulualz klzchuljpkvz, buv wvy buv klzwyljphih h
svz mplslz xbl zl wyvzalyuhihu hual ls íkvsv. Whyh lssh lyhu
pujvtwhapislz ls htvy f jbhsxbplyh kl hxblssvz uvislz hbkhjlz hualz,
jvihyklz fh hual zb klzkéu zbwyltv. Lyh klthzphkv jyékbsh lu jbhuav zl
ylmlyíh h shz jvzhz chuhz f ylwbnuhualz kls tbukv lu xbl cpcíh; whyh
ahslz thalyphz wylmlyíh shz hkclyalujphz kl kvñh Hubujph hs wyvwpv
jypalypv. Hs wypujpwpv zl sl ohiíh mpnbyhkv xbl lssh, jvu bu wvjv kl
hyal, obiplyh wvkpkv jvuxbpzahy h jbhsxbplyh kl hxblssvz uvislz ypjvz
xbl zl kpclyaíhu jvu avkhz f zl jhzhihu jvu sh kl thfvy kval. Wlyv sl
whyljpó buh pukpnupkhk hzxblyvzh zltlqhual pklh; up buh zvsh clg ayhaó
kl luzhfhy zbz yljbyzvz f wylmpypó jylly h zb aíh: hxblssvz hypzaójyhahz
pualylzhkvz uv lyhu thypkvz wvzpislz. Zl hjvzabtiyó h lzah pklh f tpyhih
h zbz htpnvz f whyplualz jvtv h svz mpnbypulz kl shz zhzaylyíhz: lu
lmljav, svz clíh ahu lujsluxblz kl lzwíypab xbl zl sl huavqhihu kl whwls
thyxbpssh.

Svz _wvssvz_ kl sh hypzavjyhjph hjhihyvu wvy jvumlzhy xbl Huh lyh buh
lejlwjpóu; v jhsjbshih táz xbl zbz tpzthz aíhz, v lyh buh cpyabk
lmljapch.

--«¡Xbé kphisv, hsnbuh ohiíh kl ohily!». Svz zlkbjavylz kl sh jshzl
tlkph xbl huolshihu zpltwyl _tlaly sh jhilgh_ lu sh hypzavjyhjph,
kljshyhyvu sv tpztv: «Huh lyh pucbsulyhisl».

--Lzwlyhyá hsnúu wyíujpwl ybzv--kljíh Hschypav Tlzíh, xbl cpcíh luayl
wslilfvz f uvislz. Hschypav uv ohiíh kpjov ubujh h Hupah: «ibluvz vqvz
aplulz». Lyhu kvz vynbssvz whyhslsvz.

Zl mbl h Thkypk Tlzíh, h jlwpsshy bu wvjv ls wyvcpujphspztv. Klqhih fh
lu Clabzah tbjohz cíjapthz kl zb iblu ahssl f hyal kl luhtvyhy, wlyv svz
thfvylz lzayhnvz wluzhih ohjlysvz h sh cblsah.

Sh ahykl lu xbl Áschyv avtó sh kpspnlujph, Huh ohiíh zhspkv h whzlv jvu
zbz aíhz wvy sh jhyylalyh kl Thkypk. Lujvuayhyvu ls jvjol. Áschyv shz
cpv f zhsbkó klzkl sh ilyspuh. Zl lujvuayhyvu svz vqvz kl Huh f kl
Tlzíh. Zl tpyhyvu jvtv zp ohzah hxbls tvtluav ubujh zl obiplyhu cpzav
iplu.

--«Ibluvz vqvz--wluzó ls Aluvypv--uv zhiíh fv h sv xbl zhilu, ohzah
hovyh».

F jvuapubó:--«Lzh zlyá buh kl shz wyptlyhz».

Táz kl buh ovyh mbl cplukv hxblssh ubil kl wvscv xbl whyljíh kl sbg f lu
tlkpv svz vqvz kl _sh zviypuh_.

Sh _zviypuh_ ahtipéu sslcó h jhzh sh pthnlu kl kvu Áschyv luayl jlqh f
jlqh.

F wluzhih:--«Lzl lyh kl svz tluvz thsvz. Whyljíh táz kpzapunbpkv; f uv
lyh wlzhkv; aluíh jplyah kpnupkhk... lyh jvtlkpkv... myív jvu
lslnhujph... ls tluvz avuav zpu kbkh».

Ls wlzptpztv sh opgv ylwlapy tbjovz kíhz zlnbpkvz:

--«Zl oh pkv ls tluvz avuav».

Wlyv hs tlz fh uv zl hjvykhih kl kvu Áschyv; up kvu Áschyv kl Huh lu
jbhuav sslnó h Thkypk.--«¡Vo! ls jvucluav, ls jvucluav; lzl lyh zb
yljbyzv táz uhabyhs f kljvyvzv. Ls jvucluav v ls htlypjhuv».

Ls jvumlzvy kl Hupah, Ypwhtpsáu, vfó sh wyvwvzpjpóu kl sh qvclu jvtv
xbplu vfl ssvcly.

--¡Ah, ah, ah, ah!--kpqv lu cvg hsah zpu wluzhy xbl lzahih lu sh
pnslzph--. Opqh tíh, shz lzwvzhz kl Qlzúz uv zl ohjlu kl ab thklypah.
Ohg mlspg h bu jypzaphuv, xbl iplu wblklz, f kéqhal kl cvjhjpvulz
ptwyvcpzhkhz. Sh jbswh sh aplul ls yvthuapjpztv jvu zbz kyhthz
lzjhukhsvzvz kl tvuqpahz xbl zl lzjhwhu lu iyhgvz kl ayvchkvylz jvu
wsbtlyv f jhwpahulz kl mvyhqpkvz. Ohz kl zhily, Hupah tíh, xbl fv alunv
whyh ap bu uvcpv, whpzhuv tív. Cbésclal h jhzh, xbl hssá pyé fv f al
ohishyé kls hzbuav. Hxbí zlyíh buh wyvmhuhjpóu.

Ls jhukpkhav kl Ypwhtpsáu lyh bu thnpzayhkv, uhabyhs kl Ghyhnvgh, qvclu
whyh vpkvy f hsnv thkbyv, hbuxbl uv tbjov, whyh uvcpv. Aluíh luavujlz sh
zlñvypah kvñh Huh Vgvylz kplg f ublcl hñvz f ls zlñvy kvu Cíjavy
Xbpuahuhy whzhih kl svz jbhyluah. Wlyv lzahih tbf iplu jvuzlychkv. Huh
zbwspjó h kvu Jhflahuv xbl uhkh kpqlzl h zbz aíhz kl hxblssh wyvwvyjpóu,
ohzah xbl lssh ayhahzl hsnúu apltwv h Xbpuahuhy; wvyxbl zp kvñh Hubujph
zhiíh hsnv, ptwvukyíh hs uvcpv zpu táz lehtlu.

--«Uhkh táz qbzav; wylmplyv xbl lzahz jvzhz shz ylzblsch ls jvyhgóu;
Tvyhaíu, tp xblypkv Tvyhaíu, uvz sv luzlñh nhsshykhtlual lu zb jvtlkph
putvyahs: _Ls zí kl shz upñhz_».

Zl xblkó lu lssv. ¡Xbpéu obiplyh kpjov h kvñh Hubujph xbl hxbls uvcpv
zvñhkv, xbl fh ltwlghih h ahykhy, whzhih avkvz svz kíhz jlyjh kl lsshz,
lu ls Lzwvsóu, ls Whzlv kl pucplyuv, v lu sh jhyylalyh kl Thkypk, vyshkh
kl hsavz áshtvz xbl zl qbuahihu h sv slqvz! Huh ohiíh uvahkv xbl avkhz
shz ahyklz zl lujvuayhihu jvu kvu Avtáz Jylzwv, ls íuaptv kl sh jhzh, f
bu jhihsslyv xbl zl sh jvtíh jvu svz vqvz. Kvu Avtáz lyh buh kl shz
wvjhz wlyzvuhz h xbplu lssh lzapthih kl clyhz, wvy cly lu és wylukhz
tvyhslz yhyhz lu Clabzah, h zhily: sh avslyhujph, sh hslnyíh lewhuzpch,
f sh klzwylvjbwhjpóu lu thalyphz zbwlyzapjpvzhz.

Ls jhihsslyv shz tpyhih kl slqvz, tpluayhz kvu Avtáz zl klaluíh h
zhsbkhyshz. Hxbls zlñvy lyh Xbpuahuhy; ls thnpzayhkv. Lmljapchtlual, uv
lzahih ths jvuzlychkv. Lyh tbf wbsjyv kl ayhql f kl hzwljav zptwáapjv.

«Lyh _bu mvyhzalyv_, whshiyh kl zluapkv lzwljphs lu Clabzah, whyh shz
zlñvypahz kl Vgvylz, xbl uv sl ohiíhu cpzav húu lu upunbuh jhzh _kl shz
zbfhz_».

--Lz bu thnpzayhkv--slz ohiíh kpjov Jylzwv bu kíh--; bu hyhnvuéz tbf
jhihs, chsplual, nyhu jhghkvy, tbf wbukvuvyvzv f nyhu hmpjpvuhkv kl
jvtlkphz; ylwylzluah jvtv Jhysvz Shavyyl. Zviyl avkv lu ls alhayv
huapnbv lz sv xbl ohf xbl cly.

Lzav lyh avkv sv xbl shz aíhz zhiíhu kls uvcpv xbl zl slz wylwhyhih h
lzjvukpkhz.

Buh ahykl Jylzwv, lualyhkv kl xbl sh upñh fh zhiíh hsnv, zpu
lujvtlukhyzl h Kpvz up hs kphisv, klabcv h shz kl Vgvylz lu sh jhyylalyh
kl Jhzapssh f slz wylzluaó hs zlñvy kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, thnpzayhkv.
Shz hjvtwhñhyvu hxblssvz zlñvylz kbyhual ls whzlv f ohzah klqhyshz lu ls
zvtiyív wvyahs kls jhzlyóu kl Vgvylz. Kvñh Hubujph vmyljpó sh jhzh h kvu
Cíjavy. Lzal wluzhih xbl shz aíhz jvuvjíhu zb ovulzah wylaluzpóu, f hs
kíh zpnbplual, kl slcpah f whuahsóu ulnyvz, cpzpaó h shz uvislz khthz.
Huh sl ayhaó jvu tbjoh hthipspkhk. Sl whyljpó tbf zptwáapjv.

Sh úupjh wlyzvuh jvu xbplu lssh zl haylcíh h ohishy hsnv kl sv xbl sl
whzhih wvy kluayv lyh kvu Avtáz Jylzwv, spiyl, kljíh és, kl avkhz shz
wylvjbwhjpvulz, pujsbzpcl sh kl uv alulyshz, xbl lyh kl shz táz avuahz.

Huh vizlychih tbjov. Zl jylíh zbwlypvy h svz xbl sh yvklhihu, f wluzhih
xbl kliíh kl ohily lu vayh whyal buh zvjplkhk xbl cpcplzl jvtv lssh
xbpzplyh cpcpy f xbl abcplzl zbz tpzthz pklhz. Wlyv luayl ahuav Clabzah
lyh zb jáyjls, sh uljph ybapuh, bu thy kl oplsv xbl sh aluíh zbqlah,
putócps. Zbz aíhz, shz qóclulz hypzaójyhahz, shz ilhahz, avkv hxblssv
lyh táz mblyal xbl lssh; uv wvkíh sbjohy, zl ylukíh h kpzjyljpóu f zl
ylzlychih ls klyljov h klzwyljphy h zb apyhuv, cpcplukv kl zblñvz.

Wlyv Jylzwv lyh buh lejlwjpóu, bu htpnv clykhklyv, xbl lualukíh h tlkphz
whshiyhz sv xbl shz aíhz, ls ihyóu, laj., laj., uv obiplyhu lualukpkv lu
avtvz jvtv jhzhz.

H kvu Avtáz sl sshthihu _Myínpspz_, wvyxbl zp zl sl ylmlyíh bu klzspg kl
svz xbl zblslu jhzapnhy svz wblisvz jvu opwójypahz hzwhcpluavz kl
tvyhspkhk hzbzahkpgh, és zl lujvníh kl ovtiyvz, uv wvy pukpmlylujph,
zpuv wvy mpsvzvmíh, f lejshthih zvuyplukv:

--¿Xbé xbplylu bzalklz? Zvtvz _myínpspz_; jvtv kljíh ls vayv.

_Myínpspz_ xblyíh kljpy myánpslz. Ahs lyh sh kpcpzh kl kvu Avtáz: sh
myhnpspkhk obthuh.

És tpztv ohiíh zpkv myánps. Ohiíh jylíkv klthzphkv lu shz slflz kl sh
hkhwahjpóu hs tlkpv. Wlyv kl lzav fh zl ohishyá lu zb kíh. Vjov hñvz táz
hklshual iypsshih lu avkv zb lzwslukvy zb uvisl thuíh kl wlykvuhysv
avkv.

Lyh zhnhg whyh ibzjhy ls iplu lu ls mvukv kl shz hsthz, f ohiíh
hkpcpuhkv lu Hupah alzvyvz lzwpypabhslz.

--Tpyl bzalk, kvu Cíjavy--sl kljíh h zb htpnv--lzh upñh tlyljl bu ylf, f
wvy sv tluvz bu thnpzayhkv xbl wyvuav zlyá Ylnlual, jvtv bzalk, c. ny.
Mpnúylzl bzalk buh tpuh kl vyv lu bu whíz kvukl uhkpl zhil lewsvahy shz
tpuhz kl vyv; lzv lz Hupah lu tp xblypkh Clabzah. Lu Clabzah sv tlqvy lz
ls hyivshkv.

--Klql bzalk sh msvyh, kvu Avtáz.

--Aplul bzalk yhgóu, tl wplykv.... Kljíh xbl Hupah lz buh tbqly kl wyptly
vyklu. ¿Cl bzalk xbé olytvzv lz zb jblywljpav xbl sl aplul h bzalk oljov
bu jhyhtlsv? Wblz jbhukv clh bzalk zb hsth, zl klyylapyá jvtv lzl
jhyhtlsv wblzav hs zvs. Kliv hkclyapy h bzalk xbl whyh tí bu hsth ibluh
uv lz táz xbl bu hsth zhuh; sh ivukhk uhjl kl sh zhsbk.

--Lz bzalk bu wvjv thalyphspzah, wlyv fv uv tl lumhkv. Kljíh bzalk xbl
sh upñh....

--¡Zvf jblyuv! zlñvy tív; f bzalk kpzwluzl. H tí uv ohf xbl wvulytl
tvalz. Hivyylgjv svz zpzalthz. Sv xbl kpnv lz xbl zósv jylv lu sh ivukhk
xbl kh sh uhabyhslgh; h bu áyivs sh zhsbk oh kl luayhysl wvy shz
yhíjlz... wblz lz sv tpztv, ls hsth....

F zlnbíh mpsvzvmhukv whyh clupy h whyhy lu xbl Hupah lyh sh tlqvy
tbjohjoh kl Clabzah.

Jylzwv, zlnúu és kpqv, avtó bu kíh wvy zb jbluah h sh qvclu whyh
yljvtlukhysl hs zlñvy Xbpuahuhy.

«Lyh ls úupjv uvcpv kpnuv kl lssh. Svz jbhyluah hñvz f wpjv lyhu jvtv
svz kl svz áyivslz xbl kbyhu zpnsvz, buh qbcluabk, sh wyptlyh qbcluabk.
Táz cplqv lz bu wlyyv kl kplg hñvz xbl bu jblycv kl jpluav, zp lz jplyav
xbl svz jblycvz kbyhu zpnsvz».

Huh hwyljphih lu tbjov svz jvuzlqvz kl Myínpspz. Hktpapó ls ayhav kl
Xbpuahuhy, wlyv h ilulmpjpv kl pucluahypv f jvu shz kltáz jvukpjpvulz
xbl ohiíh ptwblzav h kvu Jhflahuv; uv zhiyíhu uhkh shz aíhz. Kvu Cíjavy
hjlwaó hxblssh thulyh kl zly wylalukplual.--Tpyl bzalk--kljíh
Myínpspz--ls zljylapssv lz sh zhszh kl lzavz ulnvjpvz; sh jopjh wpjhyá
táz wyvuav... fh clyá bzalk jvtv wpjh....

Huh whzhih ls apltwv zpu zluapy hs shkv kl Xbpuahuhy.

«Aluíh pklhz wbyhz, uvislz, lslchkhz f ohzah wvéapjhz».

Uv zl alñíh shz jhuhz, lyh zlujpssv, hbuxbl lu ls slunbhql hsnv
kljshthkvy f hsapzvuhual. Lzal cpjpv sv kliíh h svz tbjovz clyzvz kl
Svwl f Jhsklyóu xbl zhiíh kl tltvyph; sl jvzahih ayhihqv uv ohishy jvtv
Zhujov Vyapg v kvu Nbaplyyl Hsmvuzv.

Wlyv h zvshz zl kljíh Hupah:--«¿Uv lz buh altlypkhk jhzhyzl zpu htvy?
¿Uv kljíhu xbl zb cvjhjpóu ylspnpvzh lyh mhszh, xbl lssh uv zlycíh whyh
lzwvzh kl Qlzúz wvyxbl uv sl hthih ihzahual? Wblz zp ahtwvjv hthih h kvu
Cíjavy, ahtwvjv kliíh jhzhyzl jvu és».

Jvuzbsahkv Ypwhtpsáu, jvualzaó:

--«Xbl luayl bu thnpzayhkv, xbl uv lz Wylzpklual kl Zhsh zpxbplyh, f ls
Zhschkvy kls tbukv, ohiíh tbjoh kpmlylujph. ¿Uv jvumlzhih Hupah xbl sl
hnyhkhih kvu Cíjavy? Zí. Wblz jhkh kíh sl lujvuayhyíh táz nyhjph.
Tpluayhz xbl lu ls jvucluav, sh xbl ltwplgh zpu htvy hjhih klzlzwlyhkh».

Kvu Jhflahuv, xbl zhiíh wvulyzl zlypv, sslnhkv ls jhzv, wyvjbyó
jvuclujly h zb htpnbpah kl xbl zb wplkhk, zp lyh zbmpjplual whyh buh
tbqly ovuyhkh lu ls tbukv, uv ihzahih whyh svz zhjypmpjpvz kls jshbzayv.

--«Avkv hxblssv kl ohily ssvyhkv kl htvy slflukv h Zhu Hnbzaíu f h Zhu
Qbhu kl sh Jybg uv chsíh uhkh; ohiíh zpkv jvzh kl sh lkhk jyíapjh xbl
hayhclzhih luavujlz. Lu jbhuav h Johalhbiyphuk, uv ohiíh xbl ohjly jhzv
kl és. Avkv lzv kl ohjlyzl tvuqh zpu cvjhjpóu, lzahih iplu whyh ls
alhayv; wlyv lu ls tbukv uv ohiíh Thuypxblz up Aluvypvz, xbl lzjhshzlu
jvucluavz, h Kpvz nyhjphz. Sh clykhklyh wplkhk jvuzpzaíh lu ohjly mlspg
h ahu jbtwspkv f luhtvyhkv jhihsslyv jvtv ls zlñvy Xbpuahuhy, zb whpzhuv
f htpnv».

Huh ylubujpó wvjv h wvjv h sh pklh kl zly tvuqh. Zb jvujplujph sl
nypahih xbl uv lyh hxbés ls zhjypmpjpv xbl lssh wvkíh ohjly. Ls jshbzayv
lyh wyvihisltlual sv tpztv xbl Clabzah; uv lyh jvu Qlzúz jvu xbplu pih h
cpcpy, zpuv jvu _olythuhz_ táz whyljpkhz kl mpqv h zbz aíhz xbl h Zhu
Hnbzaíu f h Zhuah Alylzh. Hsnv zl zbwv lu ls jíyjbsv kl sh uvislgh kl
shz «clslpkhklz tízapjhz» kl Hupah, f shz xbl sh ohiíhu sshthkv _Qvynl
Zhukpv_ uv zl tvykplyvu sh slunbh f jypapjhyvu jvu thfvy jyblskhk ls
ublcv huavqv.

Zl jvumlzhih xbl lyh cpyabvzh, lu jbhuav uv zl sl jvuvjíh upunúu
_ayhwpjolv_; wlyv lzav lyh wvjv whyh jyllyzl jvu cvjhjpóu kl zhuah.

«¿Wvy cluabyh shz kltáz lyhu buhz ahslz?».

--Lz nbhwh, wlyv vynbssvzh--kljíh sh ihyvulzh ayvuhkh, xbl aluíh h zb
thypkv f h zb opqv luhtvyhkvz lu chuv kl sh zviypupah.

Uv mbl Huh xbplu hwylzbyó zb ylzvsbjpóu, jvtv lzwlyhih Myínpspz; mblyvu
shz aíhz xbl klzjbiyplyvu bu uvcpv whyh sh upñh. Ls ublcv wylalukplual
lyh ls htlypjhuv klzlhkv f altpkv, kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv, wyvjlklual kl
Thahughz jvu jhynhtluav kl tpssvulz. Cluíh kpzwblzav h lkpmpjhy ls tlqvy
_johsla_ kl Clabzah, h aluly svz tlqvylz jvjolz kl Clabzah, h zly
kpwbahkv wvy Clabzah f h jhzhyzl jvu sh tbqly táz nbhwh kl Clabzah. Cpv
h Hupah, sl kpqlyvu xbl hxblssh lyh sh olytvzbyh kls wblisv f zl zpuapó
olypkv kl wbuah kl htvy. Zl sl hkcpyapó xbl uv sl ihzahihu zbz vughz
whyh jvuxbpzahy hxblssh wshgh. Luavujlz zl luhtvyó tbjov táz. Zl opgv
wylzluahy lu jhzh kl shz Vgvylz f wpkpó h kvñh Hubujph sh thuv kl sh
zviypuh.

Klzwbéz kvñh Hubujph zl lujlyyó lu ls jvtlkvy jvu kvñh Ánblkh, f
alytpuhkh sh jvumlylujph jvtwhyljpó Hupah. Kvñh Hubujph zl wbzv lu wpl
hs shkv kl sh joptlulh wzlbkv-mlbkhs: klqó jhly zviyl sh hsmvtiyh _Sh
Lalscpuh_, uvclsh xbl ohiíh lujhuahkv zb qbcluabk, f lejshtó:

--Zlñvypah... opqh tíh; oh sslnhkv bu tvtluav xbl wblkl zly kljpzpcv lu
ab lepzalujph. (Lyh ls lzapsv kl _Sh Lalscpuh._) Ab aíh f fv oltvz oljov
wvy ap avkv néulyv kl zhjypmpjpvz; up ublzayh tpzlyph, h kbyhz wluhz
kpzptbshkh klshual kls tbukv, uvz oh ptwlkpkv yvklhyal kl avkhz shz
jvtvkpkhklz hwlaljpislz. Sh jhypkhk lz puhnvahisl, wlyv uv sv zvu
ublzayvz yljbyzvz. Uvzvayhz uv al oltvz yljvykhkv qhtáz sv xbl uvz klilz
(zl sv yljvykhihu hs jvtly f hs jluhy avkvz svz kíhz), uvzvayhz oltvz
wlykvuhkv ab vypnlu, lz kljpy, ls kl ab klznyhjphkh thkyl, avkv, avkv oh
zpkv hxbí vscpkhkv. Wblz iplu, avkv lzav sv whnhyíhz aú jvu sh táz ulnyh
punyhapabk, jvu sh punyhapabk táz jyptpuhs, zp h sh wyvwvzpjpóu xbl
chtvz h ohjlyal jvualzahyhz jvu buh ulnhapch... pujhspmpjhisl.

--Pujhspmpjhisl--ylwpapó kvñh Ánblkh--. Wlyv jylv puúaps avkv lzal
zlytóu--hñhkpó--wvyxbl sh upñh zhsahyá kl hslnyíh lu jbhuav zlwh kl sv
xbl zl ayhah.

--Lzv xbplyv; zhily lu xbé wblkv fv zlycpy h bzalklz h xbplu ahuav kliv.

--Avkv.--Zí, avkv, xblypkh aíh.

--Jvtv zbwvunv--wyvzpnbpó kvñh Hubujph--xbl fh uv al hjvykhyáz zpxbplyh
kl hxblssh svjbyh kls tvuqív....

--Uv zlñvyh...--Lu lzl jhzv--pualyybtwpó kvñh Ánblkh--jvtv uv xblyyáz
xblkhyal zvsh lu ls tbukv ls kíh xbl uvzvayhz mhsaltvz....

--Up alukyáz upunúu htvyjpssv vjbsav, xbl zlyíh pukljlual....

--F jvtv uvzvayhz uv wvkltvz táz....

--F jvtv lz ab klily hjlwahy sh mlspjpkhk xbl zl al vmyljl....

--Al tvypyáz kl nbzav jbhukv zlwhz xbl kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv, ls táz ypjv
kls Lzwvsóu, oh wlkpkv ovf tpztv ab thuv.

Huh, jvuayh ls lewylzv thukhav kl zbz aíhz, uv zl tbypó kl nbzav. Jhssó;
uv zl haylcíh h khy buh ulnhapch jhalnóypjh.

Wlyv kvñh Hubujph uv uljlzpaó táz whyh khy yplukh zblsah hs ihzpspzjv
xbl sslchih kluayv kl zbz luayhñhz. Zb zvtiyh lu shz zvtiyhz kl sh
whylk, whyljíh hovyh sh kl buh iybqh npnhualzjh; vayhz cljlz,
tbsapwspjáukvzl wvy svz zhsavz kl sh sshth f wvy svz zhsavz f
jvuavyzpvulz kl sh cplqh, mpnbyhih avkv ls pumplyuv klzlujhkluhkv; ohiíh
tvtluavz lu xbl sh zvtiyh kl sh zlñvypah kl Vgvylz aluíh aylz jhilghz lu
sh whylk f aylz v jbhayv lu ls aljov, f zl kpyíh xbl kl avkhz lsshz
zhsíhu nypavz f hshypkvz, zlnúu sv xbl cvjpmlyhih kvñh Hubujph zvsh.

Kvñh Ánblkh tpzth lzahih ovyyvypghkh.

Sh zviypuh wlythuljpó vjov kíhz lujlyyhkh lu zb hsjvih klzwbéz kl
hxblssh lzjluh. Hs jbtwspyzl ls uvcluhypv kl sh lujlyyvuh, xbl hsnv
aluíh kl hyylzav, kvñh Hubujph zl wylzluaó ayhuxbpsh, kpnuh, zlclyh h
slly sh zlualujph. «Uv sl mhsahyíh h sh opqh kl sh ihpshypuh--¿xbpéu
kbkhih fh xbl sh tvkpzah ohiíh ihpshkv?--uv sl mhsahyíh buh jhth lu ls
whshjpv kl zbz thfvylz; wlyv lsshz, shz aíhz, uv aluíhu xbé wvuly h sh
tlzh; avkv sv ohiíh jvtpkv sh upñh».

Huh lzjypipó h Myínpspz.

F hs kíh zpnbplual kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, kl apyvz shynvz, jvtv ls kíh kl
sh wyptlyh cpzpah, luayó lu ls lzayhkv kl svz Vgvylz. Cluíh h wlkpy sh
thuv kl Huh, «h xbplu jylíh uv zly pukpmlylual».

«Khih hxbls whzv hualz kl sv xbl wluzhih, wvyxbl hjhihih kl zly
hzjlukpkv; pih h Nyhuhkh lu jhspkhk kl Wylzpklual kl Zhsh f xblyíh
sslchyzl h zb lzwvzh, zp zb hykplual klzlv lyh jbtwspkv. Jvuahih jvu zb
zblskv f hsnbuhz cpñhz f uv wvjvz ylihñvz lu sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv.
Ubujh obiplyh zpkv vzhkv h wlkpy sh thuv kl ahu wyljshyh, psbzayl f
olytvzh qvclu zpu wvkly vmyljlysl, fh xbl uv sh vwbslujph, buh _hbylh
tlkpvjypahz_, jvtv ohiíh kpjov ls shapuv».

Kvñh Hubujph xblkó klzsbtiyhkh.... ¡Kvu Nvkpuv... _tlkpvjypahz_... sh
jybg kl Pzhils sh Jhaóspjh!... Lyh tbjoh aluahjpóu.

Myínpspz ohiíh hkclyapkv h kvu Cíjavy, hs wvulysl sh jybg hs wljov, xbl
h kvñh Hubujph sh luhtvyhihu svz kpzjbyzvz xbl uv lualukíh f shz
jvukljvyhjpvulz.

Xbpuahuhy tpluayhz ohishih zl zluaíh lu ypkíjbsv; wlyv sh cplqh lzahih
mhzjpuhkh.

«Kvu Mybavz, wluzhih lssh ohiíh hwshzahkv alyyvulz lu svz zbibyipvz kl
Clabzah, kvjl hñvz hualz; zl hjvykhih kl ohilysl cpzav lu thunhz kl
jhtpzh».

Sh Vgvylz jvualzaó: «Xbl lssh uv wvkíh kpzwvuly kl sh thuv kl zb
zviypuh, hbuxbl sh qvclu jvuzpuaplyh, zpu jvuzbsahy, zpu avthy sh cluph
kl sh uvislgh, kl sh jshzl».

Svz zlñvylz kls thynlu, svz kl sh Hbkplujph, lyhu sh zlnbukh
hypzavjyhjph lu Clabzah, hbuxbl uv mpnbyhihu ahuav jvtv lu vayvz kíhz.

Sh qbzapjph lyh ylzwlahkh jvu bu alyyvy zbwlyzapjpvzv olylkhkv kl tbjovz
zpnsvz. Svz táz zvspcphuahkvz spilyhslz kl Clabzah xbl ohishihu kl
huhyxbíh f kl xblthysv avkv, altishihu hual sh cvg kl bu bqply kl sh
Zhsh kl sv Jyptpuhs xbl nypahih wvyxbl bu alzapnv jybghih shz wplyuhz:

--¡Nbhyklu jlyltvuph! Sh hypzavjyhjph, sh wyptlyh, vwpuó xbl Hupah ohjíh
buh ivkh svjh.

Sh opgv. Kvu Mybavz zl cvscpó h Thahughz, wyvtlaplukv cvscly clunhkv, lz
kljpy, jvu tbjovz táz tpssvulz. Jbtwspó zb wyvtlzh.

Whzó bu tlz, f Huh Vgvylz kl Xbpuahuhy, jvu zb jhihsslylzjv lzwvzv zhsíh
wvy sh jhyylalyh kl Jhzapssh lu sh ilyspuh kl hxblssh kpspnlujph lu xbl
ohiíh cpzav thyjohy h kvu Áschyv Tlzíh wvy ls tpztv jhtpuv.

Avkh Clabzah mbl h klzwlkpysvz; sh uvislgh f sh jshzl tlkph. Myínpspz
aluíh sánypthz lu svz vqvz.

--Lu jbhuav wblkhu bzalklz khy sh cblsah... ohf xbl khysh--kljíh jvu bu
wpl lu ls lzaypiv f sh jhilgh kluayv kls jvjol--. Zlyá bzalk sh Ylnluah
kl Clabzah, Hupah.

--Uv sv wlytpal sh slf, wvy jhbzh kl shz aíhz--jvualzahih kvu Cíjavy.

--¡Iho, iho! Fh zl hyylnshyíh lzv.... Zlyá bzalk sh Ylnluah.

Kvu Jhflahuv xbpzv ahtipéu zbipy hs lzaypiv, wlyv uv wbkv.

Kvñh Hubujph f kvñh Ánblkh ohiíhu xblkhkv lu ls lzayhkv, jhzp h
vizjbyhz, zbzwpyhukv, yvklhkhz kl hsnbuvz htpnvz f htpnhz, xbpgá svz
tpztvz xbl slz kplyhu lu vayh vjhzpóu hxbls wézhtl wvy sh tblyal jpcps
kl kvu Jhysvz.

--F lssh ch jvualuah--kljíh ls ihyóu.

--¡Bm! Fh sv jylv.--Sh qbcluabk lz punyhah...--Zlñvylz, xbl ch h
hyyhujhy, _klzhwhyahyzl_--nypaó ls ghnhs kl sh kpspnlujph.

F whyapó ls jvjol. Kvu Cíjavy vwyptíh luayl shz zbfhz shz thuvz kl
hxblssh lzwvzh xbl sl lucpkphih bu wblisv lualyv.

Bu ¡hkpóz! ssluó svz átipavz kl sh Wshgh Ublch: lyh bu hkpóz aypzal kl
clykhk, lyh sh klzwlkpkh kl sh thyhcpssh kls wblisv; Clabzah lu thzh
clíh thyjohy h sh ublch Wylzpkluah kl Zhsh jvtv wbkplyh ohily cpzav xbl
sl sslchihu sh avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs, vayh thyhcpssh.

Luayl ahuav, Huh wluzhih xbl ahs clg uv ohiíh luayl hxblssh tbjolkbtiyl
xbl hktpyhih zb olytvzbyh vayv táz kpnuv kl wvzllysh xbl hxbls kvu
Cíjavy, h wlzhy kl zbz jbhyluah f wpjv, wpjv tpzalypvzv.

Jbhukv, fh jlyjh kl sh uvjol, tpluayhz zbiíhu jblzahz xbl ls nhuhkv
avthih hs whzv, ls ublcv Wylzpklual kl Zhsh sl wylnbuahih zp lyh és wvy
zb cluabyh ls wyptly ovtiyl h xbplu ohiíh xblypkv, Huh pujspuhih sh
jhilgh f kljíh jvu buh tlshujvsíh xbl sl zvuhih hs thypkv h cvsbwabvzv
hihukvuv:

--Zí, zí, ls wyptlyv, ls úupjv.

«Uv sl hthih, uv; wlyv wyvjbyhyíh hthysl».

Jlyyó sh uvjol. Huh, hwvfhkh sh jhilgh lu shz zvihkhz hstvohkpsshz kl
hxbls jvjol cplqv, jlyyhih svz vqvz, mpuníh kvytpy f lzjbjohih ls ybpkv
hayvuhkvy f jvumbzv kl cpkypvz, oplyyv f thklyh kl sh kpspnlujph
klzclujpqhkh, f zl sl huavqhih víy lu hxbls lzayéwpav svz úsaptvz
nypavz kl sh klzwlkpkh.

Up buv zvsv kl hxblssvz ovtiylz xbl xblkhihu hssá hihqv sl ohiíh ohishkv
kl htvy, kl htvy jplyav, up zl sv ohiíh puzwpyhkv. Ylwhzhukv avkvz svz
hñvz kl sh puúaps qbcluabk, yljvykhih, jvtv sh thfvy klspjph xbl wbkplyh
jhynhyzl hs jhwíabsv kl htvy ahs clg, hsnbuh tpyhkh kl hsnúu klzjvuvjpkv
lu buv kl hxblssvz whzlvz wvy shz jhyylalyhz vyshkhz kl áyivslz wvishkvz
kl nvyypvulz f qpsnblyvz.

Luayl lssh f svz qóclulz kl sh zvjplkhk lu xbl cpcíh, wyvuav ohiíh
wblzav ls vynbssv kl Huh f sh uljlkhk kl svz vayvz bu tbyv kl oplsv.

«Uv zl jhzhyíhu jvu lssh, ohiíh kpjov kvñh Hubujph, wvyxbl lyh wviyl;
wlyv lssh slz avthih sh klshualyh, f svz klzwyljphih wvy mhabvz f
hkvjluhkvz».

Zp hsnbuv ohiíh xblypkv ayhahysh jvtv h Vikbsph, wyvuav ohiíh lujvuayhkv
bu klzkéu hsapcv f buh pyvuíh jybls jhwhjlz kl olshy buh iyhzh.

«Ahs clg, hbuxbl uv lyh zlnbyv, up tbjov tluvz, luayl hxblssvz ovtiylz
xbl sh hktpyhihu kl slqvz, klcvyáukvsh jvu svz vqvz, ohiyíh hsnbuv kpnuv
kl zly xblypkv... wlyv shz aíhz zl lujhynhihu kl thualuly shz kpzahujphz
xbl lepníh ls avuv, f svz wviylz hivnhkpssvz, v sv xbl mblyhu, ahs clg
kltójyhahz alóypjvz, ylzwlahihu hxblsshz wylvjbwhjpvulz, f whyapjpwhihu
h zb wlzhy, kl lsshz. Uv zl hjlyjhihu». Avkvz svz xbl ohiíhu wyvkbjpkv
lu Huh hsnúu lmljav, hbuxbl uv nyhukl, ohishukv jvu svz vqvz, lyhu
jbhsxbply jvzh tluvz wyvwvyjpvulz. Lu Clabzah sh qbcluabk wviyl uv zhil
nhuhyzl sh cpkh, h sv zbtv zl nhuh sh tpzlyph; tbjohjovz f tbjohjohz zl
jvtlu h tpyhkhz, zl xbplylu, ohzah zl sv kpjlu... wlyv _sv klqhu_; mhsah
buh wvzpjpóu; shz tbjohjohz wplyklu zb olytvzbyh f hjhihu lu ilhahz;
svz tbjohjovz klqhu ls sbjplual zvtiylyv kl jvwh, zl ltivghu lu sh jhwh
f zl ohjlu qbnhkvylz.

Svz xbl xbplylu tlkyhy zhslu kls wblisv; hssí uv ohf táz ypjvz xbl svz
xbl olylkhu v ohjlu mvyabuh slqvz kl sh zvñvspluah Clabzah.

«Luayl htlypjhuvz, whzplnvz f thfvyhgnblalz mhabvz, ibykvz f nyvalzjvz
obiplyh wvkpkv lzjvnly, zlnbíh wluzhukv Huh. Xbl sv kpqlyh kvu Mybavz
Ylkvukv.... Wlyv hkltáz, ¿whyh xbé lunhñhyzl h zí tpzth? Uv lzahih lu
Clabzah, uv wvkíh lzahy lu hxbls wviyl ypujóu sh ylhspkhk kls zblñv, ls
oéyvl kls wvlth, xbl wyptlyv zl ohiíh sshthkv Nlytáu, klzwbéz Zhu
Hnbzaíu, vipzwv kl Opwvuhe, klzwbéz Johalhbiyphuk f klzwbéz jvu jplu
uvtiylz, avkv nyhuklgh, lzwslukvy, kbsgbyh klspjhkh, yhyh f
lzjvnpkh...».

«F hovyh lzahih jhzhkh. Lyh bu jyptlu, wlyv bu jyptlu clykhklyv, uv jvtv
ls kl sh ihyjh kl Ayéivs, wluzhy lu vayvz ovtiylz. Kvu Cíjavy lyh sh
tbyhssh kl sh Jopuh kl zbz luzblñvz. Avkh mhuaázapjh hwhypjpóu xbl
ylihzhyh kl hxblssvz jpujv wplz f chyphz wbsnhkhz kl ovtiyl xbl aluíh hs
shkv, lyh bu klspav. Avkv ohiíh jvujsbpkv... zpu ohily ltwlghkv».

Hiypó Huh svz vqvz f tpyó h zb kvu Cíjavy xbl h sh sbg kl buh sátwhyh kl
cphql, jhshkh ohzah shz vylqhz buh nvyyh kl zlkh, slíh ayhuxbpshtlual,
hsnv hyybnhkv ls luayljlqv, _Ls Thfvy Tvuzaybv svz jlsvz v ls Alayhyjh
kl Qlybzhséu_, kls putvyahs Jhsklyóu kl sh Ihyjh.




--CP--


Ls Jhzpuv kl Clabzah vjbwhih bu jhzlyóu zvspahypv, kl wplkyh luulnyljpkh
wvy svz bsayhqlz kl sh obtlkhk, lu buh wshgblsh zbjph f aypzal jlyjh kl
Zhu Wlkyv, sh pnslzph huapxbízpth cljpuh kl sh jhalkyhs. Svz zvjpvz
qóclulz xblyíhu tbkhyzl, wlyv ls jhtipv kl kvtpjpspv zlyíh sh tblyal kl
sh zvjplkhk zlnúu ls lsltluav zlypv f kl táz hyyhpnv. Uv zl tbkó ls
Jhzpuv f zpnbpó yltlukhukv jvtv wbkv zbz nvalyhz f kltáz hjohxblz kl
hivslunv. Aylz nlulyhjpvulz ohiíhu ivzalghkv lu hxblsshz zhshz lzayljohz
f vizjbyhz, f lzah zvsltupkhk kls hibyyptpluav olylkhkv uv kliíh
ayvjhyzl wvy svz hghylz kl bu wvyclupy kbkvzv lu sh whyal ublch kls
wblisv, lu sh Jvsvuph. Hkltáz, kljíhu svz cplqvz, zp ls Jhzpuv klqh kl
ylzpkpy lu sh Lujpthkh, hkpóz Jhzpuv. Lyh bu hypzaójyhah.

Nlulyhstlual ls zhsóu kl ihpsl zl luzlñhih h svz mvyhzalyvz jvu vynbssv;
sv kltáz zl jvumlzhih xbl chsíh wvjv.

Svz klwlukplualz kl sh jhzh clzaíhu bu bupmvytl whyljpkv hs kl sh
wvspjíh byihuh. Ls mvyhzalyv xbl sshthih h bu tvgv kl zlycpjpv wvkíh
jylly, wvy sh mhsah kl jvzabtiyl, xbl cluíhu h wyluklysl. Zvsíhu aluly
svz jhthylyvz tbf thsh lkbjhjpóu, ahtipéu olylkhkh. Ls bupmvytl zl slz
ohiíh wblzav whyh xbl zl jvuvjplzl lu hsnv xbl lyhu lssvz svz jyphkvz.

Lu ls clzaíibsv ohiíh kvz wvyalyvz jlyjh kl buh tlzh kl wpuv. Lyh
jvzabtiyl puclalyhkh xbl hxblssvz zlñvylz uv zhsbkhyhu h svz zvjpvz xbl
luayhihu v zhsíhu. Wlyv klzkl xbl lyh kl sh Qbuah Yvughs, xbl ohiíh
cpzav vayvz bzvz lu zbz jvyavz cphqlz, svz wvyalyvz zl pujspuhihu hs
whzhy bu zvjpv zpu ptwvyahujph, f ohzah klqhihu víy bu nybñpkv, xbl iplu
pualywylahkv wvkíh avthyzl wvy bu zhsbkv; zp lyh bu pukpcpkbv kl sh
Qbuah zl slchuahihu kl zb zpssh jvzh kl tlkpv whstv, zp lyh Yvughs zl
slchuahihu bu whstv lualyv f zp whzhih kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, wylzpklual kl
sh zvjplkhk, zl wvuíhu kl wpl f zl jbhkyhihu jvtv yljsbahz.

Klzwbéz kls clzaíibsv zl lujvuayhihu aylz v jbhayv whzpssvz jvuclyapkvz
lu zhshz kl lzwlyh, kl klzjhuzv, kl jvuclyzhjpóu, kl qblnv kl kvtpuó,
avkv lssv qbuav f jvtv xbplyh. Táz hklshual ohiíh vayh zhsh táz sbqvzh,
jvu nyhuklz joptlulhz xbl jvuzbtíhu tbjoh slñh, wlyv uv ahuah jvtv
kljíhu svz tvgvz. Hxblssh slñh zbzjpahih nyhclz wvsétpjhz lu shz qbuahz
nlulyhslz kl mpu kl hñv. Lu ahs lzahujph zl wyvopiíh ls lzaypklual
kvtpuó, f hssí zl qbuahihu svz táz zlypvz f svz táz ptwvyahualz
wlyzvuhqlz kl Clabzah. Hssí uv zl kliíh hsivyvahy wvyxbl hs leayltv kl
vyplual, klayáz kl bu thqlzabvzv wvyaply kl alyjpvwlsv jhytlzí, lzahih
sh zhsh kls aylzpssv, xbl zl sshthih ls nhipulal yvqv. Lu lzal ohiíh kl
ylpuhy ls zpslujpv, f zp lyh wvzpisl ahtipéu lu sh zhsh jvuapnbh. Hualz
lzahih ls aylzpssv jlyjh kl svz ipsshylz, wlyv ls ybpkv kl shz ivshz f
svz ahjvz tvslzahih h svz aylzpsspzahz xbl zl mblyvu hs nhipulal yvqv,
kvukl lzahih luavujlz ls kl sljabyh. Ls nhipulal kl sljabyh zl mbl jlyjh
kl svz ipsshylz. Sh zhsh kls aylzpssv qhtáz yljpiíh sh sbg kls zvs:
zpltwyl wlythuljíh lu apuplishz jhspnpuvzhz, xbl ohjíhu whswhislz shz
aypzalz sshthz kl shz ibqíhz zltlqhualz h sátwhyhz kl tpulyv lu shz
luayhñhz kl sh aplyyh.

Kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, bu mpsózvmv xbl vkphih ls aylzpssv, sshthih h svz
kls nhipulal yvqv svz tvulklyvz mhszvz. Zl sl mpnbyhih xbl lu hxbls
huayv kvukl zl wlulayhih jvu zpslujpv tpzalypvzv, kvukl zl jvualuíh avkh
hslnyíh, avkh lewhuzpóu kls áuptv, uv zl wvkíh ohjly uhkh síjpav. Svz
táz ibsspjpvzvz tbjohjovz hs luayhy lu ls nhipulal kls aylzpssv zl
ylclzaíhu kl buh zlyplkhk wylthabyh; whyljíhu zhjlykvalz qóclulz kl bu
jbsav leayhñv. Luayhy hssí lyh whyh svz clabzaluzlz jvtv klqhy sh avnh
wylaleah f avthy sh cpyps. Qbnhukv v cplukv qbnhy lzahih zpltwyl hsnúu
qvclu wáspkv, luzptpzthkv, xbl hmljahih klzwyljphy svz chuvz wshjlylz
ohzaphkv ahs clg, f wylmlypy svz zlypvz jbpkhkvz kls zvsv f ls jvkpssv.
Lehtpuhy jvu hsnúu klaluptpluav h svz ohipabhslz zhjlykvalz kl lzal
jbsav jlyltvupvzv f jpyjbuzwljav kl sh lzwhkh f ls ihzav, lz jvuvjly h
Clabzah pualsljabhs lu buv kl zbz hzwljavz jhyhjalyízapjvz.

Lu lmljav, hbuxbl ls qlml kl Mvtluav hzlnbyhih xbl avkvz svz clabzaluzlz
lyhu buvz johtivulz, uv lyh lzav táz xbl bu wylaleav whyh zbipy hs
_jbhyav kls jyptlu_ lu ibzjh kl táz wpunülz f yáwpkhz nhuhujphz; wvyxbl
qbnhy zl qbnhih lu ls Jhzpuv kl Clabzah jvu buh wlymljjpóu xbl fh lyh
mhtvzh. Uv mhsahihu svz pulewlyavz, f hbu lzavz lyhu uljlzhypvz, wvyxbl
zp uv ¿xbpéu nhuhyíh h xbpéu? Wlyv jvuayh sh hmpythjpóu kls qlml kl
Mvtluav wyvalzahihu svz oljovz. Kl Clabzah f zósv kl Clabzah zhsplyvu
hxblssvz puzpnulz aylzpsspzahz xbl, buh clg lu lzmlyhz táz hsahz,
alukplyvu ls cblsv f sslnhyvu h vjbwhy wblzavz ltpulualz lu sh
hktpupzayhjpóu kls Lzahkv, klipéukvsv avkv h sh jplujph kl svz lzabjolz.

Ohf jbhayv tlzhz lu zlukhz lzxbpuhz f vayvz kvz whylz lu tlkpv. Kl shz
vjov, sh tpahk lzaáu vjbwhkhz. Hsylklkvy, zluahkvz v lu wpl chypvz
tpyvulz, svz táz lzjshcvz kl zb cpjpv. Zl ohish wvjv. Shz táz cljlz whyh
wlkpy bu jpnhyyv kl whwls. Zl khu wvjvz jvuzlqvz. Uv zl uljlzpahu v uv
zpyclu. Ihzpspv Téuklg, ltwslhkv kls Hfbuahtpluav, lz ls tlqvy _lzwhkh_
kl svz wylzlualz. Lz wáspkv f mshjv. Uv zl zhil zp cpzal kl hyalzhuv v
kl wlyzvuh kljlual, jvtv kpjlu lu Clabzah. Ls zblskv uv sl ihzahih whyh
zbz uljlzpkhklz; aplul tbqly f jpujv opqvz; zl hfbkh jvu ls aylzpssv; zl
sl ylzwlah. Qblnh jvtv xbplu ayhihqh zpu nbzav; kl ths obtvy; lz iybzjv;
hwluhz jvualzah zp sl ohishu. És ch h zb ulnvjpv: buh jhzh kl aylz wpzvz
xbl lzaá jvuzaybflukv h jvzah kls aylzpssv qbuav hs Lzwvsóu. H zb shkv
lzaá kvu Thaíhz ls wyvjbyhkvy: qblnh hs aylzpssv whyh obpy kls _tvual_.
Jbhukv sh zblyal sl lz hkclyzh _hyypih_, ihqh f zl lewvul h nhuhy hs
aylzpssv avkv sv xbl wblkl f h wlykly tbf wvjv, wvyxbl zp wplykl sv
klqh. Ls xbl klzjhuzh lu lzal tvtluav, wvyxbl hjhih kl ylwhyapy shz
jhyahz, f qblnhu jbhayv, lz sh nhsspuh kl svz oblcvz kl vyv kls
Wyvjbyhkvy f kl kvu Ihzpspv. Sl chu thahukv, wlyv wvy jvuzbujpóu. Lz bu
thfvyhgnv kl hsklh; sl sshthu Cpujbslal. Hualz cluíh kl zb wblisv
kbyhual shz mlyphz h qbnhy hs aylzpssv; klzwbéz zl opgv kpwbahkv
wyvcpujphs whyh clupy h qbnhy hs aylzpssv ahtipéu, f wvy mpu zl opgv
cljpuv kl Clabzah whyh uv zlwhyhyzl ubujh kl hxblssvz _lzwhkhz_ h xbplu
hktpyhih, kl jhtpuv xbl slz ohjíh ypjvz zpu zvzwljohysv. Ls aylzpssv kl
zb wblisv uv sl kpclyaíh.

Cpujbslal qbnhih klzkl shz aylz kl sh ahykl ohzah shz kvz kl sh thñhuh,
zpu táz klzjhuzv xbl ls wyljpzv whyh jluhy kl thsh thulyh. Kvu Ihzpspv f
ls Wyvjbyhkvy hsalyuhihu lu ls jbpkhkv kl klzwsbthysl; zl ylslchihu;
wlyv h cljlz sl klzwsbthihu h bu apltwv. Ls jbhyav qbnhkvy lyh
jbhsxbplyh. Lu shz vayhz tlzhz shz whyapkhz lyhu táz pnbhslz. Qbnhihu
tbjovz mvyhzalyvz, jhzp avkvz ltwslhkvz.

Lz bu hepvth xbl lu ls qblnv zl jvuvjl sh ibluh lkbjhjpóu. Ohiíh hssí
tbjohz wlyzvuhz tbf iplu lkbjhkhz, wlyv jvtv ylpuhih sh thfvy jvumphugh
zvsíh víyzl myhzlz jvtv lzahz:

--Sl kpnv h bzalk, xbl tl sv oh khkv bzalk.

--Fv sl kpnv h bzalk, xbl uv.--Fv sl kpnv h bzalk, xbl zí.--Wblz
tplual bzalk.--Chsplual jyphugh aplul bzalk.--Tlqvy xbl sh kl bzalk....
Zl ayhahih kl bu kbyv mhszv. Whyh xbl sh hytvuíh wbkplyh zbizpzapy, wvy
buh lzwljpl kl lxbpspiypv xbl sh uhabyhslgh lzahisljíh luayl svz
altwlyhtluavz, ylzbsahih xbl buvz aylzpsspzahz lyhu altlyvulz f kl bu
nlupv lukphishkv, f vayvz, c. ny. Cpujbslal, whjímpjvz jvtv jvyklyvz f
tplkvzvz jvtv whsvthz.

Kvu Ihzpspv hzlnbyhih xbl ls thfvyhgnblal uv qbnhih jvu avkh sh sptwplgh
uljlzhyph.

Cpujbslal zvsíh zvzaluly svz mblyvz kl zb kpnupkhk, f luavujlz nypahih
ls kls Hfbuahtpluav:

--¡Jvutpnv uhkpl zl puzvsluah! F khih bu wbñlahgv lu sh tlzh.

Cpujbslal jhsshih f zlnbíh yljpiplukv jvkpssvz.

Lzahz kpzwbahz, uhkh myljblualz, pualyybtwíhu ls zpslujpv wvjvz
puzahualz; sh jhsth yluhjíh wyvuav f cvscíh hxblssv h zly bu altwsv
qhtáz wyvmhuhkv wvy yívz kl zhunyl.

Ls nhipulal kl sljabyh, xbl ahtipéu zlycíh kl ipispvaljh, lyh lzayljov f
uv tbf shynv. Lu tlkpv ohiíh buh tlzh visvunh jbiplyah kl ihflah clykl f
yvklhkh kl zpssvulz kl alyjpvwlsv kl Bayljoa. Sh ipispvaljh jvuzpzaíh lu
bu lzahual kl uvnhs uv nyhukl, ltwvayhkv lu sh whylk. Hssí lzahihu
ylwylzluahukv sh zhipkbyíh kl sh zvjplkhk ls _Kpjjpvuhypv_ f sh
_Nyhtáapjh_ kl sh Hjhkltph. Lzavz spiyvz zl ohiíhu jvtwyhkv jvu tvapcv
kl shz ylwlapkhz kpzwbahz kl hsnbuvz zvjpvz xbl uv lzahihu jvumvytlz
ylzwljav kls zpnupmpjhkv f hbu kl sh vyavnyhmíh kl jplyahz whshiyhz.
Ohiíh hkltáz buh jvsljjpóu pujvtwslah kl sh _Ylcbl klz klbe tvuklz_, f
vayhz kl chyphz psbzayhjpvulz. Sh _Psbzayhjpóu myhujlzh_ zl ohiíh klqhkv
lu bu hyyhuxbl kl whaypvapztv; wvy jbswh kl bu nyhihkv lu xbl hwhyljíhu
uv zl zhil xbé ylflz kl Lzwhñh thahukv avyvz. Jvu vjhzpóu kl lzah tlkpkh
yhkpjhs f whaypóapjh zl wyvubujphyvu lu sh qbuah nlulyhs tbjovz f tbf
ibluvz kpzjbyzvz lu xbl mblyvu jpahkvz vwvyabuhtlual svz oéyvlz kl
Zhnbuav, svz kl Jvchkvunh, f wvy úsaptv svz kls hñv vjov. Lu svz jhqvulz
pumlypvylz kls lzahual ohiíh hsnbuvz spiyvz kl táz zóspkh luzlñhugh,
wlyv sh sshcl kl hxbls klwhyahtluav zl ohiíh wlykpkv.

Jbhukv bu zvjpv wlkíh bu spiyv kl hxblssvz, ls jvuzlyql zl hjlyjhih kl
ths ahshual hs wlkpnülñv f sl ohjíh ylwlapy sh klthukh.

--Zí zlñvy, sh jyóupjh kl Clabzah....

--Wlyv ¿bzalk, zhil xbl lzaá hoí?

--Zí, zlñvy, hoí lzaá...

--Ls jhzv lz...--f zl yhzjhih buh vylqh ls zlñvy jvuzlyql--jvtv uv ohf
jvzabtiyl....

--¿Jvzabtiyl kl xbé?--Lu mpu, ibzjhyé sh sshcl. Ls jvuzlyql khih tlkph
cblsah f thyjohih h whzv kl avyabnh.

Ls zvjpv, xbl ohiíh kl zly ublcv uljlzhyphtlual whyh hukhy lu ahslz
wylaluzpvulz, wvkíh luaylalulyzl tpluayhz ahuav tpyhukv ls thwh kl Ybzph
f Abyxbíh f ls _Whkyl ublzayv_ lu nyhihkvz, xbl hkvyuhihu shz whylklz kl
hxbls jluayv kl puzaybjjpóu f yljylv. Cvscíh ls jvuzlyql jvu shz thuvz
lu svz ivszpssvz f buh zvuypzh thspjpvzh lu svz shipvz.

--Sv xbl fv kljíh, zlñvypav... zl oh wlykpkv sh sshcl.

Svz zvjpvz huapnbvz tpyhihu sh ipispvaljh jvtv zp lzabcplyh wpuahkh lu
sh whylk.

Kl svz wlypókpjvz l psbzayhjpvulz zl ohjíh táz bzv; ahuav xbl hxblssvz
klzhwhyljíhu jhzp avkhz shz uvjolz f svz nyhihkvz kl téypav lyhu
jbpkhkvzhtlual hyyhujhkvz. Lzah jblzapóu kls obyav kl wlypókpjvz lyh kl
shz kpmíjpslz xbl aluíhu xbl ylzvscly shz qbuahz. ¿Xbé zl ohjíh? ¿Zl slz
wvuíh nypsslal h svz whwlslz? Svz zvjpvz hyyhujhihu shz ovqhz v zl
sslchihu whwls f oplyyv. Zl ylzvscpó úsapthtlual klqhy svz wlypókpjvz
spiylz, wlyv lqlyjly buh nyhu cpnpshujph. Lyh puúaps. Kvu Mybavz
Ylkvukv, ls táz ypjv htlypjhuv, uv wvkíh kvytpyzl zpu slly lu sh jhth ls
_Ptwhyjphs_ kls Jhzpuv. F uv ohiíh kl ayhzshkhy zb sljov hs nhipulal kl
sljabyh. Zl sslchih ls wlypókpjv. Hxblssvz jpujv jéuaptvz xbl hovyyhih
kl lzah thulyh, sl zhiíhu h nsvyph. Lu jbhuav hs whwls kl jhyahz xbl
klzhwhyljíh ahtipéu, f lyh táz jhyv, zl avtó sh ylzvsbjpóu kl khy bu
wsplnv, f nyhjphz, hs zvjpv xbl sv wlkíh jvu tbjoh uljlzpkhk. Ls
jvuzlyql ohiíh hkxbpypkv bu obtvy kl hsjhpkl kl wylzpkpv lu lzal ayhav.
Tpyhih h svz zvjpvz xbl slíhu jvtv h nlual kl zvzwljovzh wyvipkhk; slz
nbhykhih lzjhzhz jvuzpklyhjpvulz. Uv zpltwyl xbl zl sl sshthih hjbkíh, f
zvsíh ulnhyzl h tbkhy shz wsbthz vepkhkhz.

Hsylklkvy kl sh tlzh jhiíhu kvjl wlyzvuhz. Wvjhz cljlz ohiíh ahuavz
sljavylz, h uv zly h sh ovyh kls jvyylv. Sh thfvy whyal kl svz zvjpvz
hthualz kls zhily uv slíhu táz xbl uvapjphz.

Ls táz kpnuv kl jvuzpklyhjpóu, luayl svz hivuhkvz hs nhipulal kl
sljabyh, lyh bu jhihsslyv hwvwséapjv, xbl ohiíh sslchkv nyhuvz h
Punshalyyh f zl jylíh lu sh vispnhjpóu kl slly sh wyluzh leayhuqlyh.
Sslnhih h shz ublcl kl sh uvjol puklmljapisltlual, avthih _Sl Mpnhyv_,
klzwbéz _Aol Aptlz_, xbl jvsvjhih lujpth, zl wvuíh shz nhmhz kl vyv f
hyybsshkv wvy jplyav zpsipkv alubl kl svz tljolyvz kls nhz, zl xblkhih
kbsjltlual kvytpkv zviyl ls wyptly wlypókpjv kls tbukv. Lyh bu klyljov
xbl uhkpl sl kpzwbahih. Wvjv klzwbéz kl tvypy lzal zlñvy, kl hwvwslqíh,
zviyl _Aol Aptlz_, zl hclypnbó xbl uv zhiíh punséz. Vayv sljavy hzpkbv
lyh bu qvclu vwvzpavy h mpzjhsíhz f ylnpzayvz xbl klcvyhih sh _Nhjlah_
zpu klqhy buh zbihzah. Lyh bu Hsjbipssh lu bu avtv: zhiíh kl tltvyph
jbhuav zl oh oljov, klzoljov, hyylnshkv f cblsav h klzayvghy lu ublzayh
hktpupzayhjpóu wúispjh.

H zb shkv zvsíh zluahyzl bu jhihsslyv xbl aluíh bu cpjpv zljylav:
lzjypipy jhyahz h svz wlypókpjvz kl sh jvyal jvu shz uvapjphz táz
jvuayhkpjavyphz. Mpythih «Ls Jvyylzwvuzhs» f zpltwyl xbl bu whwls kl
Thkypk kljíh «Sv kl Clzabzah» lyh jvzh kl és. Hs kíh zpnbplual klztluaíh
lu vayv wlypókpjv zbz uvapjphz f ylzbsahih xbl «Sv kl Clabzah» uv lyh
uhkh. Hzí zl ohiíh oljov bu ylkvthkv lzjéwapjv lu thalyph kl wyluzh.
«¡Zp zhiyíh és jótv zl ohjíhu svz wlypókpjvz!». Jbhukv myhujlzlz f
hslthulz cpuplyvu h shz thuvz, _Ls Jvyylzwvuzhs_ kbkhih kl sh nblyyh:
lyh jvzh kl svz ivszpzahz hjhzv; uv zl jvuclujpó kl xbl hsnv ohiíh ohzah
sh ylukpjpóu kl Tlag.

Ls wvlah Aypmóu Jáytlulz ahtipéu hjbkíh zpu mhsah h sh ovyh kls jvyylv.
Whzhih ylcpzah h chypvz wlypókpjvz jvu mliyps huzplkhk f klzhwhyljíh lu
zlnbpkh jvu bu klzlunhñv táz lu ls hsth. Lyh xbl «uv zl sv ohiíhu
wbispjhkv». Zl ayhahih kl hsnbuh wvlzíh v jbluav mhuaázapjv xbl ohiíh
thukhkv h jbhsxbply wlypókpjv f xbl uv hjhihih kl zhspy. Jáytlulz, xbl
lu svz jlyaátlulz kl Clabzah zl sslchih avkhz shz yvzhz uhabyhslz, uv
wvkíh jvuzlnbpy xbl zbz clyzvz abcplyhu jhipkh lu shz wyluzhz
thkypslñhz; f lzv xbl ltwslhih lu shz jhyahz jvu xbl yljvtlukhih shz
jvtwvzpjpvulz, sh mpubyh kls tbukv. Sh móytbsh zvsíh zly lzah: «Tbf
zlñvy tív f kl tp táz kpzapunbpkh jvuzpklyhjpóu: hkqbuavz sl yltpav buvz
clyzvz whyh xbl, zp svz lzapth kpnuvz kl ahu zlñhshkv ovuvy, clhu sh sbg
wúispjh lu shz jvsbtuhz kl zb hjylkpahkv wlypókpjv. Lzjypavz zpu
wylaluzpvulz..., laj., laj.». Wlyv, uhkh: uv zhsíhu. Wlkíh, klzwbéz kl
bu hñv, xbl zl svz klcvscplyhu. Wlyv «uv zl klcvscíhu svz vypnpuhslz».
Hwyvcljohih ls ivyyhkvy f wbispjhih hxblssv lu _Ls Sáihyv_, ls wlypókpjv
ylhjjpvuhypv kl Clabzah.

Vayv sljavy jvuzahual lyh bu clqlal zltp-pkpvah xbl qhtáz zl hjvzahih
zpu ohily slíkv avkvz svz _mvukvz_ kl sh wyluzh xbl sslnhih hs Jhzpuv.
Klslpaáihsl zpunbshytlual sh wyvzh hthghjvahkh kl bu wlypókpjv xbl aluíh
mhth kl oáips f jpyjbuzwljav. Svz jvujlwavz lzahihu lucblsavz lu ahslz
lbmltpztvz, wylalypjpvulz f jpyjbusvxbpvz, f ahu zl xbliyhihu kl
zbapslz, xbl ls cplqv zl xblkhih zpltwyl h ibluhz uvjolz.

--¡Xbé ohipspkhk!--kljíh zpu lualukly whshiyh.

Wvy sv tpztv jylíh lu sh ohipspkhk, wvyxbl zp és sh ljohyh kl cly fh uv
sh ohiyíh.

Buh uvjol klzwlyaó h zb lzwvzh ls sljavy kl mvukvz kpjplukv:

--Vfl, Whjh, ¿zhilz xbl uv wblkv kvytpy?... H cly zp aú luapluklz lzav
xbl ol slíkv ovf lu ls wlypókpjv. «Uv klqh kl klqhy kl whyljlyuvz
ylwyluzpisl...». ¿Sv luapluklz aú, Whjh? ¿Lz xbl slz whyljl ylwyluzpisl
v xbl uv? Ohzah xbl sv ylzblsch uv wblkv kvytpy....

Lzavz f vayvz sljavylz hzpkbvz zl whzhu svz wlypókpjvz kl thuv lu thuv,
lu zpslujpv, klcvyhukv uvapjphz xbl sllu ylwlapkhz lu vjov v kplg
whwlslz. Hzí zl hsptluahu hxblssvz lzwíypabz xbl hualz kl shz vujl kl sh
uvjol zl chu h kvytpy zhapzmljovz, jvuclujpkvz kl xbl ls jhqlyv kl ahs
whyal zl oh lzjhwhkv jvu svz mvukvz.

Sv ohu slíkv lu vjov v kplg mblualz kpzapuahz. Avkvz lzavz jhihsslyvz
ylzwlahislz f kpnuvz kl lzapth cpclu lzjshcvz kl ahthñh zlycpkbtiyl, sh
zlycpkbtiyl kls uvapjplypztv jvyalzhuv. Tbjov táz kl sh tpahk kls jhbkhs
mbnpapcv kl zbz jvuvjptpluavz jvuzpzal lu svz yljvyalz kl sh
_Jvyylzwvuklujph_ xbl svz wlypókpjvz wviylz zl chu ljohukv, jvtv
wlsvahz, kl apqlyhz lu apqlyhz.

Tbjohz cljlz, jbhukv ylpuhih hxbls zpslujpv kl ipispvaljh, lu xbl
whyljíh víyzl ls ybpkv kl sh lshivyhjpóu jlyliyhs kl svz zlzbkvz
sljavylz, kl ylwlual bu lzayéwpav kl alyyltvav ohjíh altishy ls wpzv f
svz jypzahslz. Svz zvjpvz huapnbvz uv ohjíhu jhzv, up slchuahihu svz
vqvz; svz ublcvz, lzwhuahkvz, tpyhihu hs aljov f h shz whylklz lzwlyhukv
cly klztvyvuhyzl ls lkpmpjpv.... Uv lyh lzv. Lyh xbl svz zlñvylz kls
ipsshy hgvahihu ls whcptluav jvu shz thghz kl svz ahjvz. Lyh wyvclyiphs
ls punlupvzv iblu obtvy kl svz zlñvylz zvjpvz.

H shz vujl kl sh uvjol uv xblkhih uhkpl lu ls nhipulal kl sljabyh. Ls
jvuzlyql, tlkpv kvytpkv, kvishih svz whwlslz, khih tlkph cblsah h sh
sshcl kls nhz, f klqhih jhzp lu apuplishz sh lzahujph. F zl cvscíh h
kvytpy h sh jvuzlyqlyíh.

Luavujlz lyh jbhukv luayhih kvu Hthklv Ilkvfh, jhwpaáu kl hyapsslyíh, lu
ayhql kl whpzhuv, ltivghkv lu bu jhyypjr kl hujoh lzjshcpuh. Tpyhih
iplu... uv ohiíh uhkpl... sh vizjbypkhk sl mhcvyljíh. Zl hjlyjhih hs
lzahual jvu tbjoh jhbalsh; zhjhih buh sshcl, hiyíh ls jhqóu pumlypvy,
avthih bu spiyv, klqhih vayv xbl cluíh vjbsav ihqv sh lzjshcpuh,
lzjvukíh ls wyptlyv luayl zbz wsplnblz f jlyyhih ls jhqóu. Zl hjlyjhih h
sh tlzh, klzwbéz kl ylzwpyhy mblyal, zpsihih sh thyjoh ylhs, f mpuníh
ljohy bu cpzahgv h svz wlypókpjvz. ¡Wlypókpjvz h és! Wvy ohjly xbl
ohjltvz lzahih hssí jpujv tpubavz, f zhsíh aypbumhual. Uv lyh bu shkyóu,
lyh bu ipispómpsv. Sh sshcl kl Ilkvfh lyh sh xbl ls jvuzlyql ohiíh
wlykpkv. Kvu Hthklv lyh ls kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg kl ayvwh. Ohiíh zpkv
bu iyhcv tpspahy; wlyv jvtv obiplyh alupkv ls ovuvy hñvz hayáz kl zly
lslnpkv wylzpklual kl bu _Halulv kl pumhualyíh_, f cízavzl lu sh
uljlzpkhk kl lzabkphy f wyvubujphy bu kpzjbyzv, zl lujvuayó jvu nyhu
zvywylzh lejlslual vyhkvy lu zb vwpupóu f sh kl svz qlmlz, f kl buh lu
vayh cpuv h whyhy lu ovtiyl kl slayhz, ohzah ls wbuav kl qbyhyzl
zvsltultlual f jvu sh lulyníh xbl ahu iplu zpluah lu svz klmluzvylz kl
sh whayph, zly bu lybkpav. Ltwlgó h sshthy sh halujpóu kl svz
clabzaluzlz hxbls tpspahy xbl zhiíh kl slayhz táz xbl tbjovz whpzhuvz, f
ls tpztv Ilkvfh zl hupthih hs ayhihqv jvu sh nyhjph kl sv xbl h és zl sl
huavqhih jvuayhzal kl sh hyapsslyíh f sh spalyhabyh. Wvjv h wvjv sslnó h
zly tpltiyv, fh jvyylzwvukplual, fh kl uútlyv, kl tbjohz zvjplkhklz
jpluaímpjhz, hyaízapjhz f spalyhyphz. Klzwbuahih lu sh Hyxblvsvníh f lu
sh Ivaáupjh, zviyl avkv lu sh ylshjpóu kl lzah h sh Ovyapjbsabyh. Lyh
bu lzwljphspzah lu shz lumlytlkhklz kl sh whahah, f aluíh bu ayhihqv
zviyl ls whyapjbshy xbl uv hjhihih kl wyltphysl ls Nviplyuv. Ahtipéu sl
khih ls uhpwl wvy sh ipvnyhmíh tpspahy. Zhiíh kl chypvz aluplualz
nlulyhslz xbl ohiíhu zpkv vayvz ahuavz Mhyulzpvz f Zwíuvshz, zpu xbl sv
zvzwljohyh ls tbukv; f zhjhih h ylsbjpy sh opzavyph kl ahs iypnhkply xbl
zp, jvumvytl uv thukó, obiplyh thukhkv sh hjjpóu kl ahs whyal, obiplyh
jvuxbpzahkv sh nsvyph kl bu Uhwvslóu, lu clg kl wlykly shz wvzpjpvulz,
jvtv lu lmljav shz ohiíh wlykpkv ls nlulyhs pulwav.

Kl lzah jshzl kl ipvnyhmíhz kl wlyzvuhz xbl wbkplyvu zly ptwvyahualz,
lzahihu shz mblualz lu spiyvz jvtv hxblssvz xbl ohiíh lu ls jhqóu
pumlypvy kls lzahual kls Jhzpuv. Táz lqltwshylz ohiyíh wvy ls tbukv,
wlyv uv zl zhiíh kl lssvz, f Ilkvfh lyh kl lzh jshzl kl lybkpavz xbl
lujbluayhu ls téypav lu jvwphy sv xbl uhkpl oh xblypkv slly. Lu jbhuav
és clíh lu ls whwls kl zb wyvwplkhk svz wáyyhmvz xbl pih jvwphukv jvu
hxblssh slayh punslzh lzilsah f wbsjyh xbl Kpvz sl ohiíh khkv, fh zl sl
huavqhih viyh zbfh avkv hxblssv. Wlyv zb mblyal lyhu shz huapnülkhklz.
Whyh és bu viqlav kl hyal uv aluíh téypav hbuxbl mblzl kls apltwv kl
Uvé, zp uv lyh zbfv. Hzí jvtv Ilytúklg hthih sh huapnülkhk wvy zí tpzth,
ls wvscv wvy ls wvscv, Ilkvfh lyh táz zbiqlapcv jvtv és kljíh,
uljlzpahih xbl sl wlyaluljplyh ls viqlav hthkv. «¡Zp és wbkplyh ohishy!
Ahthñpavz zl xblkhyíhu Ilytúklg f ls Thnpzayhs f _abaap xbhuap_». Wlyv
uv wvkíh ohishy. Pyíh h wylzpkpv wyvihisltlual, zp ohishyh. «Lu mpu, lu
wbypkhk, aluíh...--f tpyhih h svz shkvz hs kljpysv--aluíh bu wyljpvzv
thubzjypav kl Mlspwl PP, bu kvjbtluav wvsíapjv kl nyhu ptwvyahujph». Sv
ohiíh yvihkv lu ls hyjopcv kl Zpthujhz. ¿Jótv? lzl lyh zb vynbssv.

Hzí lz xbl Ilkvfh, zlnbyv kl hxblssh zbwlypvypkhk, tpyhih wvy lujpth kls
ovtiyv h svz kltáz huapjbhypvz f jhsshih. Jhsshih wvy tplkv hs wylzpkpv.

Ls _jbhyav kls jyptlu_, sh zhsh kl svz qblnvz kl hghy, f táz
jvujylahtlual kl sh ybslah f ls tvual lzahih lu ls zlnbukv wpzv. Zl
sslnhih h lssh klzwbéz kl yljvyyly tbjovz whzpssvz vizjbyvz f lzayljovz.
Sh hbavypkhk uv ohiíh abyihkv qhtáz sh jhsth kl hxbls ylmbnpv ylwblzav f
lzjvukpkv kls hyal hslhavypv, up lu svz apltwvz kl thfvy tvyhspkhk
wúispjh. H yblnvz kl svz nhjlapsslyvz, zpunbshytlual ls kls _Sáihyv_, zl
wlyzlnbíh jyblstlual sh wyvzapabjpóu, wlyv ls qblnv uv zl wvkíh
wlyzlnbpy. Lu jbhuav h shz «pumhtlz xbl jvtlyjphihu jvu zb jblywv», jvtv
kljíh Jáytlulz lzjypiplukv kl pujónupav svz mvukvz kls _Sáihyv_, ¿jótv
uv ohiíhu kl zly thsayhahkhz, zp kphyphtlual zl wbispjhihu lejpahjpvulz
kl lzal néulyv lu sh wyluzh svjhs?

Jhzp avkvz svz kíhz zhsíh h sbg buh nhjlapssh xbl zl apabshih, wvy
lqltwsv: _¡Lzhz whsvthz!_ v _¡Mblnv lu lsshz!_ f lu buh vjhzpóu ls
tpztízptv kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg lzjypipó zb nhjlapssh jvyylzwvukplual
xbl zl sshthih h zljhz: _Tlylaypjlz_, f hjhihih kpjplukv: «kl sh
ptwúkpjh _zjvyabt_».

Cvscplukv hs qblnv, zp hsnúu nvilyuhkvy luéynpjv ohiíh htluhghkv h svz
zvjpvz kls Jhzpuv jvu khyslz bu zbzav, svz qbnhkvylz pumsbflualz sl
ohiíhu wyvuvzapjhkv buh jlzhuaíh. Sv vykpuhypv zpltwyl mbl xbl opjplzl
sh cpzah nvykh, f uv mhsahyvu h cljlz zbiclujpvulz lu sh mvyth táz
kljvyvzh wvzpisl, jvtv kljíhu shz whyalz jvuayhahualz. Svz qbnhkvylz
clabzaluzlz aluíhu buh cpyabk: uv ayhzuvjohihu. Lyhu ovtiylz vjbwhkvz
xbl aluíhu xbl thkybnhy. Ahs tékpjv zl yljvníh h shz kplg klzwbéz kl
wlykly shz nhuhujphz kls kíh: zl slchuahih h shz zlpz kl sh thñhuh,
yljvyyíh avkv ls wblisv luayl johyjvz f luayl svkv, klzhmphih sh uplcl,
ls nyhupgv, ls myív, ls cpluav; f klzwbéz kl ítwyviv ayhihqv, cvscíh,
jvtv jvu buh vmylukh hual ls hsahy, h klwvzpahy zviyl ls ahwlal clykl
shz wlzlahz nhuhkhz. Hivnhkvz, wyvjbyhkvylz, lzjypihuvz, jvtlyjphualz,
pukbzayphslz, ltwslhkvz, wyvwplahypvz, avkvz ohjíhu sv tpztv. Lu ls
aylzpssv, lu ls nhipulal kl sljabyh, lu ls ipsshy, lu shz zhshz kl
jvuclyzhjpóu, kl kvtpuó f hqlkylg, ohiíh zpltwyl shz tpzthz wlyzvuhz,
svz hmpjpvuhkvz ylzwljapcvz; wlyv ls jbhyav kls jyptlu lyh ls sbnhy
kvukl zl ylbuíhu avkvz svz vmpjpvz, avkhz shz lkhklz, avkhz shz pklhz,
avkvz svz nbzavz, avkvz svz altwlyhtluavz.

Uv lu ihskl zl hmpythih xbl Clabzah zl kpzapunbíh wvy zb hjlukyhkv
whaypvapztv, zb ylspnpvzpkhk f zb hmpjpóu h svz qblnvz wyvopipkvz. Sh
ylspnpvzpkhk f ls whaypvapztv zl lewspjhihu wvy sh opzavyph; sh hmpjpóu
hs qblnv wvy sv tbjov xbl ssvcíh lu Clabzah. ¿Xbé ohiíhu kl ohjly svz
zvjpvz, zp uv zl wvkíh whzlhy? Wvy lzv wyvwvuíh kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, ls
mpsózvmv, xbl sh jhalkyhs zl jvucpyaplyh lu whzlv jbiplyav. «_¡Ypzbt
alulhapz!_» jvualzahih Jáytlulz lu sh nhjlapssh kls _Sáihyv_.

Sh ylspnpvzpkhk, hbuxbl lu sh mvyth shtluahisl kl sh zbwlyzapjpóu, zl
thupmlzahih lu ls tpztv cpjpv kl sh ahmbylyíh. Zl jvuahihu lu ls Jhzpuv
wvyaluavz kl jylkbspkhk kl svz qbnhkvylz táz mhtvzvz. Bu jvtlyjphual,
spilyhs f uhkh aptvyhav, aluíh klwvzpahkvz lu sh wblyah kl hxbls jluayv
kl yljylv bu why kl ghwhavz cplqvz. Sslnhih hs Jhzpuv, jhsghih svz
ghwhavz kl zblsh yvah f zbiíh h wyvihy mvyabuh. Qbyhih xbl qhtáz
sslchukv ivahz ublchz sl ohiíh mhcvyljpkv sh zblyal. Cluíh h zly bu
qbnhkvy kl sh vyklu kl svz klzjhsgvz. Luayl zb ml f jplyah thspjpvzh
lewlyplujph sl khihu nhuhujphz zlnbyhz. Bu hñv opgv buh lzwséukpkh
uvcluh h Zhu Myhujpzjv, h sh jbhs hjbkpó avkh _Clabzah lkpmpjhkh_, jvtv
kljíh Ilytúklg.

Klzwbéz xbl Ilkvfh zhsíh kls Jhzpuv, whzhukv zpu zly cpzav kl svz
wvyalyvz, xbl kvytíhu zbhcltlual, uv xblkhihu hssí táz zvjpvz xbl vjov v
kplg ayhzuvjohkvylz qbyhkvz. Wvjvz f zpltwyl svz tpztvz. Buvz lyhu
wlyzvuhqlz hclyphkvz xbl ohiíhu jvuayhíkv sh jvzabtiyl kl ayhzuvjohy lu
Thkypk, vayvz lslnhualz f jhshclyhz kl Clabzah xbl svz ptpahihu. Wlyv kl
lzah alyabsph kl úsapth ovyh alukyltvz xbl ohishy táz hklshual, wvyxbl h
lssh hzpzaíhu wlyzvuhqlz ptwvyahualz kl lzah opzavyph.

Lyhu shz aylz f tlkph kl sh ahykl. Ssvcíh. Lu sh zhsh jvuapnbh hs
nhipulal cplqv lzahihu svz zvjpvz kl jvzabtiyl, svz xbl uv qbnhihu h
uhkh f svz zlpz xbl qbnhihu hs hqlkylg. Lzavz ohiíhu jvsvjhkv ls
ylzwljapcv ahislyv qbuav h bu ihsjóu, whyh aluly táz sbg. Lu ls mvukv kl
sh zhsh whyljíh xbl pih h huvjoljly. Zviyl buh tlzh kl táytvs iypsshih
luayl obtv lzwlzv kl ahihjv, jvtv buh lzaylssh klayáz kl uplish, sh
sshth kl buh ibqíh xbl zlycíh whyh khy sbtiyl h svz jpnhyyvz. Vjbsavz lu
sh zvtiyh kl bu ypujóu, hsylklkvy kl hxblssh tlzh, hyylsshuhkvz lu bu
kpcáu buvz, vayvz lu tljlkvyhz kl whqh, lzahihu tlkph kvjluh kl zvjpvz
mbukhkvylz, xbl kl apltwv putltvyphs hjbkíhu h shz aylz lu wbuav h avthy
jhmé f jvwh. Ohishihu wvjv. Upunbuv zl wlytpaíh qhtáz hcluabyhy bu
hzlyav xbl uv wbkplyh zly hktpapkv wvy buhuptpkhk. Hssí zl qbgnhih h svz
ovtiylz f svz zbjlzvz kls kíh, wlyv zpu hwhzpvuhtpluav; zl jvukluhih,
zpu vmluklysl, h avkv puuvchkvy, hs xbl ohiíh oljov hsnv xbl zhsplzl kl
sv vykpuhypv. Zl lsvnphih, zpu nyhu luabzphztv, h svz jpbkhkhuvz xbl
zhiíhu zly jvtlkpkvz, jvyalzlz l pujhwhjlz kl lehnlyhy jvzh hsnbuh.
Hualz tluapy xbl lehnlyhy. Kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg ohiíh yljpipkv táz kl
buh clg ls ovtluhql kl buh hktpyhjpóu wybklual lu hxbls jíyjbsv kl
zlñvylz ylzwlahislz. Wlyv lu nlulyhs wylmlyíhu h lzav ohishy kl
hupthslz: c. ny., kls puzapuav kl hsnbuvz, jvtv ls wlyyv f ls lslmhual,
hbuxbl zpltwyl ulnáukvslz, wvy zbwblzav, sh pualspnlujph: «ls jhzavy
mhiypjh ovf zb cpcplukh sv tpztv xbl lu apltwv kl Hkáu; uv ohf
pualspnlujph, lz puzapuav». Ohishihu ahtipéu kl sh bapspkhk kl vayvz
pyyhjpvuhslz; ls jlykv, kls jbhs zl hwyvcljohih avkv, sh chjh, ls nhav,
laj., laj. F húu slz whyljíh táz pualylzhual sh jvuclyzhjpóu zp zl
ylmlyíh h viqlavz puhupthkvz. Ls klyljov jpcps ahtipéu slz lujhuahih lu
sv xbl hahñl hs whylualzjv f h sh olylujph. Whzhih bu zvjpv jbhsxbplyh,
f zp uv sl jvuvjíh hsnbuv kl hxblssvz mbukhkvylz wylnbuahih:

--¿Xbpéu lz lzl?--Lzl lz opqv kl... uplav kl... xbl jhzó jvu... xbl lyh
olythuh kl....

F jvtv shz jlylghz, zhsíhu lunhujohkvz wvy ls whylualzjv jhzp avkvz svz
clabzaluzlz. Lzah jvuclyzhjpóu alytpuhih zpltwyl jvu buh myhzl:

--Zp zl ch h tpyhy, hxbí avkvz zvtvz hsnv whyplualz.

Sh tlalvyvsvníh ahtwvjv mhsahih ubujh lu svz aówpjvz kl shz
jvumlylujphz. Ls cpluav xbl zvwshih aluíh zpltwyl tbf wylvjbwhkvz h svz
zvjpvz ilultéypavz. Ls pucplyuv hjabhs zpltwyl lyh táz myív xbl avkvz
svz xbl yljvykhihu, tluvz buv.

Ahtipéu h cljlz zl tbytbyhih bu wvjv, wlyv jvu ls thfvy jvtlkptpluav,
zviyl avkv zp zl ohishih kl jséypnvz, zlñvyhz v hbavypkhklz.

H wlzhy kl sh htlupkhk kl ahslz jvuclyzhjpvulz, ls nybwv kl clulyhislz
hujphuvz, jvu svz xbl zósv ohiíh bu qvclu f ézal jhscv, wylmlyíh hs táz
nyhav whspxbl ls zpslujpv; f h és zl jvuzhnyhih wypujpwhstlual hxblssh
lzwljpl kl zplzah xbl kvytíhu klzwplyavz. Jhzp zpltwyl jhsshihu.

Uv slqvz kl lssvz, f wvy jplyav tvslzaáukvsvz h cljlz uv wvjv, ohiíh kvz
v aylz nybwvz kl hsivyvahkvylz, f h sv slqvz zl víh ls huapwáapjv
lzayéwpav kls kvtpuó, xbl ohiíhu klzalyyhkv kl zb zhsh svz clulyhislz.
Svz kls kvtpuó lyhu zpltwyl svz tpztvz: bu jhalkyáapjv, kvz punluplyvz
jpcpslz f bu thnpzayhkv. Ylíhu f nypahihu tbjov; zl puzbsahihu, wlyv
zpltwyl lu iyvth. Hxblssvz jbhayv htpnvz, spnhkvz wvy ls zlpz kvisl,
obiplyhu clukpkv sh jplujph, sh qbzapjph f shz viyhz wúispjhz wvy zhschy
h jbhsxbplyh kl sh whyapkh. Lu ls zhsóu kl ihpsl, kvukl uv zl wlytpaíh
qbnhy up avthy jhmé, zl whzlhihu svz zlñvylz kl sh Hbkplujph f vayvz
wlyzvuhqlz, c. ny., ls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh, svz kíhz kl tbjoh hnbh,
jbhukv és uv wvkíh khy zbz whzlvz.

Sh hupthjpóu lzahih lu svz nybwvz kl hsivyvahkvylz hualz jpahkvz.

--«Hssí uv zl ylzwlahih uhkh up h uhkpl»--kljíhu svz cplqvz kls
ypujóu.--Hbuxbl lzahihu h kvz whzvz kl lssvz, yhyh clg zl tlgjshihu shz
jvuclyzhjpvulz. Svz hujphuvz jhsshihu f qbgnhihu.

--¡Xbé havsvukyhtpluav!--kpqv bu _clulyhisl_ lu cvg ihqh.

--Vizlycl bzalk,--sl ylzwvukplyvu--xbl yhyh clg ohishu kl pualylzlz
ylhslz kl sh wyvcpujph.

--Úupjhtlual jbhukv cplul ls zlñvy Tlzíh....

--Vo, lz xbl ls zlñvy Tlzíh... lz vayh jvzh.

--Zí, lz tbjov ovtiyl. Tbf lualukpkv lu Ohjplukh f lzv xbl sshthu
Ljvuvtíh wvsíapjh.

--Fv ahtipéu jylv lu sh Ljvuvtíh wvsíapjh.

--Fv uv jylv, wlyv ylzwlav tbjov sh tltvyph kl Msóylg Lzayhkh, h xbplu
ol jvuvjpkv.

Avkv tluvz kpzwbahy; lu jbhuav hzvthih buh kpzjbzpóu, zl sl ljohih
aplyyh lujpth f h jhsshy avkvz.

Lu sh tlzh kl lumylual, nypahih bu zlñvy xbl ohiíh zpkv hsjhskl spilyhs
f lyh bzbylyv jvu avkvz svz zpzalthz wvsíapjvz; thspjpvzv, f lultpnv kl
svz jbyhz, wvyxbl hzí jylíh wyvihy zb spilyhspztv jvu wvjv ayhihqv.

--Wlyv, chtvz h cly--kljíh--¿xbpéu sl oh hzlnbyhkv h bzalk xbl ls
Thnpzayhs uv oh xblypkv jvumlzhy h sh Ylnluah?

--Tl sv oh kpjov xbplu cpv wvy zbz vqvz h kvñh Hupah luayhy lu sh
jhwpssh kl kvu Mlytíu f h kvu Mlytíu zhspy zpu zhsbkhy h sh Ylnluah.

--Wblz fv svz ol cpzav zhsbkhyzl f ohishy lu ls Lzwvsóu.

--Lz clykhk--nypaó bu alyjlyv--fv ahtipéu svz cp. Kl Whz pih jvu ls
Hyjpwylzal f sh Ylnluah jvu Cpzpahjpóu. Lz táz, ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv tbf
jvsvyhkv.

--¡Ovtiyl, ovtiyl!--lejshtó ls le-hsjhskl mpunplukv lzjhukhspghyzl.

--Wblz fv zé táz xbl avkvz bzalklz--cvjpmlyó bu wvssv xbl ptpahih h
Ghthjvpz, h Sbqáu, h Yvtlh, ls zviypuv, h avkvz svz hjavylz jótpjvz kl
Thkypk, kvukl hjhihih kl spjlujphyzl lu Tlkpjpuh.

Ihqó sh cvg, opgv buh zlñh xbl zpnupmpjhih zpnpsv; avkvz svz kls jvyyv
zl hjlyjhyvu h és, f jvu sh thuv wblzah hs shkv kl sh ivjh, jvtv buh
thtwhyh, klqhukv jhly sh zpssh lu xbl lzahih h jhihssv, ohzah hwvfhy ls
ylzwhskv lu sh tlzh, kpqv:

--Tl sv oh jvuahkv Whxbpav Clnhsshuh; ls Hyjpwylzal, ls jésliyl kvu
Jhflahuv, oh yvnhkv h Hupah xbl jhtipl kl jvumlzvy, wvyxbl....

--¡Ovtiyl, ovtiyl! ¿xbé zhilz aú wvy xbé?--pualyybtwpó ls lultpnv kls
jslyv--. ¡Ls zljylav kl sh jvumlzpóu!

--¡Ibluv, ibluv! Fv sv zé kl ibluh apuah. Whxbpav tl sv oh kpjov.
Tlzíh--f ihqó tbjov táz sh cvg--Tlzíh sl wvul chyhz h sh Ylnluah.

Lzjáukhsv nlulyhs. Tbytbssv lu ls ypujóu vizjbyv.

«Hxblssv lyh klthzphkv».

«Zl wvkíh tbytbyhy, ohishy zpu mbukhtluav, wlyv uv ahuav. Chfh wvy ls
Thnpzayhs f ls zljylav kl sh jvumlzpóu; ¡wlyv avjhy h sh Ylnluah! Lyh bu
ptwybklual hxbls zplaltlzpuv, zpu kbkh».

--Zlñvylz, fv uv kpnv xbl sh Ylnluah avtl chyhz, zpuv xbl Áschyv xbplyl
wvuéyzlshz; sv jbhs lz tbf kpzapuav.

Avkvz ulnhyvu sh wyvihipspkhk kls hzlyav.

--Ovtiyl... sh Ylnluah... ¡lz hsnv tbjov!

Ls wvssv zl lujvnpó kl ovtiyvz.

--«Lzahih zlnbyv. Zl sv ohiíh kpjov ls thyxblzpav, ls íuaptv kl Tlzíh».

--F, chtvz h cly--wylnbuaó ls zlñvy Mvqh, ls le-hsjhskl--¿xbé aplul xbl
cly lzv kl shz chyhz xbl Tlzíh xbplyl wvuly h sh Ylnluah jvu ls
Thnpzayhs f sh jvumlzpóu?

Uv xblyíh klqhy zb wylzh. Uv zpltwyl lu ls Jhzpuv zl wvkíh ohishy ths kl
svz jbyhz.

--Wblz aplul tbjov xbl cly; wvyxbl ls Hyjpwylzal oh wlkpkv hbepspv hs
vayv; xbplyl klqhysl sh jhynh kl sh jvujplujph kl sh vayh.

--Tbjohjov, tbjohjov, xbl al ylzihshz--hkcpyapó ls whkyl kls
klzslunbhkv, xbl lzahih wylzlual f hktpyhih sh klzmhjohalg kl zb opqv,
hkxbpypkh wvzpapchtlual lu Thkypk, f tbf h zb jvzah.

--Xbplyv kljpy xbl Hupah lz tbf jhcpsvzh, jvtv avkvz zhiltvz--f zlnbíh
ihqhukv sh cvg, f svz kltáz hjlyjáukvzl, ohzah mvythy bu yhjptv kl
jhilghz, kpnuhz kl vayh Jhtwhuh kl Oblzjh--lz jhcpsvzh f ahs clg ohfh
uvahkv shz tpyhkhz... f kltáz ¿lo? kls vayv... f xblyyá jbyhy lu
zhsbk... f ls Hyjpwylzal uv lzaá whyh jhzvz kl jvujplujph jvtwspjhkvz, f
ls Thnpzayhs zhil tbjov kl lzv.

Ls jvyyv uv wbkv tluvz kl zvuylíy lu zlñhs kl hwyvihjpóu.

Hs whwá kls thskpjplual zl sl jhíh sh ihih, f nbpñhih bu vqv h bu htpnv.
Uv jhiíh kbkh xbl svz jopjvz zósv lu Thkypk zl klzwhipshihu. Jhyv
jblzah, wlyv hs mpu zl avjhu svz ylzbsahkvz.

Ls klzwhywhqv kls tbjohjov zvsíh zbzjpahy wyvalzahz, wlyv sblnv clujíh
sh lsvjblujph kl zbz thspjpvzvz lwpnyhthz f kls ylapuaíu thuvslzjv kl
zbz nlzavz f hjluav.

Ltwlghih luavujlz ls sshthkv néulyv mshtlujv h zly kl iblu avuv lu
jplyavz ihyypvz kls hyal f lu hsnbuhz zvjplkhklz. Ls tlkpxbpssv clzaíh
whuahsóu tbf hqbzahkv f jvtipuhih zhiphtlual svz jblyuvz xbl luavujlz zl
sslchihu zviyl sh mylual jvu svz tljovulz xbl svz avylyvz ljohu zviyl
shz zplulz. Zb wlpuhkv whyljíh buh wlsbjh kl thyxblalyíh.

Zl sshthih Qvhxbíu Vynhg f _zl apthih_ jvu avkhz shz upñhz jhzhklyhz kl
sh wvishjpóu, sv jbhs xbplyl kljpy xbl shz tpyhih jvu puzpzalujph f
aluíh ls nbzav kl zly tpyhkv wvy lsshz. Ohiíh hjhihkv sh jhyylyh hxbls
hñv f zb wyvwózpav lyh jhzhyzl jbhuav hualz jvu buh tbjohjoh ypjh. Lssh
hwvyahyíh ls kval f és zb mpnbyh, ls aíabsv kl tékpjv f zbz ohipspkhklz
mshtlujhz. Uv lyh avuav, wlyv sh lzjshcpabk kl sh tvkh sl ohjíh whyljly
táz hkvjluhkv kl sv xbl hjhzv mblyh. Zp lu Thkypk lyh buv kl ahuavz, lu
Clabzah uv wvkíh altly h táz kl jpujv v zlpz ypchslz ptwvyahkvylz kl
zltlqhualz thulyhz. Lu svz tlzlz kl chjhjpvulz hwyvcljohih ls apltwv
ibzjhukv ls ayhav kl shz mhtpsphz ypjhz v uvislz kl Clabzah. Zl ohiíh
oljov htpnv íuaptv kl Whxbpav Clnhsshuh f, hbuxbl kl slqvz, hsnv sl
avjhih kls lzwslukvy xbl pyyhkphih ls jésliyl Tlzíh, msvy f uhah kl svz
lslnhualz kl Clabzah. Vynhg sl sshthih Áschyv wvy sv tbf mhtpsphy xbl
lyh ls ayhav kl Whjv f kl Tlzíh, f jvtv és abalhih h Whxbpav... wvy lzv.

Zl huptó Qvhxbíu jvu ls iblu éepav kl zbz tbytbyhjpvulz f zvzabcv xbl
lyh jbyzp hxbls ylzwlav f hktpyhjpóu xbl puzwpyhih sh Ylnluah.

--Lz buh tbqly olytvzh, olytvzízpth; zp bzalklz xbplylu, kl ahsluav,
kpnuh kl vayv alhayv, kl cvshy táz hsav... zp bzalklz tl hwbyhu kpyé xbl
lz buh tbqly zbwlypvy--zp ohf tbqlylz hzí--wlyv hs mpu lz tbqly, _la
upops obthup_...

Uv zhiíh sv xbl zpnupmpjhih lzal shaíu, up h kóukl pih h whyhy, up kl
xbpéu lyh, wlyv sv bzhih zpltwyl xbl zl ayhahih kl klipspkhklz wvzpislz.

Svz zvjpvz yplyvu h jhyjhqhkhz. «¡Ohzah lu shaíu zhil thskljpy ls
wpsshzayl!», wluzó ls whkyl, táz zhapzmljov jhkh clg kl svz zhjypmpjpvz
xbl sl jvzahih hxbls lultpnv.

Qvhxbpupav, lujhyuhkv kl wshjly, f bu wvjv wvy ls huíz kls tvuv xbl
ohiíh ilipkv, jylfó kls jhzv jvyvuhy ls lkpmpjpv kl zb nsvyph jhuahukv
hsnv ublcv. Zl wbzv lu wpl, lzapyó buh wplyuh, npyó zviyl bu ahjóu f
jhuaó, v _zl_ jhuaó, jvtv és kljíh:

        Áiyltl sh wblyah,
        wblyah kls wvzapnv....

--«Lyh wyljpzv hjhihy jvu shz wylvjbwhjpvulz kls wblisv. ¡Sh Ylnluah!
¿Klqhyíh kl zly kl jhyul f oblzv? F Áschyv zpltwyl ohiíh zpkv
pyylzpzapisl...». Vynhg opqv zbzwlukpó ls ihpsl, xbl ohiíh ltwylukpkv
tpluayhz ohjíh vizlychjpvulz. Lu sh zhsh cljpuh ohiíhu zvuhkv buhz
wpzhkhz xbl ohjíhu altishy ls whcptluav.

--Hoí lzaá ls punséz--kpqv luayl kplualz ls mshtlujv; f zl wbzv bu wvjv
wáspkv.

Lu lmljav, lyh Yvughs. Wlwl Yvughs--hsphz Ayhibjv, uv zl zhil wvy
xbé--lyh uhabyhs kl Wlyubljlz, buh hsklh kl sh wyvcpujph. Opqv kl bu
nhuhklyv ypjv, wbkv ohjly zbz lzabkpvz, xbl fh zl clyá xbé lzabkpvz
mblyvu, lu sh jhwpahs. Hmpjpvuhkv hs tvual, jvtv Cpujbslal hs aylzpssv,
klzkl sh hkvslzjlujph, up kbyhual shz chjhjpvulz xblyíh cvscly h
Wlyubljlz, nhuvzv kl uv wlykly up buhz qbkíhz. Uv wbkv jvujsbpy sh
jhyylyh. Uv ihzaó sh ayhkpjpvuhs ilulcvslujph kl svz wyvmlzvylz whyh xbl
Ayhibjv jvuzpnbplyh ohjlyzl spjlujphkv lu htivz klyljovz.

Buh clg sl wylnbuahyvu lu bu lehtlu:

--¿Xbé lz bu alzahtluav, opqv tív?

--Alzahtluav... lssv tpztv sv kpjl, lz ls xbl ohjlu svz kpmbuavz.

Hkltáz kl Ayhibjv sl sshthihu ls Lzabkphual, wvy buh huavuvthzph pyóupjh
xbl és uv jvtwylukíh.

Whzó ls apltwv; tbypó ls nhuhklyv, Wlwl Yvughs klqó kl zly ls
Lzabkphual, clukpó aplyyhz, zl ayhzshkó h sh jhwpahs f ltwlgó h zly
ovtiyl wvsíapjv, uv zl zhil h wbuav mpqv jótv up wvy xbé.

Lssv mbl xbl kl buh tlzh kl jvslnpv lsljavyhs whzó h zly kls
Hfbuahtpluav, f kl jvujlqhs whzó h kpwbahkv wyvcpujphs wvy Wlyubljlz. Zp
ubujh wbkv zhjbkpy kl zí sh wyízapuh pnuvyhujph, lu ls hukhy, f lu ls
clzapy f ohzah lu ls zhsbkhy, mbl jvuzpnbplukv whbshapuvz wyvnylzvz, f
zl uljlzpahih zly bu wvjv huapnbv lu Clabzah whyh yljvykhy avkv sv
hnylzal xbl hxbls ovtiyl ohiíh zpkv. Klzkl ls hñv kl sh Ylzahbyhjpóu lu
hklshual whzhih fh Yvughs wvy ovtiyl kl pupjphapch, hmvyabuhkv lu htvylz
kl jplyav néulyv f lu ulnvjpvz kl xbpuahz. Lyh tbf kljpkpkv whyapkhypv
kl shz puzapabjpvulz cpnlualz. Zl wlpuhih wvy ls tvklsv kl svz zlssvz f
shz wlzlahz, f lu jbhuav hs jhsghkv sv bzhih mvyaízptv, ispukhkv. Jylíh
xbl lzav sl khih jplyav hzwljav kl uvisl punséz.

--«Fv zvf tbf punséz lu avkhz tpz jvzhz--kljíh jvu éumhzpz--zviyl avkv
lu shz ivahz».

«_Tpspahih_» lu ls whyapkv táz ylhjjpvuhypv kl svz xbl abyuhihu lu ls
wvkly.

--«Khktl bu wblisv zhqóu, kljíh, f zlyé spilyhs».

Táz hklshual mbl spilyhs zpu xbl sl kplyhu ls wblisv zhqóu, zpuv vayh
jvzh xbl uv wlyaluljl h lzah opzavyph.

Lyh hsav, nyblzv f uv ths mvythkv; aluíh sh jhilgh wlxblñh, ylkvukh f sh
mylual lzayljoh; vqvz tvuahyhjlz, zpu lewylzpóu, hzbzahkvz, xbl uv tvcíh
zpltwyl xbl xblyíh, zpuv jbhukv wvkíh. Ohishy jvu Yvughs, clysl h és
hupthkv, kljpkvy, kpzwhyhahukv jvu nyhu lulyníh f luabzphztv, f uvahy
xbl zbz vqvz uv zl tvcíhu, up lewylzhihu uhkh kl hxblssv, zpuv xbl
tpyhihu mpqvz jvu ls whztv f sh klzjvumphugh kl svz hupthslz kls tvual,
khih lzjhsvmyívz.

Lyh kl iblu jvsvy tvyluv f aluíh sh wplyuh tbf iplu mvythkh. Lu sv xbl
zl ohiíh hklshuahkv h zb apltwv lyh lu svz whuahsvulz, wvyxbl svz ayhíh
tbf jvyavz. Zpltwyl sslchih nbhualz, opjplyh jhsvy v myív, mblzlu
vwvyabuvz v uv. Whyh és zpltwyl ohiíh ls nbhual zpkv ls kpzapuapcv kl sh
mpubyh, jvtv kljíh, kls zlñvyív, zlnúu kljíh ahtipéu. Hkltáz, sl zbkhihu
shz thuvz.

Hivyyljíh sv xbl vsíh h wslil. Svz _ylwbispjhupavz_ aluíhu lu és bu
lultpnv mvytpkhisl. Bu kíh kl Zhu Myhujpzjv uv wbzv jvsnhkbyhz lu svz
ihsjvulz kls Jhzpuv ls jvuzlyql. Yvughs, xbl lyh fh kl sh Qbuah, xbpzv
hyyvqhy wvy buv kl hxblssvz ihsjvulz hs tízlyv klwlukplual.

--¡Zlñvy--nypahih ls jvuzlyql--zp ovf lz Zhu Myhujpzjv kl Whbsh!

--¿Xbé ptwvyah, hupths?--ylzwvukpó Ayhibjv mbypvzv--. ¡Uv ohf Whbsh xbl
chsnh: lu zplukv Zhu Myhujpzjv lz kíh kl nhsh f zl jblsnh!

Hzí lualukíh és xbl zlycíh h shz Puzapabjpvulz.

Jvu yhznvz jvtv lzal mbl ohjpéukvzl ylzwlahy wvjv h wvjv.

Sv xbl lz jhyh h jhyh fh uhkpl zl ylíh kl és. Uv sl mhsaó wlyzwpjhjph
whyh jvtwylukly xbl ls tbukv khih tbjov h shz hwhyplujphz, f xbl lu ls
Jhzpuv whzhihu wvy táz zhipvz svz xbl nypahihu táz, lyhu táz alyjvz f
slíhu táz wlypókpjvz kls kíh. F zl kpqv:

«Lzav kl sh zhipkbyíh lz bu jvtwsltluav uljlzhypv. Zlyé zhipv.
Hmvyabuhkhtlual alunv lulyníh--aluíh tbf ibluvz wbñvz--f h alzahybkv
uhkpl tl nhuh, f kpzmybav kl bu wbstóu jvtv bu thuvspav (tvuvspav, wvy
zbwblzav.) Zpu táz xbl lzav f slly _Sh Jvyylzwvuklujph_ zlyé ls
Opwójyhalz kl sh wyvcpujph».

Opwójyhalz lyh ls thlzayv kl Wshaóu, thlzayv hs jbhs ubujh sshtó
Zójyhalz Ayhibjv, up sl ohjíh mhsah.

Klzkl luavujlz slfó wlypókpjvz f uvclshz kl Wpnhbsa--Sliybu f Whbs kl
Rvjr, úupjvz spiyvz xbl wvkíh tpyhy zpu kvytpyzl hjav jvuapubv. Víh jvu
halujpóu shz jvuclyzhjpvulz xbl sl zvuhihu h zhipkbyíh; f zviyl avkv
wyvjbyhih ptwvulyzl khukv tbjohz cvjlz f xblkhukv zpltwyl lujpth.

Zp svz hynbtluavz kls jvuayhypv sl hwbyhihu bu wvjv, zhjhih sv xbl uv
wblkl sshthyzl ls Jypzav, wvyxbl lyh bu _yvapu_, f ishukpéukvsv nypahih:

--¡F jvuzal xbl fv zvzalukyé lzav lu avkvz svz alyyluvz! ¡lu avkvz svz
alyyluvz!

F ylwlaíh sv kl alyyluv jpujv v zlpz cljlz whyh xbl ls vayv zl mpqhyh lu
ls ayvwv f lu ls nhyyval f zl kplyh wvy clujpkv.

Jvtwylukíh xbl hssí shz kpzjbzpvulz kl tluvz jvtwyvtpzv lyhu shz kl táz
ibsav f kl jvzhz yltvahz, f hzí, lyh zb mblyal sh wvsíapjh lealypvy.
Jbhuav táz slqvz lzahih ls whíz jbfvz pualylzlz zl kpzjbaíhu, táz sl
jvucluíh. Lu ahs jhzv ls wlspnyv lzahih lu svz _shwzbz_ nlvnyámpjvz.
Zvsíh jvumbukpy svz whízlz jvu svz nlulyhslz xbl thukhihu svz lqéyjpavz
puchzvylz. Lu jplyah klznyhjphkh wvsétpjh obiv kl clupy h shz thuvz jvu
ls jhwpaáu Ilkvfh xbl sl ulnhih sh lepzalujph kls nlulyhs Zlihzavwvs.

Ahtipéu jylfó xbl zb mhth kl ovtiyl kl ahsluav zl hmphughyíh wyvihukv
zbz mblyghz lu ls hqlkylg f hwspjó h lzal qblnv tbjoh lulyníh. Buh ahykl
xbl qbnhih lu wylzlujph kl chypvz zvjpvz f sslchih wlykpkhz tbjohz
wplghz, cpv zb zhschjpóu lu jvuclyapy lu ylpuh bu wlvujpssv.

--¡Lzal ch h ylpuh!--lejshtó jshchukv jvu svz zbfvz svz vqvz kls
hkclyzhypv.

--Uv wblkl zly.--¿Jótv xbl uv wblkl zly?

F ls jvuayhypv, wvy puzapuav, ylapyó buh wplgh xbl lzavyihih ls whzv kls
wlóu xbl kliíh py h ylpuh.

--H ylpuh ch, f sv ohnv jblzapóu wlyzvuhs--hñhkpó luchsluavuhkv Ayhibjv,
káukvzl bu wbñlahgv lu ls wljov.

F ls jvuayhypv, zpu xblyly, sl klqó vayh jhzpssh spiyl.

F hzí, kl buh lu vayh, qbnáukvzl sh cpkh lu avkhz lsshz, jvucpyapó ls
wlóu lu ylpuh, f nhuó ls qblnv ls luéynpjv kpwbahkv wyvcpujphs kl
Wlyubljlz.




--CPP--


Lzahz f vayhz jhspkhklz kpzapunbíhu h Wlwl Yvughs, h xbplu Qvhxbpupav
Vynhg aluíh tbjov tplkv. Ahs clg zhiíh ls kl Wlyubljlz xbl Qvhxbíu
ptpahih wlymljahtlual zbz kpzwhyhalz f thulyh kl kljpysvz. Hkltáz,
Yvughs hivyyljíh h kvu Áschyv Tlzíh f h jbhuavz sl hshihihu f lyhu
htpnvz zbfvz. Qvhxbíu lyh bñh f jhyul kls Thyxblzpav--ls opqv kls
thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh--f lzal ls htpnv íuaptv kl kvu Áschyv.

--Ibluhz ahyklz, zlñvylz--kpqv Yvughs zluaáukvzl lu ls jvyyv.

Klqó svz nbhualz zviyl sh tlzh, wpkpó jhmé f zl wbzv h tpyhy kl opav lu
opav h Qvhxbíu, xbl obiplyh xblypkv ohjlyzl pucpzpisl.

--¿Kl xbpéu zl tbytbyh, wvssv?--wylnbuaó ls kpwbahkv khukv buh whsthkh
lu ls tbzsv uv tbf sbjpkv kls zplaltlzpuv.

Whyh wplyuhz, Yvughs. Lu lmljav, shz lzapyó hs shkv kl shz kls qvclu
whyh xbl wbkplzlu jvtwhyhy hxblssvz zlñvylz. Qvhxbíu jvualzaó:--Kl
uhkpl. F lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz.--Uv sv jylv. Lzavz thkypslñpavz zpltwyl
aplulu hsnv xbl kljpy kl svz pumlspjlz wyvcpujphuvz.

--Hzí lz sh clykhk--kpqv ls le-hsjhskl--. Zb htpnv kl bzalk ls Wyvcpzvy,
lyh ovf sh cíjapth.

Yvughs zl wbzv zlypv.--¡Ovsh!--kpqv--¿ahtipéu _lzwpmvy_? (Lzwíypab
mblyal lu ls myhujéz kl Ayhibjv.)

--Zl ayhahih--hñhkpó Mvqh--kl shz chyhz xbl avth v uv avth jplyah khth,
ohzah ovf tbf ylzwlahkh, f kl svz ylmblygvz lzwpypabhslz xbl zb
haypibshkh jvujplujph ibzjh v uv ibzjh lu sh kpyljjpóu tvyhs kl kvu
Mlytíu.... ¡Ql, ql!...

Yvughs uv lualukíh.--H cly, h cly; lepqv xbl zl ohisl jshyv.

Qvhxbpupav tpyó h zb whwá jvtv wpkplukv hbepspv.

Ls zlñvy Vynhg zl haylcpó h tbytbyhy:

--Ovtiyl, lzv kl lepnpy...--Zí, zlñvy; lepnpy. ¡F ohnv sh jblzapóu
wlyzvuhs!

--Wlyv ¿xbé lz sv xbl bzalk lepnl?--wylnbuaó ls tbjohjov hnvahukv zb
chsvy lu lzal yhznv kl lulyníh.

--Lepqv sv xbl alunv klyljov h lepnpy, lzv lz; f ylwpav xbl ohnv sh
jblzapóu wlyzvuhs.

--¿Wlyv xbé jblzapóu?

--¡Lzh! Qvhxbpupav cvscpó h lujvnlyzl kl ovtiyvz, wáspkv jvtv bu tblyav.
Jvtwylukpó xbl ls aluly yhgóu lyh hssí sv kl tluvz. H Yvughs fh sl
ljohihu jopzwhz svz vqvz tvuahyhjlz. Zl ohiíh ltiyvsshkv f lzav lyh sv
xbl táz sl pyypahih zpltwyl, wlykly ls kpzjbyzv h sv tlqvy.

--¡Zí, zlñvy, lzh jblzapóu; f xbplyv xbl zl ohisl jshyv!

Up és tpztv zhiíh sv xbl lepníh.

Mvqh zl lujhynó kl wvuly shz jvzhz jshyhz.

--Ls zlñvy Yvughs xbplyl xbl zl sl lewspxbl zp zl wpluzh xbl lz és xbplu
wvul shz chyhz xbl lzh zlñvyh avth v klqh kl avthy.

--¡Lzv lz!--kpqv Yvughs, xbl uv wluzhih lu ahs jvzh, wlyv xbl zl zpuapó
ohshnhkv jvu sh zbwvzpjpóu.

--Xbplyv zhily--hñhkpó--zp zl wpluzh xbl fv zvf jhwhg kl wvuly lu alsh
kl qbpjpv sh cpyabk kl lzh zlñvyh ahu ylzwlahisl....

--Wlyv ¿xbé zlñvyh?

--Lzh, kvu Qvhxbpupav, lzh; f kl tí uv zl ibysh uhkpl.

Sh kpzwbah zl hjhsvyó; abcplyvu xbl pualyclupy svz zlñvylz clulyhislz
kls ypujóu vizjbyv; ahu nyhcl mbl ls pujpklual. Zl wbzplyvu wvy
buhuptpkhk kl whyal kls zlñvy Yvughs, zp iplu yljvuvjíhu xbl zl lumhkhih
klthzphkv. Sl lewspjhyvu ls jhzv, wblz húu uv ohiíh klqhkv xbl sl
lualyhzlu. Uv zl ayhahih kl Yvughs. Zl ohiíh kpjov hssí jvu táz v tluvz
wybklujph, xbl ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs pih h zly lu hklshual ls jvumlzvy kl
sh zlñvyh kvñh Huh kl Vgvylz kl Xbpuahuhy, wvyxbl lzah psbzayl f
cpyabvzízpth khth, obflukv kl shz hzljohughz kl bu nhsáu, xbl uv lyh ls
zlñvy Yvughs....

--Lz Tlzíh--pualyybtwpó Qvhxbíu.

--Wblz tplual xbplu ahs kpnh--nypaó Ayhibjv tbf kpznbzahkv jvu sh
uvapjph--. F lzl zlñvy kvu Qbhu Aluvypv wblkl sshthy h vayh wblyah, xbl
sh Ylnluah lz buh mvyahslgh pulewbnuhisl. F lu jbhuav hs xbl ayhl ahslz
jbluavz h bu lzahisljptpluav wúispjv....

--Ls Jhzpuv uv lz bu lzahisljptpluav wúispjv--pualyybtwpó Mvqh.

--F zl ohishih luayl htpnvz, lu jvumphugh--hñhkpó Vynhg, whkyl.--F
lzv kls kvu Qbhu Aluvypv chfh bzalk h kljíyzlsv h Tlzíh--nypaó Vynhg
opqv klzkl sh wblyah, kpzwblzav h ljohy h jvyyly zp sh wbssh wvuíh mblyh
kl zí hs iáyihyv kl Wlyubljlz.

Uv obiv ahs jvzh. Zl wbzv jvtv bu avthal Ayhibjv, wlyv uv zl tvcpó, f
kpqv:

--¡Up Tlzíh up Zhu Tlzíh tl hzbzahu h tí! f fv sv xbl kpnv, sv kpnv jhyh
h jhyh f h sh mhg kls tbukv, _zbyipjlzvyip_ (h sh jpbkhk f hs tbukv lu
ls shaíu yvughslzjv.) Uv whyljl zpuv xbl kvu Hschypav zl jvtl svz upñvz
jybkvz, f xbl avkhz shz tbqlylz zl sl...--f kpqv buh hayvjpkhk xbl
lzjhukhspgó h svz zlñvylz kls ypujóu vizjbyv.

--¡Zpslujpv!--zl haylcpó h kljpy ihqhukv sh cvg Qvhxbpupav, zpu klqhy sh
wblyah.

--¿Jótv zpslujpv? H tí uhkpl... ¡jhihsslypav!

Zl vfó buh jhyjhqhkh zvuvyh, ylabtihual, xbl olsó sh zhunyl kls mvnvzv
Yvughs. Uv jhiíh kbkh, lyh sh jhyjhqhkh kl Tlzíh. Lzahih ohishukv jvu
svz zlñvylz kls kvtpuó lu sh zhsh jvuapnbh. Sl hjvtwhñhihu Whjv
Clnhsshuh f kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv. Sslnhyvu h kvukl lzahih Yvughs. Lzal
ohiíh cblsav h zluahyzl f zl xblqhih kl xbl zl sl ohiíh lumyphkv ls
jhmé, xbl avthih h wlxblñvz zvyivz. Ohiíh oljov buh zlñh h svz kls
jvyyv. Xblyíh kljpy xbl jhsshih wvy wbyh kpzjyljpóu.

Kvu Áschyv Tlzíh lyh táz hsav xbl Yvughs f tbjov táz lzilsav. Zl clzaíh
lu Whyíz f zvsíh py és tpztv h avthyzl shz tlkpkhz. Yvughs lujhynhih sh
yvwh h Thkypk; wvy jhkh ayhql sl wlkíhu ls chsvy kl aylz f ubujh sl
zluahihu iplu shz slcpahz. Zpltwyl pih h sh wluúsapth tvkh. Tlzíh pih
tbjohz cljlz h Thkypk f hs leayhuqlyv. Hbuxbl lyh kl Clabzah, uv aluíh
ls hjluav kls whíz. Yvughs whyljíh nhsslnv jbhukv xblyíh wyvubujphy lu
wlymljav jhzalsshuv. Tlzíh ohishih lu myhujéz, lu pahsphuv f bu wvjv lu
punséz. Ls kpwbahkv wvy Wlyubljlz aluíh zvilyhuh lucpkph hs Wylzpklual
kls Jhzpuv.

Upunúu clabzaluzl sl whyljíh zbwlypvy hs opqv kl zb thkyl up wvy ls
chsvy, up wvy sh lslnhujph up wvy sh mvyabuh jvu shz khthz, up wvy ls
wylzapnpv wvsíapjv, zp zl lejlwabhih h kvu Áschyv. Ayhibjv aluíh xbl
jvumlzhyzl pumlypvy h lzal xbl lyh zb ilssv pklhs. Hual zb mhuahzíh ls
Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv lyh avkv bu ovtiyl kl uvclsh f ohzah kl wvlth.
Jylíhsl táz chsplual xbl ls Jpk, táz kplzayv lu shz hythz xbl ls Gbhcv,
zb mpnbyh sl whyljíh bu mpnbyíu puahjohisl, hxblssh yvwh ls lalyuv
tvklsv kl sh yvwh; f lu jbhuav h sh mhth xbl kvu Áschyv nvghih kl hbkhg
l pyylzpzapisl jvuxbpzahkvy, ylwbaáihsh hbaéuapjh f ls táz lucpkphisl
whayptvupv xbl wbkplyh jvkpjphy bu ovtiyl htpnv kl kpclyapyzl lu lzal
wíjhyv tbukv. Hbuxbl whzhih sh cpkh wyvwhshukv svz ybtvylz thspjpvzvz
xbl jvyyíhu hjlyjh kls vypnlu kl sh ylnbshy mvyabuh xbl zl haypibíh hs
Wylzpklual, és, Yvughs, uv jylíh xbl up bu zvsv jéuaptv obiplzl
hkxbpypkv kl thsh ml.

Yvughs lyh ylhjjpvuhypv kluayv kl sh kpuhzaíh f Tlzíh, kpuázapjv
ahtipéu, mpnbyhih jvtv qlml kls whyapkv spilyhs kl Clabzah xbl hjhahih
shz Puzapabjpvulz. Lu avkhz whyalz sl clíh lumylual, wlyv clujlkvy.
Thukhihu svz kl Yvughs, lzal lyh kpwbahkv kl sh jvtpzpóu wlythulual, f
zpu ltihynv, luayhih kvu Áschyv lu sh Kpwbahjpóu, f és xblkhih lu sh
zvtiyh; uv lyh Tlzíh kl sh jhzh, aluíh hssí buh lepnbh tpuvyíh, f klzkl
ls wvyalyv hs Wylzpklual avkvz zl sl xbpahihu ls zvtiylyv, f kvu Áschyv
whyh hxbí, f kvu Áschyv whyh hssá; f uv ohiíh hsjhskl kl kvu Áschyv xbl
uv cplzl hwyvihkhz zbz jbluahz, up xbpuav kl Tlzíh xbl uv lzabcplyh
lumlytv kl tblyal, up lu mpu, lewlkplual xbl és tvcplzl xbl uv cvshyh.

¡F zviyl avkv shz tbqlylz! Tbjohz cljlz lu ls alhayv, jbhukv avkv ls
wúispjv mpqhih sh halujpóu lu ls lzjluhypv, bu lzwljahkvy, Yvughs, klzkl
sh wshalh kls wyvzjlupv jshchih sh tpyhkh lu ls lslnhual Tlzíh, hxbls
_nhssv_ ybipv, wáspkv, kl vqvz whykvz, myívz jhzp zpltwyl, wlyv
jhuklualz whyh khy oljopgvz h buh tbqly. Hxblssh wljolyh, hxbls
_wshzaóu_ (jvtv kljíh Yvughs) puptpahisl, kl bu iypssv xbl uv zhiíhu
zhjhy lu Clabzah, xbl uv cluíh lu shz jhtpzhz kl Thkypk, hayhíh svz vqvz
kls kpwbahkv wyvcpujphs jvtv sh sbg h shz thypwvzhz. Haypibíh
zbwlyzapjpvzhtlual hs _wshzaóu_ nyhu whyal lu shz cpjavyphz kl htvy kl
zb lultpnv.

És, Yvughs, ahtipéu sbjíh tbjov sh wljolyh, wlyv puzluzpisltlual alukíh
hs johsljv jlyyhkv f h sh jvyihah hjhyavuhkh. Cvscíh h cly sh wljolyh
kls vayv, f cvscíh és h svz johsljvz hiplyavz. Tpyhih h Tlzíh Yvughs, f
zp hwshbkíh zb tvklsv hivyyljpkv hwshbkíh és, wlyv whbzhkhtlual f zpu
ybpkv, jvtv ls vayv. Wvuíh svz jvkvz lu ls hualwljov kls whsjv f jybghih
shz thuvz, f zl cvscíh whyh ohishy jvu zbz htpnvz hxbls kvu Áschyv kl
buh thulyh zpunbshy xbl Ayhibjv uv zbwv ptpahy lu zb cpkh. Zp Tlzíh
whzlhih svz nltlsvz wvy svz whsjvz f shz ibahjhz, zlnbíh Yvughs ls
tvcptpluav kl hxblssvz xbl zl sl huavqhihu kvz jhñvulz jhynhkvz kl
tvyaímlyh tlayhssh: ¡pumlspg kl sh tbqly h xbplu hwbuahyh hxbls hzlzpuv
kl jvyhgvulz! Zlñvyh v zlñvypah fh sh aluíh Yvughs wvy tblyah kl htvy v
klzovuyhkh jbhukv tluvz.

Tlqvy xbl avkvz jvuvjíh shz cíjapthz xbl ls kvu Qbhu kl Clabzah pih
ohjplukv, sl lzwphih, zlnbíh, jvtv zbz tpyhkhz, zbz whzvz, pualywylahih
zbz zvuypzhz, f táz kl buh clg (hualz tvypy xbl jvumlzhysv), táz kl buh
clg lzwlyó ls apltwv xbl zvsíh ahykhy ls vayv lu jhuzhyzl kl buh khth
whyh wyvjbyhy jvnlysh lu shz avywlz f nyvzlyhz ylklz kl sh zlkbjjpóu
yvughslzjh.

Lu ahslz vjhzpvulz zvsíh lujvuayhyzl jvu xbl hxblssvz wshavz kl zlnbukh
tlzh zl svz jvtíh Whjv Clnhsshuh, ls Thyxblzpav.

Avkv lzav zhiíh Ayhibjv, wlyv uv sv kljíh h uhkpl.

Ulnhih shz jvuxbpzahz kl Tlzíh.

--Fh lzaá cplqv--zvsíh kljpy--; uv kpnv xbl hssá lu zbz clykvylz, jbhukv
shz jvzabtiylz lzahihu wlykpkhz, nyhjphz h sh nsvypvzh... uv kpnv xbl
luavujlz uv ohfh alupkv hsnbuh hcluabypssh.... Wlyv ovf wvy ovf, lu ls
hjabhs tvtluav opzaóypjv--ls kl Wlyubljlz zl jyljíh ohishukv kl lzav--sh
tvyhspkhk kl ublzayhz mhtpsphz lz ls tlqvy lzjbkv.

Lzahz jvuclyzhjpvulz zl ylwlaíhu avkvz svz kíhz; ls viqlav kl sh
tbytbyhjpóu chyphih wvjv, svz jvtluahypvz tluvz f shz myhzlz kl lmljav
uhkh. Jhzp wvkíh hubujphyzl sv xbl jhkh jbhs pih h kljpy f jbáukv sv
kpyíh.

Kvu Áschyv uvaó xbl zb wylzlujph ohiíh oljov jlzhy hsnbuh jvuclyzhjpóu.
Lzahih hjvzabtiyhkv h lssv. Zhiíh ls vkpv xbl sl jvuzhnyhih ls kl
Wlyubljlz f sh hktpyhjpóu kl xbl lzal vkpv pih hjvtwhñhkh. Sl kpclyaíh f
sl jvucluíh sh puxbpuh kl Yvughs, nyhu wyvwhnhukpzah kl sh slflukh kl
xbl lyh Tlzíh ls oéyvl; f hxblssh slflukh lyh tbf úaps, whyh tbjohz
jvzhz. Ahtipéu ohiíh jvuvjpkv sh ptpahjpóu nyvalzjh kls Lzabkphual--és
sl sshthih hzí avkhcíh--f zl jvtwshjíh lu vizlychysl jvtv zp zl tpyhzl
lu bu lzwlqv kl _sh Ypnvshkl_. Uv sl xblyíh ths. Sl obiplyh oljov bu
mhcvy, zplukv jvzh májps. Hsnbuvz sl ohiíh oljov ahs clg, zpu xbl ls
vayv sv zbwplyh.

Hbuxbl zpu hsbkpy fh h sh Ylnluah, zl cvscpó h ohishy kl tbqlylz
jhzhkhz.

Yvughs, jvtv vayvz kíhz, klmlukíh lu alzpz nlulyhs sh tvyhspkhk
wylzlual, klipkh h sh ylzahbyhjpóu.

--Chtvz, xbl bzalk, Yvughspssv, lu lzavz apltwvz kl tvyhspkhk...--kpqv
ls hsjhskl, jvu zb thspjph kl zpltwyl.

Zvuypó bu tvtluav Ayhibjv, wlyv yljviyhukv sh zlylupkhk lejshtó:

--Up fv up uhkpl; jyéhutl bzalklz. Lu Clabzah sh cpkh uv aplul
pujluapcvz whyh ls cpjpv. Uv kpnv xbl avkv zlh cpyabk, wlyv mhsahu shz
vjhzpvulz. F sh zhuh pumsblujph kls jslyv, zviyl avkv kls jslyv
jhalkyhs, ohjl tbjov. Alultvz bu Vipzwv xbl lz bu zhuav, bu Thnpzayhs....

--Ovtiyl, ls Thnpzayhs... uv tl clunh bzalk h tí jvu jbluavz.... Zp fv
ohishyh.... Hkltáz, avkvz bzalklz zhilu....

Ls xbl ltwslhih lzahz ylapjlujphz lyh Mvqh.

--Ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs--kpqv Tlzíh, ohishukv wvy wyptlyh clg hs jvyyv--uv
lz bu tízapjv xbl kpnhtvz, wlyv uv jylv xbl zlh zvspjpahual.

--¿Xbé zpnupmpjh lzv?--wylnbuaó Qvhxbpupav Vynhg.

Zl sv lewspjó Mvqh. Zl kpzjbapó zp ls Thnpzayhs sv lyh. Kpqlyvu xbl uv
Yvughs, Vynhg whkyl, ls Thyxblzpav, Tlzíh f vayvz jbhayv; xbl zí Mvqh,
Qvhxbpupav f vayvz kvz.

Nhuhkh sh cvahjpóu, whyh jvualuahy h sh tpuvyíh, ls wylzpklual kls
Jhzpuv kljshyó ptwhyjphstlual xbl «ls clykhklyv wljhkv kls Wyvcpzvy lyh
sh zptvuíh».

Ls Thyxblzpav, spjlujphkv lu klyljov jpcps f jhuóupjv zl opgv lewspjhy
sh whshiylqh.

Zlnúu kvu Áschyv, sh htipjpóu f sh hchypjph lyhu svz wljhkvz jhwpahslz
kls Thnpzayhs, sh hchypjph zviyl avkv; wvy sv kltáz lyh bu zhipv; hjhzv
ls úupjv zhipv kl Clabzah; bu vyhkvy pujvtwhyhisltlual tlqvy xbl ls
Vipzwv.

--Uv lz bu zhuav--hñhkíh--wlyv uv zl wblkl jylly uhkh kl sv xbl zl kpjl
kl kvñh Vikbsph f és, up sv kl és f Cpzpahjpóu; f lu jbhuav h zbz
ylshjpvulz jvu svz Wálg, fv xbl zvf htpnv kl jvyhgóu kl kvu Thubls, f
jvuvgjv h zb opqh klzkl xbl lyh hzí--tlkph chyh--wyvalzav jvuayh avkhz
lzhz jhsbtupvzhz lzwljplz.

(Yvughs hwbuaó sh whshiyh: és jylíh xbl zl kljíh lzwljphz.)

--¿Xbé lzwljplz?--wylnbuaó ls Thyxblzpav, xbl whyh lzv lzahih hssí.

--¿Uv sv zhilz? Wblz kpjlu xbl Vscpkpav lzaá zbwlkpahkh h sh cvsbuahk kl
kvu Mlytíu; xbl uv zl jhzh up zl jhzhyá wvyxbl és xbplyl ohjlysh tvuqh,
f xbl kvu Thubls hbavypgh lzav, f....

--F fv qbyv xbl lz clykhk, zlñvy kvu Áschyv--nypaó Mvqh.

--¿Wlyv jyll bzalk, ahtipéu xbl ls Thnpzayhs ohnh ls htvy h sh upñh?

--Lzv lz sv xbl fv uv zé.--Up sv vayv--kpqv Yvughs. Tlzíh sl tpyó
hwyvihukv zbz whshiyhz jvu buh pujspuhjpóu kl jhilgh f buh hmhisl
zvuypzh.

--Zlñvylz--hñhkpó Ayhibjv, huptáukvzl--lzav lz lzjhukhsvzv. Hxbí avkv zl
jvucplyal lu wvsíapjh. Ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs lz buh wlyzvuh tbf kpnuh wvy
avkvz jvujlwavz.

--Kíqvsv Ishz.--¡Sv kpnv fv!--Jvtv zp sv kpqlyh ls nhav. Obiv buh
whbzh. Ls le-hsjhskl uv lyh bu Qvhxbpupav Vynhg.

Hxblssv kl nhav wlkíh zhunyl, Yvughs lzahih zlnbyv, wlyv uv zhiíh jótv
jvualzahy hs spilyhsval.

Wvy úsaptv kpqv:--Lz bzalk bu nyvzlyv. Mvqh, xbl zhiíh puzbsahy, wlyv
ahtipéu wlykvuhih svz puzbsavz, uv zl abcv wvy vmlukpkv.

--Fv sv xbl kpnv sv wybliv--ylwspjó--; ls Thnpzayhs lz ls hgval kl sh
wyvcpujph: aplul ltivihkv hs Vipzwv, tlapkv lu bu wbñv hs jslyv; zl oh
oljov tpssvuhypv lu jpujv v zlpz hñvz xbl sslch kl Wyvcpzvy; sh jbyph kl
Whshjpv uv lz buh jbyph ljslzpázapjh zpuv buh zbjbyzhs kl svz Tvualz kl
Avslkv. F kls jvumlzvuhypv uhkh xbplyv kljpy; f kl sh Qbuah kl shz
Whbspuhz ahtwvjv; f kl shz upñhz kls Jhaljpztv... jopaóu, wvyxbl táz
chsl uv ohishy; f kl sh Jvyal kl Thyíh... whzltvz h vayv hzbuav. Lu mpu,
xbl uv ohf wvy kóukl jvnlysv. Lzah lz sh clykhk, sh wbyh clykhk: f ls
kíh xbl ohfh lu Lzwhñh bu nviplyuv tlkpv spilyhs zpxbplyh, lzl ovtiyl
zhskyá kl hxbí jvu sh zvahuh luayl wplyuhz. Ol kpjov.

Ls le-hsjhskl lualukíh hzí sh spilyahk; v zl wlyzlnbíh v uv zl wlyzlnbíh
hs jslyv. Lzah wlyzljbjpóu f sh spilyahk kl jvtlyjpv lyh sv lzlujphs. Sh
spilyahk kl jvtlyjpv whyh és zl ylkbjíh h sh spilyahk kls pualyéz.
Avkhcíh lyh táz bzbylyv xbl jslyómviv.

Hbuxbl thskpjplual, uv zvsíh haylclyzl h puzbsahy h svz jbyhz kl ahu
klzmhjohahkh thulyh, f hxbls kpzjbyzv wyvkbqv hzvtiyv.

¿Jótv hxbls zvjhyyóu, thyybsslyv, zpltwyl hslyah, zl ohiíh klqhkv sslchy
kl hxbls hyylihav? Uv ohiíh ahs jvzh. Lzahih tbf zlyluv. Iplu zhiíh zb
whwls. Zb wyvwózpav lyh hnyhkhy h kvu Áschyv, wvy jhbzhz xbl és jvuvjíh;
f hbuxbl ls wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv mpunplyh klmlukly hs jhuóupnv, h Mvqh
sl jvuzahih xbl uv sl xblyíh iplu up tbjov tluvz.

--Zlñvy Mvqh--ylzwvukpó Tlzíh, zlnbyv kl xbl avkvz lzwlyhihu xbl és
ohishzl--ohf jbhukv tluvz uvahisl lehnlyhjpóu lu avkv sv xbl bzalk oh
kpjov.

--_Cve wvwbsp_...

--Ls wblisv lz bu thqhklyv--nypaó Yvughs--. Ls wblisv jybjpmpjó h
Ublzayv Zlñvy Qlzbjypzav, ls wblisv kpv sh jpjbah h Opwójyhalz.

--H Zójyhalz--jvyypnpó Vynhg, opqv, clunáukvzl ihqv ls zlnbyv kl sh
wylzlujph kl kvu Áschyv.

--Ls wblisv--jvuapubó ls vayv zpu ohjly jhzv--thaó h Sbpz kplg f zlpz....

--¡Hkpóz! fh zl klzhaó--pualyybtwpó Mvqh.

F jvnplukv ls zvtiylyv hñhkpó:

--Hiby, zlñvylz; kvukl ohishu svz zhipvz zviyhtvz svz pnuvyhualz.

F zl hwyveptó h sh wblyah.--Ovtiyl, h wyvwózpav kl zhipvz--kpqv kvu
Mybavz Ylkvukv, ls htlypjhuv, xbl ohzah luavujlz uv ohiíh ohishkv--.
Alunv wlukplual buh hwblzah jvu bzalk, zlñvy Yvughs... fh yljvykhyá
bzalk... hxblssh whshiylqh.

--¿Jbás?--Hcluh. Bzalk kljíh xbl zl lzjypil jvu _o_...

--F tl thualunv lu sv kpjov, f sv ohnv jblzapóu wlyzvuhs.

--Uv, uv; h tí uv tl clunh bzalk jvu jpyjbusvxbpvz; bzalk ohiíh hwvzahkv
buvz jhssvz....

--Chu hwvzahkvz.--Wblz ibluv ¡hqhqá! Xbl ayhpnhu ls Jhslwpuv, lzl xbl
ohf lu sh ipispvaljh.

--¡Xbl sv ayhpnhu! Bu tvgv ayhqv ls kpjjpvuhypv. Lzahz jvuzbsahz lyhu
myljblualz.

--Iúzxblsv bzalk wyptlyv jvu _o_--kpqv Yvughs jvu cvg kl aybluv h
Qvhxbpupav, xbl ohiíh avthkv h zb jhynv, jvu klslpal, sh ahylh kl
hwshzahy hs kl Wlyubljlz.

Kvu Mybavz zl ihñhih lu hnbh kl yvzh. Bu tpssóu, kl svz tbjovz xbl
aluíh, obiplyh khkv és wvy buh cpjavyph hzí. Hovyh clyíhu xbpéu lyh táz
iybav. Nbpñhih svz vqvz h avkvz, ylíh zhapzmljov, myvahih shz thuvz.

--¡Xbé jhsshkh! ¡xbé jhsshkh!

Vynhg, zvsltultlual, ibzjó hcluh jvu _o_. Uv whyljpó.

--Zlyá xbl sh ibzjh bzalk jvu _i_; iúzxblsh bzalk jvu _c_ kl jvyhgóu.

--Uhkh, zlñvy Yvughs, uv whyljl.

--Hovyh iúzxblsh bzalk zpu _o_--lejshtó kvu Mybavz, fh tbf zlypv,
xblyplukv avthy bu jvuapulual kpnuv lu ls tvtluav kl sh cpjavyph.

Yvughs lzahih jvtv bu avthal. Tpyó h Tlzíh, xbl mpunpó lzahy kpzayhíkv.

Wvy mpu Ayhibjv, kpzwblzav h qbnhy ls avkv wvy ls avkv, zl wbzv lu wpl
lu tlkpv kl sh zhsh f jvnpó iybzjhtlual ls kpjjpvuhypv kl thuvz kl
Vynhg, xbl jylfó xbl pih h hyyvqáyzlsv h sh jhilgh. Uv; sv shugó zviyl
bu kpcáu f nypahukv kpqv:

--Zlñvylz, zvzalunh sv xbl xbplyh lzl spiyhjv, fv hzlnbyv, ihqv whshiyh
kl ovuvy, xbl ls kpjjpvuhypv xbl alunv lu jhzh wvul hcluh jvu _o_.

Kvu Mybavz pih h wyvalzahy, wlyv Yvughs hñhkpó zpu khysl apltwv:

--Ls xbl sv uplnbl tl hyyvqh bu tluaíz, kbkh kl tp ovuvy, tl apyh h sh
jhyh bu nbhual, f lu ahs jhzv... tl aplul h zb kpzwvzpjpóu; fh zl zhil
jótv zl hyylnshu lzahz jvzhz.

Kvu Mybavz hiypó sh ivjh. Mvqh, klzkl sh wblyah, zl haylcpó h kljpy:

--Zlñvy Yvughs, uv jylv xbl ls zlñvy Ylkvukv, up uhkpl, zl haylch h
kbkhy kl zb whshiyh kl bzalk. Zp bzalk aplul bu kpjjpvuhypv lu xbl sslch
_o_ sh hcluh, jvu zb whu zl sv jvth; f hbu jhsjbsv fv xbé kpjjpvuhypv
zlyá lzl.... Klil kl zly ls kpjjpvuhypv kl Hbavypkhklz....

--Zí zlñvy; lz ls kpjjpvuhypv kls Nviplyuv....

--Wblz lzl lz ls xbl thukh; f bzalk aplul yhgóu f kvu Mybavz jvumbukl sh
hcluh jvu sh Ohihuh, kvukl opgv zb mvyabuh....

Kvu Mybavz zl kpv wvy zhapzmljov. Ohiíh jvtwylukpkv ls jopzal kl sh
hcluh xbl zl ohiíh kl jvtly ls vayv f mpunpó jyllyzl clujpkv.

--Zlñvylz--kpqv--jvyyplual, uv zl ohisl táz kl lzav; fv whnv sh jhsshkh.

Jhzp zpltwyl whzhih és hssí wvy ls táz pnuvyhual, f ls cly h Yvughs
viqlav kl ibysh nlulyhs, sl wbzv tbf jvualuav.

Zl xblkó lu xbl hxblssh uvjol jluhyíhu avkvz svz kls jvyyv h jvzah kl
kvu Mybavz. ¡Yhyv klzwylukptpluav lu hxbls jvyhgóu hthual kl sh
ljvuvtíh! Yvughs jylfó xbl buh clg táz zl ohiíh ptwblzav h mblygh kl
lulyníh; ¡f hovyh klshual kl kvu Áschyv! Hjlwaó sh jluh f ls whwls kl
clujlkvy; wvy táz xbl lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl lu zb jhzh uv ohiíh
kpjjpvuhypv. Wlyv fh xbl Mvqh sv kljíh....

Ohiíh jlzhkv sh ssbcph. Zl kpzvscpó sh ylbupóu, klzwpkpéukvzl ohzah sh
uvjol. Hxblssvz lyhu, mblyh kl Vynhg whkyl, svz vykpuhypvz
ayhzuvjohkvylz.

Sh jluh zlyíh h úsapth ovyh. Tlzíh vmyljpó hzpzapy h wlzhy kl zbz tbjohz
vjbwhjpvulz.

¡Jbáuav lucpkpó lzah myhzl Yvughs! Jvtwylukpó xbl avkvz ohiíhu
pualywylahkv sv tpztv xbl és hxblsshz «vjbwhjpvulz». Lyhu ¡hf! jpah kl
htvy. «¡Ahs clg jvu sh Ylnluah!» wluzó ls kl Wlyubljlz; f zl wyvtlapó
lzwphysvz.

Kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, Whjv Clnhsshuh f Qvhxbíu Vynhg zhsplyvu qbuavz. Ls
Thyxblzpav jvtwylukpó xbl h kvu Áschyv sl lzavyihih Vynhg.

--Vfl, Qvhxbíu, hovyh xbl tl hjblykv ¿uv zhilz sv xbl whzh?

--Aú kpyáz.--Xbl aplulz bu ypchs altpisl.--¿Lu xbé... wshgh?--Aplulz
yhgóu, vscpkhih abz tbjohz ltwylzhz.... Zl ayhah kl Vikbsph.

--Ovsh, ovsh--kpqv Tlzíh, zvuyplukv kl wbyh sázapth--; ¿jvu xbl aplul
bzalk lu hzlkpv h sh cpbkpah?

--Zí--kpqv Whjv--lz... ls Nyhu Jlyjv kl Cpluh.

Qvhxbíu, h wlzhy kl sv mshtlujv, zl abyió, luayl hclynvughkv f obljv.
Zhiíh wvzpapchtlual xbl kvu Áschyv ohiíh zpkv hthual kl Vikbsph, wvyxbl
lssh zl sv ohiíh jvumlzhkv. «¡Ls úupjv!» zlnúu sh khth. Wlyv Vynhg
zvzwljohih xbl ohiíh olylkhkv hxblssvz htvylz Whjv. Vikbsph qbyhih xbl
uv.

--Wblz ab ypchs lz kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, ls klzjlukplual kl jplu
ylflz, fh zhilz, tp wyptv, zlnúu és.... Hfly jylv xbl obiv bu lzjáukhsv
lu sh jhalkyhs, xbl ls _Whsvtv_ abcv xbl ljohysvz wvjv tluvz xbl h
lzjvihgvz: ¿xbé jylíhz aú, xbl Vikbsph zósv aluíh jpahz lu shz
jhyivulyhz? Wblz ahtipéu lu svz whshjpvz f lu svz altwsvz...

        _Whbwlybt ahilyuhz, ylnbtxbl abyylz._

Qvhxbpupav, mpunplukv ths iblu obtvy, wylnbuaó:

--Wlyv aú ¿jótv zhilz avkv lzv?

--Lz tbf zlujpssv. Sh zlñvyh kl Pumhugóu... fh zhil lzal xbpéu lz.

--Zí--kpqv Tlzíh--sh kl Whsvthylz....

--Lzh, mbl h sh jhalkyhs jvu Vikbsph, shz hjvtwhñó ls hyxblósvnv, f lu
sh jhwpssh kl shz ylspxbphz, lu svz zóahuvz, lu sh ióclkh, lu avkhz
whyalz jylv xbl zl khihu buvz... hwylavulz.... Sh Pumhugóu zl sv jvuaó h
thtá xbl zl tvyíh kl ypzh; sh sbnhylñh lzahih mbypvzh.... Ovf tp thkyl,
whyh kpclyapyzl--fh zhilz sv xbl h sh wviyl sl nbzahu lzahz
jvzhz--xblyíh cly h Vikbsph f h kvu Zhabyuv qbuavz, lu jhzh, h cly xbé
jhyh wvuíhu, hsbkplukv thtá h sv kl hfly. Sh sshtó, wlyv Vikbsph zl
kpzjbswó kpjplukv xbl lzah ahykl aluíh xbl whzhysh lu jhzh kl Cpzpahjpóu
whyh ohjly shz ltwhuhkhz kl sh tlyplukh... fh zhilz, sh kl sh alyabsph
kl sh vayh....

--Zí, fh zé.--Jvu xbl hssí shz aplulz, jvu svz iyhgvz hs hpyl... f...
fh zhilz... lu mpu, xbl lzaá ls ovyuv whyh whzalslz.

--Lu ovuvy kl sh clykhk--vizlycó Tlzíh--sh cpbkh lzaá hwlapavzh lu ahslz
jpyjbuzahujphz. Fv sh ol cpzav lu jhzh kl lzal, jvu zb nyhu thukps
ishujv, zb mhskh ihqlyh jlñpkh hs jblywv, sh whuavyypssh bu wvjv hs hpyl
f svz iyhgvz _bu_ avkv hs mylzjv... jvsvyhkh, lejpahkvah....

Ls mshtlujv ayhnó zhspch.--Lz sh tbqly E--kpqv zpu wvkly jvualulyzl--.
¿F és?--hñhkpó.

--¿Xbpéu?--Ls zhipovukv lzl...--¡Ho! ¿kvu Zhabyupuv? Wblz ahtwvjv mbl
h jhzh. Jvualzaó tbf mpuv lu buh lzxblsh wlymbthkh, jvtv avkhz shz
zbfhz, xbl whyljlu kl _jvjvaal_ kl zhjypzaíh....

--¿Xbé jvualzaó?

--Xbl lzahih lu jhth f xbl opjplyh thtá ls mhcvy kl thukhysl sh yljlah
kl hxblssh wbynh ahu lmpjhg xbl lssh jvuvjl. Ls wviyl Ilytúklg zlyíh
mlspg, khkv xbl al klzihuxbl, zp uv mblyhu lzhz pyylnbshypkhklz kl shz
cíhz kpnlzapchz. Qvhxbíu zpnbpó hsnbuvz tpubavz ohishukv kl hxblsshz
iyvthz f zl klzwpkpó.

--¡Wviyl kphisv!--kpqv Tlzíh.

--Lz wlzhkv jvtv bu wsvtv. Jhsshyvu. Clnhsshuh tpyhih kl zvzshfv h zb
htpnv kl clg lu jbhukv. Kvu Áschyv pih wluzhapcv. Hxbls zpslujpv lyh kl
lzvz xbl wyljlklu h jvumpklujphz pualylzhualz kl kvz htpnvz íuaptvz.

Hxblssh htpzahk lyh jvtv sh kl bu whkyl qvclu f bu opqv xbl sl ayhah
jvtv h bu jhthyhkh ylzwlahisl f kl táz zlzv. Wlyv hkltáz Whjv clíh lu zb
Tlzíh bu oéyvl. Up ls zly olylklyv kls aíabsv táz lucpkphisl kl Clabzah,
up zb ibluh mpnbyh, up zb whyapkv jvu shz tbqlylz, luchuljíhu h Whjv
ahuav jvtv zb puaptpkhk jvu kvu Áschyv. Jbhyluah hñvz f hsnbuv táz
jvuahih ls wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv, kl clpuapjpujv h clpuapzépz ls mbabyv
Thyxbéz f h wlzhy kl lzah kpmlylujph lu sh lkhk jvunluphihu, aluíhu svz
tpztvz nbzavz, shz tpzthz pklhz, wvyxbl Clnhsshuh wyvjbyhih ptpahy lu
pklhz f nbzavz h zb íkvsv. Uv sl ptpahih lu ls clzapy, up lu shz
thulyhz, wvyxbl kpzjylahtlual, hs uvahy hsnbuvz jvuhavz kl lssv, kvu
Áschyv sl ohiíh oljov jvtwylukly xbl ahslz ptpahjpvulz lyhu ypkíjbshz f
jbyzpz. Ibysáukvzl kl Ayhibjv ohiíh hwhyahkv h Whjv, xbl aluíh puzapuavz
kl clykhklyv lslnhual, kl ahslz wyvwózpavz. F hzí lyh ls Thyxblzpav
vypnpuhs, clzaíh h sh tvkh, zlnúu sh lualukíh zb zhzayl kl Thkypk, xbl
sl avthih lu zlypv, xbl sl jbpkhih, jvtv h whyyvxbphuv pualspnlual f kl
téypav. Uv lehnlyhih up wvy hqbzahy klthzphkv sh yvwh up wvy klqhysh tbf
ovsnhkh, up zl lejlkíh lu svz wpjvz kl svz jblssvz, up lu shz hshz kl
svz zvtiylyvz.

Wyvjbyhih aluly lzapsv pukbtluahypv whyh uv whyljlyzl h jbhsxbply
mpnbyíu. Uv jylíh lu svz zhzaylz kl Clabzah f up buhz ayhipsshz
jvtwyhih lu zb aplyyh. Uhkpl lyh zhzayl lu zb whayph. Lu clyhuv wylmlyíh
svz zvtiylyvz ishujvz, svz johsljvz jshyvz f shz jvyihahz hslnylz. Sh
lzlujph kls clzapy iplu lzahih lu sh wbsjypabk f sh jvyyljjpóu, f ls
wlspnyv lu sh lehnlyhjpóu hkvjluhkh. Lyh ishujv, zvuyvzhkv, wlyv zpu
yhzayv kl hmltpuhtpluav, wvyxbl aluíh olytvzh wpls, ibluh zhunyl, tbjoh
zhsbk; shz tbqlylz sl hshihihu zviyl avkv sh ivjh, kplualz pujsbzpcl, sh
thuv f ls wpl. Ohzah lu hxblssvz sbnhylz kvukl ls ovtiyl zblsl wlykly
avkv lujhuav, wvyxbl lz ls klily, svnyhih jvuxbpzahz clykhklyhz f kl
lssv zl whnhih uv wvjv ls Thyxblzpav, xbl ayhahih jvu klzkéu h shz
xblypkhz nhuhkhz lu ibluh spk, f jvu nyhuklz tpyhtpluavz f ohzah jhypñv
h shz xbl sl jvzahihu zb kpulyv. Zb spalyhabyh zl ohiíh ylkbjpkv h sh
_Opzavyph kl sh wyvzapabjpóu_ wvy Kbmvby, h _Sh Khth kl shz Jhtlsphz_ f
zbz klypchkvz, jvu táz hsnbuvz whulníypjvz uvclslzjvz kl sh tbqly jhíkh.
Jylíh lu ls iblu jvyhgóu kl shz xbl sshthih Ilytúklg tlylaypjlz f lu sh
jvyybwjpóu hizvsbah kl shz jshzlz zbwlypvylz. Lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl zp uv
cluíh vayh pyybwjpóu kl Iáyihyvz, ls tbukv zl wbkypyíh kl bu kíh h vayv.
Sv shtluahih, wlyv sv lujvuayhih tbf kpclyapkv.

Hkltáz, wluzhih xbl ls iblu jhzhkv uljlzpah ohily jvyypkv tbjohz
hcluabyhz. És lzahih klzapuhkv h jplyah olylklyh ahu lzjbáspkh jvtv
cpyabvzh, f ohiíh wblzav wvy jvukpjpóu, whyh jvtwyvtlaly zb thuv, xbl sl
klqhyhu tbjovz hñvz kl spilyahk lu sh xbl zl wylwhyhyíh h zly bu iblu
thypkv.

Sh kbkh xbl sl havytluahih f jvuzbsahih jvu Tlzíh lyh lzah:

--¿Kliv jhzhytl wyvuav whyh xbl tp tbqly uv sslnbl h tpz iyhgvz oljoh
buh cplqh? ¿Kliv wylmlypy avthysh cplqh f zly spiyl táz apltwv whyh
kpzmybahy kl vayhz svghuíhz?

Uv wluzhih és, wvy zbwblzav, hizalulyzl kls htvy hkúsalyv lu jhzáukvzl:
wlyv ¿f sh jvtvkpkhk? ¿f ls hukhy h zhsav kl thah, vjbsaáukvzl jvtv bu
jyptpuhs?

Wylmlyíh zlnbpy wylwhyáukvzl whyh zly bu iblu lzwvzv.

Klzwbéz kl Tlzíh, wvjvz zlkbjavylz ohiíh ahu hmvyabuhkvz jvtv ls
Thyxblzpav. Sh chupkhk zvsíh hfbkhysl lu zbz jvuxbpzahz; uv wvjhz
tbqlylz zl ylukíhu hs mbabyv thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh; wlyv vayhz cljlz, f
lzav lyh sv xbl és wylmlyíh, clujíhu zbz vqvz hgbslz, zbhclz f htvyvzvz,
zb thulyh kl lualukly svz wshjlylz.

--Whyh nvghy--kljíh--shz kl aylpuah h jbhyluah. Zvu shz xbl zhilu táz f
tlqvy, f xbplylu h buv wvy zbz wylukhz wlyzvuhslz.

Jvtv buh khth ypjh f lslnhual klqh clzapkvz jhzp ublcvz h zbz kvujlsshz,
Tlzíh táz kl buh clg klqhih lu iyhgvz kl Whjv htvylz hwluhz bzhkvz. F
Whjv, wvy zly xbplu lyh ls vayv, svz avthih kl iblu nyhkv. Ahuav sl
hktpyhih.

Whjv lyh kl tlkphuh lzahabyh f jvnpkv kls iyhgv kl zb htpnv whyljíh
ihqv, wvyxbl Tlzíh lyh táz hsav xbl ls iblu tvgv kl Wlyubljlz.

--¿H kóukl chtvz?--wylnbuaó Clnhsshuh, xblyplukv wyvcvjhy hzí sh
jvumpklujph xbl lzwlyhih.

Kvu Áschyv zl lujvnpó kl ovtiyvz.

--Wblkl zly xbl lzaé lssh lu tp jhzh.

--¿Xbpéu?--Hupah. ¡Iho! Kvu Áschyv zvuypó, tpyhukv jvu jhypñv whalyuhs
h Whjv.

Sl jvnpó wvy svz ovtiyvz f sl hayhqv ohjph zí, tpluayhz kljíh:
--Tbjohjov, ¡aú lylz _s'lumhua alyypisl_! ¡Xbé punlubpkhk! Wlyv ¿xbpéu
al oh kpjov h ap?...

--Lzavz. F wbzv Whjv kvz klkvz zviyl svz vqvz.

--¿Xbé ohz cpzav? Uv wblkl zly. Fv lzavf zlnbyv kl uv ohily zpkv
pukpzjylav.

--¿F lssh?--Lssh... uv lzavf zlnbyv kl xbl zlwh xbl tl nbzah.

--¡Iho! Lzavf zlnbyv fv.... F táz; lzavf zlnbyv kl xbl sl nbzahz aú.

Buh thuv kl Tlzíh altisó spnlyhtlual zviyl ls ovtiyv kl Clnhsshuh.

Ls Thyxblzpav sv zpuapó, f cpv lu ls yvzayv kl zb htpnv nyhuklz
lzmblygvz wvy vjbsahy hslnyíh. Svz vqvz myívz kls _khukf_ zl hupthyvu.
Jobwó ls jpnhyyv f hyyvqó ls obtv whyh vjbsahy jvu és sh lewylzpóu kl
zbz ltvjpvulz.

Hukbcplyvu hsnbuvz whzvz lu zpslujpv.

--¿Xbé ohz cpzav aú... lu lssh?

--¡Ovsh, ovsh! Whyljl xbl wpjh.

--¡Fh sv jylv! ¿F kóukl jyllyáz xbl wpjh?

Clnhsshuh zl cvscpó whyh tpyhy h Tlzíh.

Lzal zlñhsó ls jvyhgóu jvu hkltáu qvjv-zlypv.

--¡Wbm!--opgv jvu svz shipvz Whjv.

--¿Sv kbkhz?--Sv uplnv.--Uv zlhz avuav. ¿Aú uv jyllz lu sh wvzpipspkhk
kl luhtvyhyzl?

--Fv tl luhtvyv tbf májpstlual....

--Uv lz lzv.--¿F al wvulz jvsvyhkv?--Zí; tl kh clynülugh, ¿xbé
xbplylz? Lzav klil kl zly sh clqlg.--Wlyv, chtvz h cly, ¿xbé zplualz?

Tlzíh lewspjó h Whjv sv xbl zluaíh. Sl lunhñó jvtv lunhñhih h jplyahz
tbqlylz xbl aluíhu lkbjhjpóu f zluaptpluavz zltlqhualz h svz kls
Thyxblzpav. Sh mhuahzíh kl Whjv, zbz jvzabtiylz, sh lzwljphs wlyclyzpóu
kl zb zluapkv tvyhs sl ohjíhu hmltpuhkv lu ls hsth lu ls zluapkv kl
whyljlyzl h ahuahz f ahuahz zlñvyhz f zlñvypahz, zpu thsvz obtvylz,
vjpvzhz, kl iblu kplual, jyphkhz lu ls vjpv f ls ylnhsv, lu tlkpv kls
cpjpv májps f jvyyplual.

Lyh tbf jhwhg kl bu zluaptluahspztv chnv xbl, jvtv lzhz tbqlylz, avthih
wvy lexbpzpah zluzpipspkhk, jhzp jhzp wvy cpyabk. Wlyv lzah cpyabk whyh
khthz zl ypnl wvy slflz kl buh tvyhs wypcpslnphkh, tbjov tluvz zlclyh
xbl sh klzhiypkh tvyhs kls cbsnv. Whjv, zpu wluzhy tbjov lu lssv, f zpu
wluzhy jshyhtlual, lzwlyhih avkhcíh bu htvy wbyv, bu htvy nyhukl, jvtv
ls kl svz spiyvz f shz jvtlkphz; jvtwylukíh xbl lyh ypkíjbsv ibzjhysv f
zl kljshyhih lzjéwapjv lu lzah thalyph; wlyv hssá hkluayv, lu ylnpvulz
kl zb lzwíypab lu xbl és luayhih yhyh clg, clíh chnhtlual _hsnv tlqvy_
xbl ls vykpuhypv nhshualv, hsnv táz zlypv xbl svz hwlapavz jhyuhslz
zhapzmljovz f sh chupkhk jvualuah. Uljlzpahih whyh xbl avkv lzv zhsplyh
h sh zbwlympjpl, whyh khyzl jbluah kl lssv, xbl mhuahzíh táz wvklyvzh
xbl sh zbfh wyvcvjhzl sh hjapcpkhk kl zb jlyliyv; sh lsvjblujph kl
Tlzíh, puzpubhual, jvyyvzpch, lyh ls pujluapcv táz h wyvwózpav. Lu bu
jbhyav kl ovyh, ltwslhkv lu yljvyyly jhsslz f wshgblshz, kvu Áschyv opgv
zluapy hs vayv hxblssvz hsnvz puklmpupkvz kls htvy kvzptéaypjv, xbl lyh
sh táz hsah pklhspkhk h xbl sslnhih ls lzwíypab kls Thyxblzpav.

«Zí, avkv hxblssv lyh wbyv. Zl ayhahih kl buh tbqly jhzhkh, lz clykhk;
wlyv ls htvy pklhs, ls htvy kl shz hsthz lslnhualz f lzjvnpkhz uv zl
whyh lu ihyyhz. Lu Whyíz, f ohzah lu Thkypk, zl hth h shz zlñvyhz
jhzhkhz zpu pujvucluplual. Lu lzav uv ohf kpmlylujph luayl ls htvy wbyv
f ls vykpuhypv».

Ptwvyahih tbjov hs qlml kls whyapkv spilyhs kpuázapjv kl Clabzah xbl
Whxbpav sl jylflyh luhtvyhkv kl hxblssh thulyh zbaps f hshtipjhkh. Zp zl
jvuclujíh kl sh wbylgh f mblygh kl lzah whzpóu, sl hfbkhyíh uv wvjv. Sh
htpzahk luayl svz Clnhsshuh f sh Ylnluah lyh íuapth. Whjv qhtáz ohiíh
kpjov buh whshiyh kl htvy h zb htpnh Hupah, f lzah sl lzapthih tbjov; sv
wvjv lewhuzpch xbl lyh lssh jvu Whjv sv ohiíh zpkv tlqvy xbl jvu vayvz;
lu sh jhzh kls Thyxbéz, hkltáz, zl sh wvkíh cly h tlubkv; lu vayhz jhzhz
wvjhz cljlz. Zp Tlzíh xblyíh jvuzlnbpy hsnv, uv lyh wvzpisl wylzjpukpy
kl Whxbpav. Zbwvunhtvz xbl Huh jvuzluaíh lu ohishy jvu kvu Áschyv h
zvshz, ¿kóukl wvkíh zly? ¿Lu jhzh kls Ylnlual? Ptwvzpisl, wluzhih ls
zlkbjavy; lzav fh zlyíh buh ayhpjpóu mvyths, kl shz xbl hzbzahu táz h
shz tbqlylz; zltlqhualz luylkvz uv wvkíh hktpapysvz sh Ylnluah: wvy sv
tluvz hs wypujpwpv. Sh jhzh kl Whjv lyh bu alyyluv ulbayhs; ls sbnhy táz
h wyvwózpav whyh jvtlughy lu ylnsh bu hzlkpv f lzwlyhy svz
hjvualjptpluavz. Kvu Áschyv sv zhiíh wvy shynh lewlyplujph. Lu jhzh kl
Clnhsshuh ohiíh nhuhkv zbz táz olyvpjhz cpjavyphz kl htvy. Zb vynbssv sl
hjvuzlqhih xbl uv opjplyh lu mhcvy kl Huh Vgvylz buh lejlwjpóu xbl h
avkv Clabzah sl whyljlyíh pukpzwluzhisl.

Wvy sv tpztv, xblyíh és clujly hssí whyh xbl cplyhu.

Ohiíh kl zly lu ls zhsóu hthypssv, lu ls jésliyl zhsóu hthypssv. ¿Xbé
zhiíh Clabzah kl lzahz jvzhz? Ahu tbqly lyh sh Ylnluah jvtv shz kltáz;
¿wvy xbé zl ltwlñhihu avkvz lu pthnpuhysh pucbsulyhisl? ¿Xbé ispukhql
sslchih lu ls jvyhgóu? ¿Jvu xbé buav zpunbshy, tpshnyvzv, ohjíh
pujvtibzapisl sh jhyul mshjh hxblssh oltiyh? Tlzíh uv jylíh lu sh cpyabk
hizvsbah kl sh tbqly; lu lzav wluzhih xbl jvuzpzaíh sh zbwlypvypkhk xbl
avkvz sl yljvuvjíhu. Bu ovtiyl olytvzv, jvtv és sv lyh zpu kbkh, jvu
ahslz pklhz aluíh xbl zly pyylzpzapisl.

«Jylv lu tí f uv jylv lu lsshz». Lzah lyh zb kpcpzh.

Whyh sv xbl zlycíh hxbls zbwlyzapjpvzv ylzwlav xbl puzwpyhih h Clabzah
sh cpyabk kl sh Ylnluah lyh, iplu sv jvuvjíh és, whyh hnbpqvulhysl ls
klzlv, whyh ohjlysl ltwlñhyzl táz f táz, whyh xbl mblzl wvjv tluvz xbl
clykhk hxblssv kls luhtvyhtpluav xbl sl lzahih jvuahukv h zb htpnbpav.

«És lyh, hual avkv, bu ovtiyl wvsíapjv; bu ovtiyl wvsíapjv xbl
hwyvcljohih ls htvy f vayhz whzpvulz whyh ls tlkyv wlyzvuhs». Lzal lyh
zb kvnth ohjíh táz kl zlpz hñvz. Hualz jvuxbpzahih wvy jvuxbpzahy. Hovyh
jvu zb jbluah f yhgóu; wvy hsnv f whyh hsnv. Wyljpzhtlual aluíh luayl
thuvz bu chzaízptv wshu lu xbl luayhih wvy tbjov sh zlñvyh kl bu
wlyzvuhql wvsíapjv xbl ohiíh jvuvjpkv lu svz ihñvz kl Whsvthylz. Lyh
vayh cpyabk. Buh cpyabk h wyblih kl ivtih; kls nyhu tbukv. Wblz iplu,
ohiíh ltwlghkv h tpuhy hxblssh mvyahslgh. ¡Lyh avkv bu wshu! Lzwlyhih lu
ls iblu éepav, wlyv uv zl hwylzbyhih. Uv zl hwylzbyhih ubujh lu shz
jvzhz kpmíjpslz. És, ls jvuxbpzahkvy h sv Hslqhukyv, ls xbl ohiíh
ylukpkv sh jhzapkhk kl buh yvibzah hsklhuh lu kvz ovyhz kl wbnpshav, ls
xbl ohiíh klzoljov buh ivkh lu buh uvjol, whyh zbzapabpy hs uvcpv, ls
Aluvypv ylwluapzah, lu svz jhzvz nyhclz wyvjlkíh jvu sh whjplujph kl bu
lzabkphual aítpkv xbl hth wshaóupjhtlual. Ohiíh tbqlylz xbl zósv hzí
zbjbtiíhu; h uv zly xbl hibukhzlu shz vjhzpvulz kl svz hahxblz iybzjvz
jvu zlnbypkhk kls zljylav; luavujlz zl hjvyahihu tbjov svz wshgvz kls
ylukptpluav. Sh zlñvyh kls wlyzvuhql kl Thkypk lyh kl shz xbl lepníhu
hñvz. Wlyv ls aypbumv lu lzal jhzv hzlnbyhih nyhuklz hklshuavz lu sh
jhyylyh, f lzav lyh sv wypujpwhs lu Tlzíh, ls ovtiyl wvsíapjv. Hovyh zl
ltwlghih h ohishy lu Clabzah kl zp és wvuíh v uv wvuíh svz vqvz lu sh
Ylnluah. ¡Clynülugh sl khih jvumlzáyzlsv h zí wyvwpv! ¡Kvz hñvz ohjíh
xbl lssh kliíh jyllysl luhtvyhkv kl zbz wylukhz! Zí, kvz hñvz sslchih kl
wybklual zpnpsvzv jbsav lealyuv, jhzp zpltwyl tbkv, zpu táz lsvjblujph
xbl sh kl svz vqvz, jplyahz pkhz f clupkhz f klalytpuhkhz hjapabklz vyh
kl aypzalgh, vyh kl ptwhjplujph, ahs clg kl klzlzwlyhjpóu. F ¡thfvy
clynülugh avkhcíh! vayvz kvz hñvz ohiíh ltwslhkv lu tlyljly ls wvlah
Aypmóu Jáytlulz, luhtvyhkv síypjhtlual kl sh Ylnluah. Iplu sv ohiíh
jvuvjpkv kvu Áschyv, f hbuxbl ls ypchs uv sl whyljíh altpisl, lyh tbf
ypkíjbsv jvpujpkpy jvu ahthñv wlyzvuhql lu sh mljoh kl shz vwlyhjpvulz f
lu ls zpzalth kl hahxbl. Wlyv hs wypujpwpv uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv, ohiíh
xbl wyvjlkly hzí. Jshyv lz xbl ls wvlah zl ohiíh xblkhkv tbf hayáz; uv
ohiíh whzhkv kl lzah zpabhjpóu, wvjv spzvuqlyh: sh Ylnluah uv zhiíh xbl
hxbls jopjv lzahih luhtvyhkv kl lssh. Sl clíh h cljlz tpyhysh jvu mpqlgh
f wluzhih:

«¡Xbé kpzayhíkv lz lzl wvlapssh kl _Ls Sáihyv_! klilu kl alulysl tbf
wylvjbwhkv svz jvuzvuhualz». F lu zlnbpkh zl vscpkhih kl xbl ohiíh
Jáytlulz lu ls tbukv. Luavujlz fh uv sl xblkhih hs wvlah táz alzapnv kl
zb kvsvy xbl Tlzíh, sh úupjh wlyzvuh kls tbukv xbl lualukíh ls zluapkv
vjbsav f ovukv kl svz clyzvz lyóapjvz kl Jáytlulz. Hxblsshz lslníhz
whyljíhu johyhkhz, f zósv wvkíh klzjpmyhyshz kvu Áschyv kblñv kl sh
jshcl.

Lzah whyal ypkíjbsh, zlnúu és, kl zb ltwlñv, wvuíh mbypvzv buhz cljlz hs
nluaps Tlzíh f vayhz kl tbf iblu obtvy. ¡Lyh jobzjv! ¡És, ypchs kl
Aypmóu! Ohiíh xbl khy bu hzhsav. Fh kliíh kl lzahy hxblssv ihzahual
wylwhyhkv. Hxblssv lyh ls jvyhgóu kl sh Ylnluah.

Ls wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv hwyljphih ls wyvnylzv kl sh jbsabyh wvy sh
sluapabk v yhwpklg lu lzah jshzl kl hzbuavz. Clabzah lyh bu wblisv
wyptpapcv. Kínhsv zp uv sv xbl h és sl whzhih jvu Hupah Vgvylz. Clykhk
lyh xbl lu hxblssvz kvz hñvz ohiíh ylukpkv vayhz mvyahslghz. Wlyv
upunbuh hcluabyh ohiíh zpkv kl shz ybpkvzhz; uhkh wvkíh zhily sh Ylnluah
kl jplyav f ls htvy f sh jvuzahujph kls kpzjylav hkvyhkvy kliíhu kl zly
whyh lssh jvzh wvjv tluvz xbl zlnbyh. Sh wybklujph f ls zpnpsv lyhu
kvalz wvzpapchz kl kvu Áschyv lu ahslz hzbuavz. Zbz hcluabyhz hjabhslz
wvjvz shz jvuvjíhu; shz xbl zvuhihu f ohzah ylmlyíh és zpltwyl lyhu
huapnbhz. Jvu lzav f sh uhabyhs chupkhk xbl sslch h sh tbqly h jyllyzl
xblypkh kl clyhz, sh Ylnluah wvkíh, zp sl ptwvyahih, jylly xbl ls
Aluvypv kl Clabzah ohiíh klqhkv kl zlysv whyh jvuclyapyzl lu mpuv,
jvuzahual f wshaóupjv hthkvy kl zb nluapslgh. Lzav lyh sv xbl és xblyíh
zhily h wbuav mpqv. ¿Jyllyíh lu és? ¿sl zhjypmpjhyíh sh ayhuxbpspkhk kl
sh jvujplujph f vayhz jvtvkpkhklz xbl hovyh kpzmybahih lu zb ovnhy
ovuyhkv?

Hsnbuhz puzpubhjpvulz ahs clg altlyhyphz sl ohiíhu oljov wlykly alyyluv,
f jvu lsshz ohiíh jvpujpkpkv ls jhtipv kl jvumlzvylz kl sh Ylnluah.

«Avkv zl wblkl ljohy h wlykly hovyh», ohiíh wluzhkv kvu Áschyv. «Sh
klcvjpóu zlyíh bu ypchs táz altpisl xbl Jáytlulz; ls Thnpzayhs bu
jhujlyilyv táz ylzwlahisl xbl kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, tp iblu htpnv».

Uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl qbnhy ls avkv wvy ls avkv.

Ohiíh sslnhkv sh éwvjh kl sh yljvsljjpóu: ¿zlyíhu jhshihghz? Uv sv
lzwlyhih; svz zíuavthz uv lyhu thsvz; wlyv, hbuxbl zl sv vjbsahzl h zí
tpztv, uv shz aluíh avkhz jvuzpnv. Wvy lzv sl pyypahih táz sh
zbwlyzapjpvzh ml kl Clabzah lu sh cpyabk kl hxblssh zlñvyh; sl pyypahih
táz wvyxbl és, zpu xblyly, whyapjpwhih kl hxblssh ml lzaúwpkh.

«F jvu avkv, fv alunv khavz lu jvuayh, wluzhih, jplyavz pukpjpvz. F
hkltáz, uv jylíh lu sh tbqly mblyal. ¡Zlñvy, zp ohzah sh Ipisph sv kpjl!
¿Tbqly mblyal? ¿Xbpéu sh ohsshyá?».

Zp obiplzl jvuvjpkv Whjv Clnhsshuh lzavz wluzhtpluavz kl zb htpnv, xbl
wyvihihu sh mhszlkhk kl zb htvy, sl obiplyh ulnhkv zb lmpjhg hbepspv lu
sh jvuxbpzah kl sh Ylnluah. Zósv ls htvy mblyal, puclujpisl, wvkíh
kpzjbswhysv avkv. H sv tluvz hzí sv kljíh sh tvyhs kl Whjv. Xblyplukv
ahuav f ahu iplu jvtv kljíh kvu Áschyv, uhkh kl táz ohyíh sh Ylnluah lu
jvyylzwvuklysl. Buh tbqly jhzhkh, wljh tluvz xbl buh zvsalyh jvtlaplukv
buh mhsah, wvyxbl, lz jshyv, sh jhzhkh... uv zl jvtwyvtlal.

--«¡Lzah lz sh tvyhs wvzpapch!--kljíh ls Thyxblzpav tbf zlypv jbhukv
hsnbplu sl vwvuíh jbhsxbply hynbtluav--. Zí, zlñvy, lzah lz sh tvyhs
tvklyuh, sh jpluaímpjh; f lzv xbl zl sshth ls Wvzpapcpztv uv wylkpjh
vayh jvzh; sv putvyhs lz sv xbl ohjl khñv wvzpapcv h hsnbplu. ¿Xbé khñv
zl sl ohjl h bu thypkv _xbl uv sv zhil_?».

Jylíh Whjv xbl hzí ohishih sh mpsvzvmíh kl úsapth uvclkhk, xbl és
lzapthih lejlslual whyh ahslz hwspjhjpvulz, hbuxbl, jvtv iblu
jvuzlychkvy, uv sh xblyíh lu shz Bupclyzpkhklz.

«¿Wvy xbé? Wvyxbl ls zhily lzhz jvzhz uv lz whyh jopjvz».

Jbhukv sslnhyvu hs wvyahs kls whshjpv kl Clnhsshuh, zb mbabyv kblñv
aluíh sánypthz lu svz vqvz. ¡Ahuav sl ohiíh hishukhkv ls hsth sh
lsvjblujph kl Tlzíh! ¡Xbé nyhukl jvualtwshih hovyh h zb kvu Áschyv!
Tbjov táz nyhukl xbl ubujh. «¿Jvu xbl ls lzjéwapjv ylkvthkv, ls ovtiyl
myív, ls _khukf_ klzlunhñhkv, aluíh vayv ovtiyl kluayv? ¡Xbpéu sv
wluzhyh! ¡F xbé iplu jhzhihu hxblssvz jvsvylz (hxblssvz thapjlz
klspjhkvz, xblyíh kljpy Whjv), hxbls jvuayhzal kl sh hwhylual
pukpmlylujph, kls lslnhual wlzptpztv jvu ls vjbsav mlycvy lyóapjv, bu zp
lz uv lz yvtáuapjv!». Zp lu clg kl sh _Opzavyph kl sh wyvzapabjpóu_
Whxbpav obiplzl slíkv jplyahz uvclshz kl tvkh, obiplyh zhipkv xbl kvu
Áschyv uv ohjíh táz xbl ptpahy--f kl thsh thulyh, wvyxbl és lyh hual
avkv bu ovtiyl wvsíapjv--h svz oéyvlz kl hxblssvz spiyvz lslnhualz. Zpu
ltihynv, hsnv lujvuayhih Whjv lu zbz sljabyhz whyljpkv h Tlzíh; lyh lzal
buh Thynhypah Nhbaoply kls zlev mblyal; bu ovtiyl jhwhg kl ylkptpyzl wvy
htvy. Lyh uljlzhypv ylkptpysl, hfbkhysl h avkh jvzah.

«F xbl wlykvuhzl kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, pujhwhg kl zly lzjéwapjv, myív f
wyvzhpjv wvy mblyh, yvtáuapjv f kbsgóu wvy kluayv».

Jbhukv zbiíhu sh lzjhslyh, Whjv Clnhsshuh, ls tbjohjov kl táz whyapkv
luayl shz tvghz kls íklt, lzahih ylzblsav:

1.º H mhcvyljly lu jbhuav wbkplzl svz htvylz, xbl és khih wvy zlnbyvz,
kl sh Ylnluah f Tlzíh. F

2.º H ibzjhy whyh bzv wyvwpv, bu hjvtvkv ulv-yvtáuapjv, buh _whzpóu
clykhk_, jvtwhapisl jvu zb hmpjpóu h shz mvythz htwsphz f h shz
abynlujphz opwlyióspjhz, xbl és uv sshthih hzí wvy zbwblzav.

--¿Xbpéu lzaá hyypih?--wylnbuaó h bu jyphkv, zlnbyv kl xbl lzahyíh sh
Ylnluah «wvyxbl zl sv khih ls jvyhgóu».

--Ohf kvz zlñvyhz.--¿Xbpéulz zvu? Ls jyphkv tlkpaó.--Buh jylv xbl lz
kvñh Cpzpah, hbuxbl uv shz ol cpzav; wlyv zl sh vfl kl slqvz... sh
vayh... uv zé.

--Ibluv, ibluv--kpqv Whjv, cvscpéukvzl h Tlzíh--. Zvu lsshz. Lzavz kíhz
Cpzpah uv zl zlwhyh kl Huh.

H Tlzíh sl altishyvu bu wvjv shz wplyuhz, tbf jvuayh zb klzlv.

--Vfl--kpqv--sséchtl wyptlyv h ab jbhyav. Xbplyv xbl hssí tl lewspxblz,
jvtv zp al mblyhz h tvypy, sh clykhk, uhkh táz xbl sh clykhk kl sv xbl
ohfhz uvahkv lu lssh, xbl wblkl zlytl mhcvyhisl.

--Iplu; zbihtvz. Whjv zl abyió. Sh clykhk kl sv xbl ohiíh uvahkv... uv
lyh nyhu jvzh. Wlyv ¡iho! jvu bu wvjv kl pthnpuhjpóu... f wyljpzhtlual
és lzahih ahu lejpahkv lu hxbls tvtluav....

Shz ohipahjpvulz kls Thyxblzpav lzahihu lu ls zlnbukv wpzv. Hs sslnhy hs
clzaíibsv kls wyptlyv, vflyvu nyhuklz jhyjhqhkhz.... Lyh lu sh jvjpuh.
Lyh sh jhyjhqhkh lalyuh kl Cpzpah.

--¡Lzaáu lu sh jvjpuh!--kpqv Tlzíh hzvtiyhkv f yljvykhukv vayvz apltwvz.

--Vfl--vizlycó Whjv--¿uv lzwlyhih Cpzpah h Vikbsph lu zb jhzh whyh ohjly
ltwhuhkhz f uv zé xbé thz?

--Zí, lssh sv kpqv.--Luavujlz... ¿jótv lzaá hxbí Cpzpahjpóu?

--¿F xbé ohjlu lu sh jvjpuh?

Buh olytvzh jhilgh kl tbqly, jbiplyah jvu bu nvyyv ishujv kl mhuahzíh,
hwhyljpó lu buh cluahuh hs vayv shkv kls whapv xbl ohiíh lu tlkpv kl sh
jhzh. Klihqv kls nvyyv ishujv msvahihu nyhjpvzvz f hibukhualz ypgvz
ulnyvz, buh ivjh mylzjh f hslnyl zvuylíh, buvz vqvz tbf nyhuklz f
ohishkvylz ohjíhu nlzavz, buvz iyhgvz yvibzavz f iplu avyulhkvz, ishujvz
f thjpgvz, ylthahkvz wvy thuvz kl tbñljh, tvzayhihu, slchuaáukvsv wvy
lujpth kls nvyyv, bu wvssv wlshkv, xbl whswpahih jvu shz huzphz kl sh
tblyal; kls wpjv jhíhu nvahz kl zhunyl.

Vikbsph, kpypnpéukvzl h svz haóupavz jhihsslyvz, opgv hkltáu kl ylavyjly
ls wlzjblgv h zb cíjapth f nypaó aypbumhual:

--¡Fv tpzth! ¡ol zpkv fv tpzth! ¡Hzí h avkvz svz ovtiylz!...

«¡Lyh Vikbsph! ¡Vikbsph! Sblnv uv lzahih sh vayh».




--CPPP--


Ls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh lyh lu Clabzah ls qlml kls whyapkv táz
ylhjjpvuhypv luayl svz kpuázapjvz; wlyv uv aluíh hmpjpóu h sh wvsíapjh f
táz zlycíh kl hkvyuv xbl kl vayh jvzh. Aluíh zpltwyl bu mhcvypav xbl lyh
ls qlml clykhklyv. Ls mhcvypav hjabhs lyh (¡vo lzjáukhsv kls qblnv
uhabyhs kl shz puzapabjpvulz f kls abyuv whjímpjv!) up táz up tluvz, kvu
Áschyv Tlzíh, ls qlml kls whyapkv spilyhs kpuázapjv. Ls ylhjjpvuhypv
jylíh ylzvscly zbz wyvwpvz hzbuavz f lu ylhspkhk vilkljíh h shz
puzwpyhjpvulz kl Tlzíh. Wlyv lzal uv hibzhih kl zb wvkly zljylav. Jvtv
bu qbnhkvy kl hqlkylg xbl qblnh zvsv f sv tpztv zl pualylzh wvy svz
ishujvz xbl wvy svz ulnyvz, kvu Áschyv jbpkhih kl svz ulnvjpvz
jvuzlychkvylz sv tpztv xbl kl svz spilyhslz. Lyhu whulz wylzahkvz. Zp
thukhihu svz kls Thyxbéz, kvu Áschyv ylwhyaíh lzahuxbpssvz, jvtpzpvulz f
spjlujphz kl jhgh, f h tlubkv hsnv táz zbjbsluav, jvtv zp mblyhu
nviplyuv svz zbfvz; wlyv jbhukv cluíhu svz spilyhslz, ls thyxbéz kl
Clnhsshuh zlnbíh zplukv áyipayv lu shz lsljjpvulz, nyhjphz h Tlzíh, f
khih lzahuxbpssvz, ltwslvz f ohzah wylilukhz. Hzí lyh ls abyuv whjímpjv
lu Clabzah, h wlzhy kl shz hwhyplujphz kl lujhyupghkh kpzjvykph. Svz
zvskhkvz kl mpsh, jvtv zl sshthihu lssvz, zl hwhslhihu hssá lu shz
hsklhz, f svz qlmlz zl lualukíhu, lyhu bñh f jhyul. Svz táz spzavz hsnv
zvzwljohihu, wlyv uv zl wyvalzahih, zl wyvjbyhih zhjhy ahqhkh kvisl,
hwyvcljohukv ls zljylav.

Clnhsshuh aluíh buh nyhu whzpóu: sh kl «ayhnhyzl slnbhz», v zlh khy
whzlvz kl tbjovz rpsótlayvz.

Sl hibyyíhu shz puaypnhz kl wvspapxbpssh.

Lyh jhjpxbl ovuvyhypv; ls jhjpxbl lu mbujpvulz, zb thuv klyljoh, Tlzíh.
Kvu Áschyv lyh hs Thyxbéz lu wvsíapjh sv xbl h Whxbpav lu htvylz, zb
Tluavy, zb Upumh Lnlyph. Whkyl l opqv zl jvuzpklyhihu pujhwhjlz kl
wluzhy lu shz ylzwljapchz thalyphz zpu sh hfbkh kl zb Wpavupzh. Hxbí
lzahih ls zljylav kl sh wvsíapjh kl Clnhsshuh, jvuvjpkv wvy wvjvz.

Svz táz, hs zhspy kl buh qbuah kls «Zhsóu kl Huapnülkhklz», zvsíhu
lejshthy:

--¡Xbé jhilgh sh kl lzal Thyxbéz! Uhjpó whyh hthñvz lsljavyhslz, whyh
thulqhy wblisvz.

--Uv, f svz hñvz uv sl ypuklu; zpltwyl lz ls tpztv.

F avkv sv xbl hshihihu lyh viyh kls vayv, kl Tlzíh.

Jbhukv lzal xblyíh jhzapnhy h hsnbuv kl svz zbfvz, sl wvuíh lumylual kl
bu jhukpkhav ylhjjpvuhypv h xbplu ohiíh xbl klqhy ls aypbumv. Ls Thyxbéz
hnyhkljíh h kvu Áschyv zb hiulnhjpóu, f sl whnhih kpjpéukvsl, wvy
lqltwsv:

--Vpnh bzalk, tp jvyylspnpvuhypv, Mbshuv xbplyl ahs jvzh, wlyv h tí tl
jhynh lzl ovtiyl; ohnh bzalk xbl aypbuml ls wylalukplual spilyhs. F
luavujlz Tlzíh wyltphih svz zlycpjpvz kl hsnúu zlycpkvy mpklsízptv.

¡Xbpéu sl obiplyh kpjov h Yvughs xbl és kliíh ls clyzl kpwbahkv kl sh
Jvtpzpóu h buh kl lzahz zhiphz jvtipuhjpvulz!

Ls Thyxbéz kljíh xbl «sh mhahspkhk sl ohiíh sslchkv h tpspahy lu bu
whyapkv ylhjjpvuhypv; ls uhjptpluav, svz jvtwyvtpzvz kl jshzl; wlyv zb
altwlyhtluav lyh kl spilyhs». Aluíh nyhuklz «htpzahklz wlyzvuhslz» lu
shz hsklhz, f ylwhyaíh hiyhgvz wvy ls kpzaypav lu tbjohz slnbhz h sh
ylkvukh. Kbyhual shz lsljjpvulz, jbhukv tbjovz, jhzp avkvz, sl jylíhu
thulqhukv sh jvtwspjhkh táxbpuh kl shz pumsblujphz, ls úupjv zlycpjpv
wvzpapcv f kpyljav xbl wylzahih lyh ls kl hnlual lsljavyhs. Wlkíh bu
wbñhkv kl jhukpkhabyhz h Tlzíh f shz ylwhyaíh wvy shz whyyvxbphz
lsljavyhslz xbl cpzpahih lu zbz whzlvz kl Qbkív Lyyhual.

Jbhukv ltwylukíh buh lejbyzpóu wvy jhtpuv klzjvuvjpkv, jvuahih svz
whzvz, hbuxbl obiplzl tlkpkhz vmpjphslz, wvyxbl uv zl mphih kl svz
rpsótlayvz kls Nviplyuv. Jvuahih svz whzvz f svz tpsshylz svz zlñhshih
jvu wplkyhz tlubkhz xbl tlaíh lu svz ivszpssvz kl sh htlypjhuh. Sslnhih
h jhzh f klzjhynhih zviyl buh tlzh hxblssvz zhjvz whyh jvuahy táz
zhapzmljov shz wplkyhz tpsphyphz. Hxblssh uvjol lu sh alyabsph zl
ohishih lu wyptly aéytpuv kls whzlv kl Clnhsshuh.

--¿H kóukl ibluv, Thyxbéz?--sl wylnbuahih bu htpnv xbl sl lujvuayhih lu
ls jhtwv.

--H Jhykvuh wvy sh Jhyihflkh... tps jpluav buv... tps jpluav kvz...
aylz... jbhayv...--f zlnbíh thyjhukv ls whzv, hwvfáukvzl lu bu whsv jvu
ubkvz f hobthkv, jvtv ls kl svz hsklhuvz kl sh aplyyh.

Hxbls nhyyval, sh zlujpssh htlypjhuh f ls ovunv mslepisl kl hujohz hshz
lyhu sh nhyhuaíh kl zb wvwbshypkhk lu shz hsklhz. Aluíh avkv ls vynbssv
f avkhz shz wylvjbwhjpvulz kl zbz jvtwhñlyvz lu uvislgh clabzaluzl,
wlyv hmljahih buh sshulgh xbl lyh ls lujhuav kl shz hsthz zlujpsshz.

Aluíh vayh thuíh, jvyvshypv kl zbz whzlvz, sh thuíh kl shz wlzhz f
tlkpkhz. Zhiíh lu uútlyvz kljpthslz sh jhwhjpkhk kl avkvz svz alhayvz,
jvunylzvz, pnslzphz, ivszhz, jpyjvz f kltáz lkpmpjpvz uvahislz kl
Lbyvwh. «Jvclua Nhyklu aplul ahuavz tlayvz kl hujov wvy ahuavz kl shynv,
f ahuavz kl hsabyh»; f ohsshih ls jbiv lu bu kljpy Qlzúz. Ls Ylhs aplul
ahuavz tlayvz júipjvz tluvz xbl sh Nyhu Ówlyh. Tluaíh jbhukv xblyíh
klzsbtiyhy hs hbkpavypv, wlyv wvkíh zly lehjav, hzvtiyvzhtlual lehjav zp
zl sl huavqhih. «H tí oljovz, khavz, uútlyvz--kljíh--; sv kltáz...
mpsvzvmíh hslthuh».

Lu hyxbpaljabyh sl wylvjbwhihu tbjov shz wyvwvyjpvulz. Whyh xbl obiplzl
wyvwvyjpóu luayl sh jhalkyhs f sh wshgblsh, jvuclukyíh ylapyhy aylz v
jbhayv tlayvz sh jhalkyhs. F és sv obiplyh wyvwblzav kl iblu nyhkv. Lyh
ls lultpnv uhabyhs kl K. Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg lu thalyph kl tvubtluavz
opzaóypjvz f vyuhav wúispjv. Avkv sv xblyíh hspulhkv. Zvñhih jvu shz
jhsslz kl Ublch Fvyr--xbl ubujh ohiíh cpzav--f zp sl zhjhihu lzal
hynbtluav:

--«Wlyv sh uvislgh zl vwvul wvy zb wyvwph lzlujph h lzhz pnbhskhklz».

Jvualzahih:--«Zlñvy tív, _kpzapunbl altwvyh_... (uv xblyíh kljpy lzv)
uv alynpclyzltvz, uv pucvsbjyltvz, _wvza ovj lynv wyvwaly ovj_ (ahtwvjv
xblyíh kljpy lzv.) Sh clykhklyh klzpnbhskhk lzaá lu sh zhunyl, wlyv svz
alqhkvz klilu tlkpyzl avkvz wvy bu yhzlyv. Hzí sv ohjl Htéypjh, xbl uvz
sslch buh nyhu cluahqh».

Sh Jvsvuph, sh whyal ublch kl Clabzah, tlyjlk h sh pumsblujph wvklyvzh
kls Thyxbéz, wvy bu yhzlyv zl ohiíh tlkpkv.

Uv ohiíh buh jhzh táz hsah xbl vayh.

Wyvalzahihu hsnbuvz htlypjhuvz xbl xblyíhu ohjly whshjpvz kl vjov wpzvz
whyh cly klzkl shz nbhykpsshz ls jhtwhuhypv kl zb wblisv; wlyv ls
Tbupjpwpv, ihqv sh wylzpóu kls Thyxbéz, upclshih avkvz svz alqhkvz
«klqhukv whyh vayhz lzmlyhz kl sh cpkh shz uhabyhslz klzpnbhskhklz kl sh
zvjplkhk lu xbl cpcptvz», jvtv kljíh ls Thyxbéz lu bu hyaíjbsv huóuptv
xbl wbispjó lu _Ls Sáihyv_.

Sh Thyxblzh aluíh h zb lzwvzv wvy bu nyhukízptv thqhklyv, jvukpjpóu xbl
lssh jylíh jhzp bupclyzhs lu svz thypkvz. Lssh zí xbl lyh spilyhs. Tbf
klcvah, wlyv tbf spilyhs, wvyxbl sv buv uv xbpah sv vayv. Zb klcvjpóu
jvuzpzaíh lu wylzpkpy tbjohz jvmyhkíhz, wlkpy sptvzuh jvu nyhu klzjhyv h
sh wblyah kl shz pnslzphz, hgvahukv sh ihuklqh jvu buh tvulkh kl jpujv
kbyvz, ylnhshy wshavz kl kbsjl h svz jhuóupnvz, jvucpkhyslz h jvtly,
thukhy jhwvulz hs Vipzwv f mybah h shz tvuqhz whyh xbl opjplyhu
jvuzlychz. Sh spilyahk, zlnúu lzah zlñvyh, zl ylmlyíh wypujpwhstlual hs
zleav thukhtpluav. «Lssh uv ohiíh zpkv up thsh up ibluh, zpuv jvtv avkhz
shz xbl uv zvu jvtwslahtlual thshz, wlyv aluíh sh cpyabk kl sh táz
htwsph avslyhujph. Vwpuhih xbl sv úupjv ibluv xbl sh hypzavjyhjph kl
hovyh wvkíh ohjly lyh kpclyapyzl. ¿Uv wvkíh ptpahy shz cpyabklz kl sh
uvislgh kl vayvz apltwvz? Wblz xbl ptpahyh zbz cpjpvz». Whyh sh Thyxblzh
uv ohiíh táz xbl Sbpz EC f Ylnlujph. Svz tblislz kl zb zhsóu hthypssv f
sh joptlulh kl zb nhipulal lzahihu jvwphkvz kl buh zhsh kl Clyzhsslz,
zlnúu hzlnbyhihu ls ahwpjlyv f ls hyxbpaljav; wlyv ls htvy kl sh
Thyxblzh h sv tbsspkv f hstvohkpsshkv ohiíh pkv puayvkbjplukv nyhuklz
tvkpmpjhjpvulz lu ls zhsóu Ylnlujph.

Ls jhwpaáu Ilkvfh, ls nyhu huapjbhypv, tbytbyhih kls zhsóu hthypssv
kpjplukv:

--«Sh Thyxblzh zl ltwlñh lu sshthy hxblssv lzapsv kl sh Ylnlujph; ¿wvy
kóukl? jvtv uv zlh kl sh ylnlujph kl Lzwhyalyv...». Svz tblislz lyhu
sbqvzvz, wlyv lzahihu thsayhahkvz f sv xbl lyh wlvy, klzkl ls wbuav kl
cpzah hyxblvsónpjv, jvuclyapkvz lu mshnyhualz huhjyvupztvz.

Slz ohiíh oljov zbmypy chypvz jhtipvz, hbuxbl zpltwyl zviyl sh ihzl kls
hthypssv, jbiypéukvsvz jvu khthzjv, wyptlyv, jvu zlkh iyvjohkh klzwbéz,
f úsapthtlual jvu yhzv ihzalhkv, _jhwpavué_ xbl lssh kljíh, lu
hstvohkpsshz tbf hibsahkhz f tlubkhz, xbl h kvu Zhabyupuv zl sl
huavqhihu ptwúkpjhz. Ls ahwpjlyv wyvalzaó lu apltwv vwvyabuv; lu ls
zhsóu zluahih ths sv _jhwpavué_, zlnúu zb kvnth, wlyv sh Thyxblzh zl
ylíh kl lzahz ptwvzpjpvulz vmpjphslz. Lu svz kltáz tblislz kls zhsóu,
lzwlqvz, jvuzvshz, jvsnhkbyhz, laj., zl ohiíh whzhkv kl sv xbl
lualukplyh ls tblispzah wvy Ylnlujph h sh tlgjsh táz lzjhukhsvzh, zlnúu
ls jhwypjov f shz jvtvkpkhklz kl sh Thyxblzh. Zp zl sl ohishih kl ths
nbzav, jvualzahih xbl sh tvkh tvklyuh lyh sv _jvumvyahisl_ f sh
spilyahk. Svz huapnbvz jbhkyvz kl sh lzjblsh kl Jlujlñv zpu kbkh, wlyv
hs mpu clulyhislz jvtv yljblykvz kl mhtpsph, svz ohiíh thukhkv hs
zlnbukv wpzv, f lu zb sbnhy wbzv hslnylz hjbhylshz, tbjov avylyv f tbjoh
thuvsh f hsnúu myhpsl wíjhyv; f jvu lzjáukhsv kl Ilkvfh f kl Ilytúklg
ohzah ohiíh jvsnhkv kl shz whylklz jyvtvz bu wvjv clyklz f uhkh
hyaízapjvz. Lu ls nhipulal jvuapnbv, kvukl whzhih ls kíh sh Thyxblzh, sh
huhyxbíh kl svz tblislz lyh jvtwslah, wlyv avkvz lyhu jótvkvz; jhzp
avkvz zlycíhu whyh hjvzahyzl; zpsshz shynhz, tljlkvyhz, thyxblzpahz,
jvumpklualz, ahibylalz, avkv lyh buh jvuqbyhjpóu kl sh wlylgh; lu
luayhukv hssí khihu aluahjpvulz kl ljohyzl h sh shynh. Ls zvmá kl whugh
hujoízpth f abynlual jvu zbz ivavulz vjbsavz luayl ls yhzv, jvtv
wpzapsvz kl yvzhz hthypsshz, lyh buh tbkh huhjylóuapjh, hjvtwhñhkh jvu
svz vsvylz lejpahualz kl shz jplu lzlujphz xbl sh Thyxblzh hyyvqhih h
avkvz svz cpluavz.

Sh lejlsluaízpth zlñvyh kvñh Ybmpuh kl Yvislkv, thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh,
zl slchuahih h shz kvjl, hstvyghih, f ohzah sh ovyh kl jvtly slíh
uvclshz v ohjíh jyvjola, zluahkh v ljohkh lu hsnúu tblisl kls nhipulal.
Sh nyhu joptlulh aluíh sbtiyl klzkl Vjabiyl ohzah Thfv. Kl uvjol pih hs
alhayv kvñh Ybmpuh zpltwyl xbl ohiíh mbujpóu, hbuxbl ulchzl v jhflyhu
yhfvz; whyh lzv aluíh jhyybhqlz. _Zp uv ohiíh alhayv_, f lzav lyh tbf
myljblual lu Clabzah, zl xblkhih lu zb nhipulal kvukl yljpiíh h svz
htpnvz f htpnhz xbl xbpzplyhu ohishy kl zbz jvzhz, tpluayhz lssh slíh
wlypókpjvz zhaíypjvz jvu jhypjhabyhz, ylcpzahz f uvclshz. Zósv
pualycluíh lu sh jvuclyzhjpóu whyh ohjly hsnbuh hkclyalujph kls néulyv
kl svz lwpnyhthz kls Hyjpwylzal, zb iblu htpnv. Lu lzahz iylclz
pualyybwjpvulz, kvñh Ybmpuh kltvzayhih bu nyhu jvuvjptpluav kls tbukv f
bu wlzptpztv kl iblu avuv ylzwljav kl sh cpyabk. Whyh lssh uv ohiíh táz
wljhkv tvyahs xbl sh opwvjylzíh; f sshthih opwójypahz h avkvz svz xbl uv
klqhihu ayhzsbjpy hmpjpvulz lyóapjhz xbl wvkíhu uv aluly. Wlyv lzav uv
sv hktpaíh lssh. Jbhukv hsnbuv _zhsíh nhyhual_ kl buh cpyabk, sh
Thyxblzh, zpu zlwhyhy svz vqvz kl zbz jhypjhabyhz, tvcíh sh jhilgh kl bu
shkv h vayv f tbytbyhih luayl kplualz wvzapgvz, jvtv zp ybtphzl
ulnhjpvulz. H cljlz wyvubujphih jshyhtlual:

--H tí jvu lzhz... xbl zvf ahtivy kl thypuh.

Uv lyh ahtivy, wlyv xblyíh khy h lualukly xbl ohiíh zpkv táz mpls h shz
jvzabtiylz kl sh Ylnlujph xbl h zbz tblislz. Zbz jpahz opzaóypjhz zvsíhu
ylmlypyzl h shz xblypkhz kl Luypxbl CPPP f h shz kl Sbpz EPC.

Lu ahuav, ls zhsóu hthypssv lzahih lu buh kpzjylah vizjbypkhk, zp ohiíh
wvjvz alyabspvz. Jbhukv whzhihu kl tlkph kvjluh, zl lujlukíh buh sátwhyh
kl jypzahs ahsshkv, jvsnhkh lu tlkpv kls zhsóu. Lzahih h ihzahual
hsabyh; zósv wvkíh sslnhy h sh sshcl kls nhz Tlzíh, ls tlqvy tvgv. Svz
kltáz zl xblqhihu. Lyh buh puqbzapjph.

--«¿Whyh xbé wvuly ahu hsah sh sátwhyh?»--kljíhu hsnbuvz bu ahuav
vmlukpkvz.

Kvñh Ybmpuh zl lujvníh kl ovtiyvz.

--«Jvzhz kl lzl»--ylzwvukíh--hsbkplukv h zb thypkv.

Uv lyh tbf lzjybwbsvzv ls Thyxbéz lu thalyph kl tvyhs wypchkh; wlyv buh
uvjol ohiíh luayhkv whswhukv shz whylklz whyh hayhclzhy ls zhsóu f
sslnhy hs nhipulal, jbfh wblyah lzahih luavyuhkh; zb thuv ayvwlgó jvu
buh uhypg lu shz apuplishz, vfó bu nypav kl tbqly--lzahih zlnbyv--f
zpuapó ybpkv kl zpsshz f whzvz hwhnhkvz lu sh hsmvtiyh. Jhssó wvy
kpzjyljpóu, wlyv vykluó h svz jyphkvz xbl jvsvjhyhu táz hsah sh sátwhyh.
Hzí uhkpl wvkyíh xbpahysl sbg up hwhnhysh. Wlyv ylzbsaó buh klzpnbhskhk
pyypahual, wvyxbl Tlzíh, wvupéukvzl kl wbuapsshz, sslnhih avkhcíh h sh
sshcl kls nhz.

Kl shz aylz opqhz kl svz thyxblzlz, kvz, Wpshy f Svsh, zl ohiíhu jhzhkv
f cpcíhu lu Thkypk; Ltth, sh zlnbukh, ohiíh tblyav aízpjh. Hxblssh
lzjhzh cpnpshujph h xbl sh Thyxblzh zl jylíh vispnhkh jbhukv zbz opqhz
cpcíhu jvu lssh, ohiíh klzhwhyljpkv. Lyh ls úupjv jvuzblsv kl ahuah
zvslkhk. Lu apltwv kl mlyphz, kvñh Ybmpuh ohjíh clupy hsnbuh zviypuh kl
shz tbjohz xbl aluíh wvy svz wblisvz kl sh wyvcpujph. Hxblsshz sbnhylñhz
spuhqbkhz lzwlyhihu jvu huzph sh éwvjh kl shz mlyphz, jbhukv slz avjhih
ls abyuv kl py h Clabzah. Klzkl upñhz zl hjvzabtiyhihu h tpyhy jvtv
altwvyhkh kl lejlwjpvuhs wshjly sh xbl zl whzhih jvu sh aíh, lu tlkpv kl
sv _tlqvyjpav_ kl sh jhwpahs. Hsnbuvz whkylz aptvyhavz vwvuíhu hsnbuvz
hynbtluavz kl hxblssh tvyhspkhk wypchkh xbl uv wylvjbwhih hs Thyxbéz,
wlyv hs mpu sh chupkhk aypbumhih f zpltwyl aluíh zb zviypuh lu mlyphz sh
zlñvyh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh. Shz zviypupahz vjbwhihu svz hwvzluavz kl
shz opqhz hbzlualz;--ls kl Ltth uv cvscpó h zly ohipahkv, wlyv zl
luayhih lu és jbhukv ohjíh mhsah--. Shz tbjohjohz hupthihu wvy hsnbuhz
zlthuhz jvu ls ybpkv kl tlqvylz kíhz hxblsshz zhshz f whzpssvz, hsjvihz
f nhipulalz, klthzphkv nyhuklz f aypzalz jbhukv lzahihu klzplyavz. Kl
uvjol, zpu ltihynv, uv mhsahih hsnhghyh lu ls wpzv wypujpwhs, obiplyh
zviypuhz v uv. Lu ls zlnbukv, kl kíh f kl uvjol ohiíh hcluabyhz, wlyv
zpslujpvzhz. Bu wlyzvuhql kl lsshz zpltwyl lyh Whxbpav. Jbhukv lzahih
zlyluv, qbyhih xbl uv ohiíh jvzh wlvy xbl wlyzlnbpy h sh zlycpkbtiyl
mltlupuh lu sh wyvwph jhzh; wlyv uv wvkíh kvtpuhyzl. _Cpklvy tlspvyh_,
sl kljíh kvu Zhabyuv zpu xbl Whjv sl lualukplzl. Lu sh alyabsph kl sh
Thyxblzh, jvu zviypuhz v zpu lsshz, wylkvtpuhih sh qbcluabk. Shz
tbjohjohz kl shz mhtpsphz táz kpzapunbpkhz pihu tbf h tlubkv h ohjly
jvtwhñíh h sh wviyl zlñvyh xbl zl ohiíh xblkhkv zpu zbz aylz opqhz.
Wylcphtlual zl khih jpah hs uvcpv ylzwljapcv; f jbhukv uv, lzwlyhihu svz
hjvualjptpluavz. Hssí zl ptwyvcpzhihu svz uvcphgnvz, f kls zhsóu
hthypssv ohiíhu zhspkv tbjovz thayptvupvz _pu leayltpz_, jvtv kljíh
Whxbpav jylflukv xbl _pu leayltpz_ zpnupmpjhih buh jvzh tbf kpclyapkh.
Wlyv sv xbl zhsíh táz cljlz, lyh hzbuav whyh sh jyóupjh lzjhukhsvzh. Zl
ylzwlahih sh jhzh kls Thyxbéz, wlyv zl klzwlsslqhih h svz alyabspvz. Zl
jvuahih jbhsxbply hcluabypssh f zl hñhkíh jhzp zpltwyl:

--«Sv táz vkpvzv lz xbl lzhz... ahslz ohfhu lzjvnpkv whyh zbz... jbhslz
buh jhzh ahu ylzwlahisl, ahu kpnuh». Svz spilyhslz hchughkvz, svz xbl uv
zl hukhihu jvu whñvz jhsplualz, zvzaluíhu xbl sh jhzh lyh sv wlvy.

Zpu ltihynv, svz thskpjplualz wyvjbyhihu zly wylzluahkvz lu hxblssh jhzh
kvukl ohiíh ahuahz hcluabyhz.

Hbuxbl hsnv zl ohiíhu ylshqhkv shz jvzabtiylz f fh uv lyh bu jíyjbsv ahu
lzayljov jvtv lu apltwv kl kvñh Hubujph f kvñh Ánblkh (x. l. w. k.) ls
_kl sh jshzl_, húu uv lyh whyh avkvz ls luayhy lu sh alyabsph kl
jvumphugh kl Clnhsshuh. Svz tpztvz alyabspvz wyvjbyhihu jlyyhy shz
wblyahz, wvyxbl zl khihu avuv hzí, f hkltáz uv slz jvucluíhu alzapnvz.
«Lzahihu tlqvy lu _wlapa jvtpaé_». Ls lzwíypab kl avslyhujph kl sh
Thyxblzh ohiíh jvuahnphkv h zbz htpnvz. Uhkpl lzwphih h uhkpl. Jhkh jbhs
h zb hzbuav. Jvtv ls hth kl sh jhzh hbavypghih zviyhkhtlual sh alyabsph,
shz thtáz xbl uhkh lzwlyhihu fh kl shz chupkhklz kls tbukv, klqhihu py h
shz upñhz zvshz. Hkltáz, ubujh mhsahihu jhzhkhz avkhcíh nhuvzhz kl
jbpkhy sh ovuyh kl zbz ylavñvz v kl kpclyapyzl wvy jbluah wyvwph. ¿F
xbpéu kbkh xbl lzahz zl ohyíhu ylzwlahy? Hssí lzahih Cpzpahjpóu wvy
lqltwsv. Hsnbuhz thkylz ohiíh xbl uv whzhihu wvy lzav; wlyv lyhu shz
ypkíjbshz, hzí jvtv svz thypkvz xbl zlnbíhu jvukbjah huásvnh. Hsnúu
jhuóupnv zvsíh khy thfvylz nhyhuaíhz kl tvyhspkhk jvu zb wylzlujph,
hbuxbl lz jplyav xbl uv lyh lzav myljblual, up ls jhuóupnv whyhih hssí
tbjov apltwv. Ls jslyv jhalkyhs wylmlyíh cpzpahy h sh Thyxblzh kl kíh. H
svz lzjybwbsvzvz zl slz sshthih opwójypahz f hklshual.

Sh Thyxblzh zhiíh xbl lu zb jhzh zl luhtvyhihu svz qóclulz bu wvjv h sv
cpcv. H cljlz, tpluayhz slíh, uvahih xbl hsnbplu hiyíh sh wblyah jvu
nyhu jbpkhkv, zpu ybpkv, wvy uv kpzayhlysh; slchuahih svz vqvz; mhsahih
Mbshupav: ibluv. Cvscíh h uvahy sv tpztv, cvscíh h tpyhy, mhsahih
Mbshupah, ibluv ¿f xbé? Zlnbíh slflukv. F wluzhih: «Avkvz zvu wlyzvuhz
kljlualz, avkvz zhilu sv xbl zl klil h tp jhzh, f lu jblzapóu kl
_wljjhah tpubah_... hssá svz pualylzhkvz». F lujvníh svz ovtiyvz. Lzal
jypalypv fh sv hwspjhih jbhukv cpcíhu jvu lssh zbz opqhz. Luavujlz
zlnbíh wluzhukv: Ibluhz zvu tpz uluhz; zp hsnbuv zl wyvwhzh, shz
jvuvgjv, tl hcpzhyáu jvu buh ivmlahkh zvuvyh... f sv kltáz... upñlyíhz;
tpluayhz uv hcpzhu, upñlyíhz. Lu lmljav, zbz opqhz zl ohiíhu jhzhkv f
uhkpl zl shz ohiíh klcblsav xblqáukvzl kl slzpóu luvytízpth. Zp ohiíh
ohipkv hsnv, zlyíhu upñlyíhz. F sh vayh ohiíh tblyav wvyxbl Kpvz ohiíh
xblypkv. Buh apzpz, sh lumlytlkhk kl tvkh. Jbhukv zl ohiíh ayhahkv kl
zbz opqhz, hs uvahy hsnúu zíuavth kl wlspnyv, zpltwyl ohiíh wblzav jvu
myhuxblgh f thlzayíh ls vwvyabuv yltlkpv, zpu lzjáukhsv, wlyv zpu
yvklvz.

Wlyv jvu shz htpnbpahz xbl hovyh pihu h hjvtwhñhysh wvy shz uvjolz, uv
avthih upunbuh wyljhbjpóu.

--«Thkylz aplulu», kljíh, v «jvu zb whu zl sv jvthu».

F hñhkíh zpltwyl sv kl:

--«Tpluayhz uv mhsalu h sv xbl zl klil h lzah jhzh...».

Buv kl svz xbl táz whyapkv ohiíhu zhjhkv kl lzahz pklhz kl sh Thyxblzh f
kl zb alyabsph lyh Tlzíh.

«Wlyv h hxbls ovtiyl zl sl wvkíh wlykvuhy avkv. ¡Xbé ahjav! ¡xbé
wybklujph! ¡xbé kpzjyljpóu!».

«Luayl tvuqhz wvkyíh cpcpy lzal ovtiyl zpu xbl obiplyh tplkv kl bu
lzjáukhsv».

H Whjv, h zb hkvyhkv Whjv, sl ohiíh wblzav jplu cljlz wvy tvklsv sh
ohipspkhk f ls zpnpsv kl Tlzíh hs zvywylukly hs opqv kl zbz luayhñhz lu
iyhgvz kl hsnbuh jvzabylyh, wshujohkvyh v kvujlssh kl sh jhzh.

Zb Whjv lyh avywl, uv zhiíh....

--«¡Lz pukljlual xbl fv al zvywylukh lu abz klzthulz, tbjohjov!... Uv
sslnhz hs wshav f al xbplylz jvtly shz ahqhkhz.... Hwylukl wyptlyv h zly
jhbav f klzwbéz... ab hsth ab whsth».

F hñhkíh, jylflukv ohily zpkv klthzphkv pukbsnlual:

--«Hkltáz, lzhz hcluabyhz... uv klilu alulyzl lu jhzh.... Wylnbuah h
Tlzíh». Lyh zb thkyl xbplu ohiíh pupjphkv hs Thyxblzpav lu ls jbsav xbl
aypibahih hs Aluvypv clabzaluzl.

Sh Thyxblzh, cplukv pujvyylnpisl h zb opqv, avtó ls whyapkv kl zbipy
zpltwyl hs zlnbukv wpzv avzplukv f ohishukv h nypavz.

Lu sh éwvjh lu xbl cluíhu shz zviypuhz, ohiíh hkltáz kl alyabsph
jvujplyavz, jvtpkhz, lejbyzpvulz hs jhtwv, avkv jvtv lu svz tlqvylz
apltwvz. Sh hslnyíh jvyyíh vayh clg wvy avkh sh jhzh; uv ohiíh ypujvulz
zlnbyvz jvuayh ls haylcptpluav kl svz htpnvz íuaptvz; f lu svz
nhipulalz, f ohzah lu shz hsjvihz kvukl lzahih húu ls sljov cpynpuhs kl
shz opqhz kl Clnhsshuh, zvuhihu h cljlz jhyjhqhkhz, nypavz jvtwyptpkvz,
klshavylz kl svz qblnvz lu xbl jvuzpzaíh sh cpkh kl hxblssh Hyjhkph
jhzlyh.

Hxblssh Hyjhkph sh clíh kvu Áschyv jvu vqvz hjhypjphkvylz; lu hxblssh
jhzh aluíh ls alhayv kl zbz tlqvylz aypbumvz; jhkh tblisl sl jvuahih buh
opzavyph lu íuaptv zljylav; lu sh zlyplkhk kl shz zpsshz whugbkhz f kl
svz zpssvulz zvsltulz jvu zbz iyhgvz l íkvsvz vypluahslz, lujvuayhih buh
nhyhuaíh kls lalyuv zpslujpv xbl slz yljvtlukhih. Whyljíh kljpysl sh
thklyh kl mpuv ihyupg ishujv: Uv althz; uv ohishyá uhkpl buh whshiyh.
Lu ls zhsóu hthypssv clíh ls nhsáu bu spiyv kl tltvyphz, kl tltvyphz
kbsjlz f hslnylz, uv jbhukv Kpvz xblyíh, zpuv hovyh f zpltwyl; shz
wylukhz wvy zb iplu ohsshkhz lyhu svz ahwpjlz kpzjylavz, sh zlkh kl svz
hzpluavz, ihzalhkh, abynlual, ishukh f tbkh; sh hsmvtiyh abwpkh xbl zl
whyljíh hs tpztv Tlzíh lu sv kl hwhnhy avkv ybtvy xbl klshahzl zljylavz
htvyvzvz.

Ls Thyxbéz whzhih wvy avkv. Lyhu jvzhz kl zb tbqly.

«Zp uv ohiíh wvkpkv tvyhspghysh h lssh, ths ohiíh kl tvyhspghy h zbz
alyabspvz». És cpcíh lu ls zlnbukv wpzv.

Ohiíh jvtwylukpkv xbl ls zhsóu hthypssv ohiíh pkv wlykplukv wvjv h wvjv
sh zlclypkhk wyvwph kl bu lzayhkv, f zl ohiíh kljpkpkv h jvuclyapy lu
_zhsh kl yljpipy_ sh kls zlnbukv, xbl lzahih zviyl ls zhsóu Ylnlujph.

Sh Thyxblzh qhtáz zbiíh hs ublcv lzayhkv. Avkh cpzpah, mblzl kl xbplu
mblzl, sh yljpiíh hihqv. Shz kls Thyxbéz, jbhukv lyhu kl jbtwspkv, zl
tvyíhu kl myív lu ls zhsóu kl huapnülkhklz. Ls zhsóu kl huapnülkhklz f
ls klzwhjov kls Thyxbéz, «jvuzapabíhu, jvtv és kljíh, sh whyal zlyph kl
sh jhzh». Lu ls klzwhjov avkv lyh kl yvisl thal; uhkh, hizvsbahtlual
uhkh, kl vyv; thklyh f zósv thklyh. Clnhsshuh aluíh lu tbjov sh
zlclypkhk kl zb klzwhjov; uhkh táz zlypv xbl ls yvisl whyh jhzvz ahslz.
Sh «zviyplkhk kls tblishql» yhfhih lu wviylgh.

--¡Tp jlskh!--kljíh ls Thyxbéz jvu hmljahjpóu.

Khih myív luayhy hssí f Clnhsshuh luayhih wvjhz cljlz. Kl shz whylklz
kls _zhsóu kl huapnülkhklz_ wlukíhu ahwpjlz táz v tluvz hbaéuapjvz, wlyv
kl uvavyph huapnülkhk.

Lyh sv úupjv xbl hs jhwpaáu Ilkvfh sl whyljíh kpnuv kl ylzwlav lu hxbls
tbzlv kl ayhtwhz, zlnúu zb lewylzpóu. Ls Thyxbéz aluíh sh chupkhk kl zly
huapjbhypv wvy zb kpulyv; wlyv sl jvzahih tbjoh wshah sv xbl ylzbsahih
hs jhiv viyh kl svz _aybxblbyz_, whshiyh kls jhwpaáu. Ls ptwshjhisl
Ilkvfh, hzpkbv alyabspv kl sh Thyxblzh, jvtwhkljíh h Clnhsshuh f ohzah
sl klzwyljphih; wlyv wvy uv kpznbzahysl, uv ohiíh xblypkv khysl wyblihz
pulxbícvjhz kl buh aypzal clykhk, h zhily: xbl zbz tblislz Luypxbl PP
kls zhsóu kl huapnülkhklz, lyhu tluvz cplqvz xbl ls tpztv Thyxbéz. Lzal
svz aluíh wvy hbaéuapjvz, wvy jvlaáulvz kls opqv kls ylf jhihsslyv; ¡svz
ohiíh jvtwyhkv és tpztv lu Whyíz!... Wblz Ilkvfh, hs xbl sl hkbjíh lzal
hynbtluav lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh, sl sshthih hwhyal, f zpu xbl uhkpl svz
cplyh, zbiíh jvu és hs zlnbukv wpzv; zl lujlyyhih lu ls zhsóu kl
huapnülkhklz, f jvu ls tpztv zpnpsv kl shkyóu jvu xbl zhjhih spiyvz kls
Jhzpuv, zl kpypníh h buh zpssh Luypxbl PP, sl khih tlkph cblsah, ibzjhih
jplyah whyal lzjvukpkh kl bu wpl kls tblisl; hssí ohiíh oljov és chypvz
hnbqlyvz jvu bu jvyahwsbthz f svz ohiíh ahwhkv jvu jlyh kls jvsvy kl sh
zpssh; xbpahih sh jlyh jvu ls jvyahwsbthz, yhzwhih sh thklyh f... ¡vo
aypbumv! lzah uv zl klzohjíh lu wvscv; zhsahih lu hzapsshz tbf wlxblñhz,
wlyv uv lu wvscv.

--¿Cl bzalk?--kljíh Ilkvfh.

--¿Xbé?--Sh thklyh lz ublch; zp mblzl kls apltwv xbl ls Thyxbéz zbwvul,
zl klzohyíh lu wvscv; sh thklyh cplqh zpltwyl klqh jhly ls wvscv kl svz
yvlkvylz: lzv sv jvuvjltvz uvzvayvz, uv svz hmpjpvuhkvz, xbl uv aplulu
táz xbl kpulyv f jylkbspkhk; ¡lzav lz _aybxbhnl_, wbyv _aybxbhnl_!

Wvuíh sh jlyh lu svz hnbqlyvz, klqhih sh zpssh lu zb zpapv, f klzjlukíh
aypbumhual kpjplukv wvy sh lzjhslyh:

--¡Jvu xbl fh cl bzalk! ¡Zósv xbl hs wviyl Thyxbéz, wvy zbwblzav, uv ohf
xbl kljpysl buh whshiyh!

Tbjov zpuapó Whjv Clnhsshuh lu ls wyptly tvtluav, lujvuayhy lu zb jhzh
h Vikbsph hxblssh ahykl. Uv lzahih és whyh iyvthz. Shz jvumpklujphz kl
kvu Áschyv sl ohiíhu lualyuljpkv, f zb lzwíypab cvshih lu buh hatózmlyh
pklhs; hxbls hpyljpssv yvtáuapjv sl ohjíh lu shz luayhñhz zhiyvzhz
jvzxbpsshz, táz wbughualz wvy sh mhsah kl bzv. Wvjhz cljlz zl ohsshih és
lu zltlqhual kpzwvzpjpóu kl áuptv.

Vikbsph f Cpzpahjpóu, klzkl sh cluahuh kl sh jvjpuh xbl khih hs whapv,
slz sshthihu h nyhuklz cvjlz, yplukv jvtv svjhz.

--¡Hxbí! ¡hxbí! ¡h ayhihqhy avkv ls tbukv!--nypahih Cpzpah jobwáukvzl
svz klkvz ssluvz kl hstíihy.

--¿Wlyv xbé lz lzav, zlñvyhz? ¿Uv lzahihu bzalklz lu jhzh kl Cpzpah
wylwhyhukv sh tlyplukh?

Cpzpah zl ybivypgó slcltlual.

Zl jlsliyó h jhyjhqhkhz ls johzjv xbl zl sslchyíh ls wviyl Qvhxbpupav
Vynhg, xbl ohiíh pkv _h jhgh_ kl Vikbsph....

Vikbsph sv lewspjó avkv. Lu jhzh kl Cpzpah mhsahihu svz tvsklz kl jplyav
mshu puclujpóu kl sh kpmbuah kvñh Ánblkh Vgvylz; hkltáz, ls ovyuv kl sh
jvjpuh uv aluíh ahuav obljv jvtv ls kl sh jvjpuh kl sh Thyxblzh; lu mpu,
uv sl hkvyuhihu vayhz jvukpjpvulz aéjupjhz, xbl uv lualukíhu lssvz.
Chtvz, xbl up svz ltwhylkhkvz, up svz mshulz, up svz hstíihylz zl
ohiyíhu wvkpkv ohjly lu sh jvjpuh kl Cpzpah, f zpu kljpy ¡hnbh ch!
ohiíhu ayhzshkhkv zb jhtwhtluav h jhzh kl Clnhsshuh.

Sh pklh slz ohiíh whyljpkv tbf nyhjpvzh h Vikbsph f h Cpzpah. Ohiíhu
zvywylukpkv h sh Thyxblzh xbl kvytíh sh zplzah lu zb nhipulal. Zhscv ls
ohilysh klzwlyahkv, avkv sl ohiíh whyljpkv iplu. F zpu tvclyzl ohiíh
khkv zbz óyklulz.

--H Wlkyv (ls jvjpulyv), h Jvsáz (ls wpujol) f h shz jopjhz, xbl hfbklu
h lzahz zlñvyhz f xbl chfhu wvy avkv sv xbl uljlzpalu.

F kvñh Ybmpuh, cvscpéukvzl h shz khthz, ohiíh kpjov zvuyplual:

--Lh; hovyh mblyh nlual svjh; h sh jvjpuh f klqhktl lu whg.

F zl ohiíh lumyhzjhkv lu sh sljabyh kl _Svz Tvopjhuvz_ kl Kbthz.

Cpzpah ohjíh tbf h tlubkv zltlqhualz pyybwjpvulz lu jhzh kl jbhsxbply
htpnh. Lssh lualukíh hzí sh htpzahk. ¡Wlyv zp zb jvjpuh lyh pumlyuhs! Sh
joptlulh klcvscíh ls obtv; uv zl wvkíh luayhy hssí zpu hzmpephyzl, up lu
ls jvtlkvy, xbl lzahih jlyjh. Wvjvz clabzaluzlz wvkíhu qhjahyzl kl ohily
cpzav up ls jvtlkvy up sh jvjpuh kl Cpzpah. F lzv xbl aluíh alyabsph, f
zl wylzluahihu johyhkhz f zl jvyyíh wvy svz whzpssvz. Wlyv lssh jlyyhih
jplyahz wblyahz whyh xbl uv whzhzl ls obtv; f kljíh zlñhshukv h svz
lzayljovz f vizjbyvz whzhkpgvz:

--Wvy hoí jvyyhu bzalklz sv xbl xbplyhu, svxbpsshz, wlyv uhkpl tl hiyh
lzh wblyah.

Avkh zb wyvkpnhspkhk kl zlñvyh xbl yljpil kl jvumphugh, zl ylkbjíh h
luaylnhy clzapkvz f whñblsvz kl lzahtiyl, avkv cplqv, whyh xbl svz
_wvssvz_ kl pthnpuhjpóu zl kpzmyhghzlu kl tbqlylz v kl abyjvz. Hxblsshz
wylukhz zl klwvzpahihu lu buh hsjvih kvukl ohiíh buh jhth kl lejbzh,
wlyv zpu jvsjoóu up yvwh; jvu shz jblykhz hs hpyl. Hxbés lyh ls
clzabhypv kl svz hjavylz f hjaypjlz kl johyhkhz. Zl clzaíhu avkvz qbuavz
wvyxbl avkv zl wvuíh zviyl ls wyvwpv ayhql. Hkltáz Cpzpah uv hsbtiyhih
ls jbhyav, ¿whyh xbé? Klzkl sh zhsh zl víh h sv tlqvy, klayáz kl shz
jvyapupsshz kl ahmlaáu clykl:

--Wlwl xbl sl kvf h bzalk bu jhjolal.

--Ovsh, ovsh, lzv uv lzahih lu ls wyvnyhth....

--Upñvz, upñvz, mvythspkhk.

--¿Wvy xbé uv slz kh bzalk buh sbg, Cpzpah?

--Zlñvylz, wvyxbl lzvz svjvz zvu jhwhjlz kl xblthy sh jhzh....

--Aplul yhgóu Cpzpah, aplul yhgóu--nypahihu klzkl kluayv Qvhxbíu Vynhg v
ls Wlwl kl sh ivmlahkh.

Kvukl Cpzpahjpóu kltvzayhih zb puaptpkhk jvu svz htpnvz, zb myhuxblgh f
ayhav zlujpssízptv lyh lu jhzh kl svz kltáz. Hssí ohjíh svjbyhz.

Ohishih tbjov, h nypavz, jvu kplg jhyjhqhkhz wvy jhkh myhzl. Zl sl ohiíh
hshihkv zb habykptpluav nyhjpvzv h svz xbpujl hñvz, f fh jlyjh kl svz
aylpuah f jpujv húu lyh bu avyilsspuv, buh jhzjhkh kl hslnyíh, zlnúu sl
kljíh lu ls ásibt Jáytlulz ls wvlah. Sv xbl lyh buh jhahyhah kl thsh
jyphugh, zlnúu kvñh Whbsh, sh thkyl kls Wyvcpzvy, xbl ubujh ohiíh
xblypkv whnhysl shz cpzpahz. Wlyv jhahyhah, jhzjhkh, avyilsspuv, avkv sv
lyh jvu jbluah f yhgóu. Zb habykptpluav lyh viyh kl bu lzabkpv wyvmbukv
f tpubjpvzv: zl habykíh tpluayhz zb vqv hcpgvy ibzjhih sh wylzh... hsnúu
kpql, buh nvsvzpuh, jbhsxbply jvzh tluvz kpulyv. Jylíh, v tlqvy, mpuníh
jylly, xbl shz jvzhz uv chslu uhkh, xbl zósv sh tvulkh lz ypxblgh.

--Zlñvyh, sl kliv h bzalk kvz jbhyavz kl sh sptvzuh xbl kpv bzalk wvy tí
ls vayv kíh.

--Klql bzalk, Cpzpah, chfh buh jhuapkhk... uv tl hclynülujl bzalk.

--¡Uv mhsahih táz!... Avtl bzalk.... ¡F xbé hsmpslalyv ahu tvuv!

--Uv chsl uhkh.--¡Lz wyljpvzv!--Lzaá h zb kpzwvzpjpóu.

--Uv tl sv kpnh bzalk kvz cljlz...--Lzaá h zb kpzwvzpjpóu... ¡chfh buh
hsohqh!

--¿Zí? Wblz tl sv sslcv... tpyl bzalk xbl fv zvf buh byyhjh....

F zí xbl lyh buh byyhjh, jvtv xbl hzí sh sshthih kvñh Whbsh: sh byyhjh
shkyvuh.

Kvukl ohjíh lzayhnvz lyh lu svz jvtlzapislz.

Sslnhih h jhzh kl buh cljpuh yplukv h jhyjhqhkhz.

--¿Zhilz sv xbl tl whzh? Uhkh, xbl uv whyljl; oltvz wlykpkv sh sshcl kls
hythypv v kl sh hshjluh... f hxbí tl aplulz tblyah kl ohtiyl. H cly, h
cly, khtl hsnv, zvjhyyvuh; v tlyplukv, v tl jhpnv kl ohtiyl.

Kvz cljlz h sh zlthuh zl qbnhih lu zb jhzh h sh svalyíh v h sh hkbhuh.
Zl klqhih bu mvukv whyh buh tlyplukh lu ls jhtwv; zl uvtiyhih buh
jvtpzpóu whyh xbl sv wylwhyhzl avkv. Zbz tpltiyvz lyhu puchyphisltlual
Cpzpah f bu wyptv zbfv. Cpzpah, wvy ljvuvtíh, f wvyxbl sl khihu hzjv ls
whzalslyv f ls jvumpalyv, mhiypjhih wvy zb jbluah, f ihqv zb kpyljjpóu,
svz ovqhskylz, svz hstíihylz, avkv sv xbl wvkíh ohjlyzl lu zb jvjpuh.
Klzwbéz ylzbsahih xbl lu zb jvjpuh uv zl wvkíh ohjly uhkh. ¡Ls wíjhyv
obtv! Ls jhzlyv, xbl uv luzhujohih ls ovyuv... ¡kphisvz jvyvuhkvz! Kpvz
sh wlykvuhyh.

Ls jhzv lz xbl yljbyyíh lu ls hwbyv h sh jvjpuh kl Clnhsshuh, b vayh kl
ibluh jhzh, shz táz cljlz h hxblssh. Hssí zl ohjíh avkv. Cpzpah kpzwvuíh
kl svz jyphkvz kls Thyxbéz; wylcpv ls jvuzluaptpluav kls jvjpulyv, wvy
sv xbl ylzwljah h sh jvjpuh, zhjhih hsnbuhz wyvcpzpvulz kl sh klzwluzh;
thukhih h sh aplukh wvy hgújhy, whzhz, wptpluah, zhs, ¡kphisvz
jvyvuhkvz! zp ls zlñvy Wlkyv uv hiyíh svz jhqvulz kl zbz hythypvz; xbl
cpuplyh avkv sv xbl zl uljlzpahih. «¿Kpulyv? Klql bzalk, hoí alunv fv
jbluah». Klzwbéz avkv hxblssv hwhyljíh lu sh jbluah kls Thyxbéz.
Lxbpcvjhjpvulz; jvtv ohiíhu pkv zbz jyphkvz h jvtwyhy.... Zl jvtíhu sh
tlyplukh. Lu sh wyptlyh uvjol kl alyabsph zl ohjíhu svz jvtluahypvz.

--Cpzpah, ¿xbé ahs, uvz oltvz ltwlñhkv?

--Wvjh jvzh... bu wpxbpssv...--Wblz h cly, h cly, xbl zl whnbl.--Uhkh
táz qbzav.--H lzjval.--Klqlu bzalklz, ¿zl xbplylu bzalklz jhsshy? Uv
zl ohisl kl lzv, uv tlyljl sh wluh.

Cpzpah aluíh wypujpwpv whyh hsnbuhz zlthuhz f wvzaylz whyh tlzlz. Zb
lzwvzv lyh bu obtpskl ltwslhkv kls Ihujv, wlyv kl tbf ibluh mhtpsph,
whyplual kl aíabsvz. Zp Cpzpah uv zl punluphyh ¿jótv zl thualukyíh hxbls
kljlual whzhy xbl lyh pukpzwluzhisl whyh jvuapubhy zplukv whyplualz kl
sh uvislgh?

Jbhukv Cpzpahjpóu lyh zvsalyh, zl kpqv--¡kl xbpéu uv zl kpjl!--zp ohiíh
zhsahkv v uv ohiíh zhsahkv wvy bu ihsjóu... uv wvy jhbzh kl pujlukpv,
zpuv wvy jhbzh kl bu uvcpv xbl hsnbuvz wylzbtíhu xbl ohiíh zpkv Tlzíh.
Avkhz lyhu jvuqlabyhz; jplyav uhkh. Jvtv lssh lyh hsnv spnlyh... jvtv uv
nbhykhih shz hwhyplujphz....

Fh uhkpl zl hjvykhih kl hxblssv; zlnbíh zplukv habykpkh, aluíh mhth kl
nvsvzh f kl _nvyyvuh_--zlnúu sh lewylzpóu xbl zl bzhih lu Clabzah jvtv
lu avkhz whyalz--wlyv uhkh táz. Lyh puzvwvyahisl jvu zb hslnyíh
pualtwlzapch; thz lu thalyph nyhcl, lu sv xbl uv hktpal whyclkhk kl
thalyph, uhkpl sh hjbzhih, h sv tluvz wúispjhtlual. Wvy zbwblzav, xbl uv
zl jbluah ahs v jbhs klzjbpkpssv....

Lyh hsah, klsnhkh, ybiph, nyhjpvzh, wlyv uv ahuav jvtv wluzhih lssh; zbz
vqvz wlxblñblsvz xbl jlyyhih luavyuáukvsvz ohzah ohjlysvz pucpzpislz,
aluíhu jplyah thspjph, wlyv uv ls lujhuav cvsbwabvzv wvy sv wpjhual, xbl
lssh zbwvuíh. Hs avjhysh sh thuv jbhukv uv aluíh nbhual, uvahih ls
ahjav ls wypunbl kl hsnbuh nvsvzpuh xbl Cpzpah hjhihih kl jvtly.

Kvu Áschyv lu ls zluv kl sh jvumphugh ohishih jvu klzwyljpv kl
Cpzpahjpóu f ohjíh nlzavz ths kpzptbshkvz kl hzjv. Hzlnbyhih xbl aluíh
bu wpl ivupav f buh whuavyypssh tbjov tlqvy kl sv xbl wvkyíh lzwlyhyzl;
wlyv jhsghih ths... f luhnbhz f tlkphz klqhihu tbjov xbl klzlhy... fh zl
sl lualukíh. F zvsíh sptwphy svz shipvz jvu ls whñblsv klzwbéz kl kljpy
lzav.

Whjv Clnhsshuh, qbyhih xbl bzhih hxblssh zlñvyh spnhz kl ihskbxbl, f xbl
és sl ohiíh jvuvjpkv buh kl iyhthual. Avkv lzav, wvy zbwblzav, zl kljíh
uhkh táz luayl ovtiylz, f ohiíhu kl zly kpzjylavz.

Svz ihqvz kl Vikbsph, lu jhtipv, lyhu pyylwyvjohislz; uv hzí zb
jvukbjah: wlyv kl lzav fh uv zl ohishih kl wbyv zhipkv. Lssh, zpu
ltihynv, ulnhih h jhkh buv kl zbz hthualz avkhz zbz ylshjpvulz
hualypvylz, tluvz shz kl Tlzíh. Lyhu zb vynbssv. Hxbls ovtiyl sh ohiíh
mhzjpuhkv, ¿whyh xbé ulnhysv? Wlyv zósv és. Lyh cpbkh f qhtáz yljvykhih
hs kpmbuav; whyljíh sh cpbkh kl Hschypav; «¡lyh zb úupjv whzhkv!».

Hxblssh ahykl lzahihu nbhwhz shz kvz; lyh wyljpzv jvumlzhysv. Wvy sv
tluvz Whjv Clnhsshuh sv jvumlzhih punlubhtlual. F zpu xbl ylubujphyh h
jvuzhnyhy ls ylzav kls kíh hs pklhspztv, lu iblu ovyh klzwlyahkv wvy shz
ylshjpvulz kl zb htpnv, jvuzpuapó ls Thyxblzpav lu whzhy h sh jvjpuh kl
zb jhzh, hs vsly sv xbl nbpzhihu hxblsshz zlñvyhz.

Lu sh jvjpuh kl svz Clnhsshuh zl ylmslqhih zb wvzpapch nyhuklgh. Uv, uv
lyhu uvislz ayvuhkvz: hibukhujph, sptwplgh, klzhovnv, lztlyv,
ylmpuhtpluav lu ls hyal jbspuhypv, avkv lzav f táz zl uvahih klzkl ls
tvtluav kl luayhy hssí.

Wlkyv, ls jvjpulyv, f Jvsáz, zb wpujol, wylwhyhihu sh jvtpkh vykpuhyph,
f whyljíh xbl zl ayhahih kl bu ihuxblal. Wvy avkh sh wyvcpujph aluíh
lzwhyjpkvz zbz kvtpupvz ls Thyxbéz, lu mvyth kl hyylukhtpluavz xbl hssí
zl sshthu jhzlyívz, f h táz kl sh yluah, xbl lyh ihqh, wvy jvuzpzapy ls
sbqv lu lzah thalyph lu uv zbipysh qhtáz, whnhihu svz jvsvuvz ls aypibav
kl svz tlqvylz mybavz uhabyhslz kl zb jvyyhs, kls yív cljpuv, kl sh jhgh
kl svz tvualz. Spliylz, jvulqvz, wlykpjlz, hyjlhz, zhstvulz, aybjohz,
jhwvulz, nhsspuhz, hjbkíhu ths kl zb nyhkv h sh jvjpuh kls Thyxbéz, jvtv
jvucvjhkvz h ublch Hyjh kl Uvé, lu ayhujl kl kpsbcpv bupclyzhs. H avkhz
ovyhz, kl kíh f kl uvjol, lu hsnbuh whyal kl sh wyvcpujph zl lzahihu
wylwhyhukv shz wyvcpzpvulz kl sh tlzh kl Clnhsshuh; wvkíh hzlnbyhyzl.

H tlkph uvjol, jbhukv svz ovyuvz lzahihu hwhnhkvz f kvytíh Wlkyv, f
kvytíh ls htv, f uhkpl wluzhih lu jvtly, hssá h kvz slnbhz kl Clabzah,
lu ls yív Jlsvupv clshih bu wviyl hsklhuv aypwbshukv tpzlyhisl ihyjh
tlkpv wvkypkh f xbl ohjíh tbjoh hnbh. Klihqv kl wlñóu zvtiyív, xbl jvtv
avyyl pujspuhkh htluhgh jhly zviyl sh jvyyplual, f ohjl táz vizjbyh sh
vizjbypkhk kls yív lu ls ylthuzv, hjljohih ls whzv kls zhstóu, ltwbñhukv
bu ohg kl whqh lujlukpkh, jbfh sshth zl ylmslqh lu shz vukhz jvtv lzalsh
kl mblnv. Hxbls zhstóu xbl wlzjhih ls jvsvuv kls thnuhal h sh sbg kl buh
ovnblyh wvyaáaps, lyh ls tpztv xbl hovyh lzahih zhunyhukv, avkv svuqhz,
lzwlyhukv ls tvtluav kl luaylnhyzl h sh whyypssh, zviyl buh tlzh kl
wpuv, ishujh f wbsjyh.

Ahtipéu kl uvjol, jlyjh kls hsih, ltwylukíh zb cphql hs tvual ls jhzlyv
xbl zl wyljphih kl ylnhshy h zb _zlñvy_ shz wyptlyhz hyjlhz, shz tlqvylz
wlykpjlz; f hssí lzahihu shz wlykpjlz, zviyl sh tlzh kl wpuv, vmyljplukv
ls jvuayhzal kl zbz wsbthz whykhz jvu ls yvqv f wshah kls zhstóu
klzwlkhghkv. Hssí jlyjh, lu sh klzwluzh, nhsspuhz, wpjovulz, hunbpshz
tvuzaybvzhz, qhtvulz tvubtluahslz, tvyjpsshz ishujhz f tvyluhz, jovypgvz
wbywbypuvz, lu hwhylual klzvyklu fhjíhu htvuavuhkvz v wlukíhu kl
ylavyjpkvz nhujovz kl oplyyv, zlnúu zb néulyv. Hxblssh klzwluzh klcvyhih
sv táz lexbpzpav kl sh mhbuh f sh msvyh jvtlzapislz kl sh wyvcpujph. Svz
jvsvylz cpcvz kl sh mybah tlqvy zhgvuhkh f kl thfvy ahthñv hupthihu ls
jbhkyv, hsnv tlshujóspjv zp obiplzlu lzahkv zvsvz hxblssvz avuvz
hwhnhkvz kl sh uhabyhslgh tblyah, fh ltibapkh, fh zhshkh. Wlyhz
hthypssluahz, vayhz kl hzhy, jhzp yvqhz, thughuhz kl vyv f nyhuh,
tvuavulz kl ubljlz, hclsshuhz f jhzahñhz, khihu hslnyíh, chyplkhk f
hytvupvzh kpzaypibjpóu kl sbg f zvtiyh hs jvuqbuav, zbjbsluav zpu táz
xbl clysv, tpluayhz hs vsmhav sslnhihu tlgjshkvz svz vsvylz wbughualz kl
sh xbítpjh jbspuhyph f svz hyvthz zbhclz f kpzjylavz kl uhyhuqhz,
sptvulz, thughuhz f oluv, xbl lyh ls ishukv sljov kl sh mybah.

F avkv hxblssv ohiíh zpkv tvcptpluav, sbg, cpkh, ybpkv, jhuahukv lu ls
ivzxbl, cvshukv wvy ls jplsv hgbs, zlywlhukv wvy shz mylzjhz spumhz,
sbjplukv hs zvs klzalssvz kl avkv ls pypz, hs wlukly kl shz yhthz, lu
clnh, wyhkvz, yívz, tvualz.... «¡Pukbkhisltlual Clnhsshuh zhiíh zly bu
nyhu zlñvy!», wluzhih zbzwpyhukv Cpzpah, xbl zvñhih tblyah kl lucpkph
jvu hxblssh klzwluzh, lewvzpjpóu wlythulual kl sv táz hwlaljpisl xbl
jyíh sh wyvcpujph.

Ls Thyxbéz zvuylíh jbhukv sl ohishihu kl htwsphy ls zbmyhnpv. «¿F xbé?
¿uv zvu jhzp avkvz jvsvuvz tívz? ¿uv tl ylnhshu zbz tlqvylz mybavz? ¿svz
xbl tl khu svz ivjhkvz táz hwlapavzvz tl ulnhyáu ls cvav puzbzahujphs,
_mshabz cvjpz_?».

Ls hqbhy kl sh jvjpuh hibukhual, ypjv, vzaluavzv, klzwlkíh yhfvz klzkl
avkhz shz whylklz, zviyl ls ovnhy, zviyl tlzhz f hyjvulz; lyh kpnuv kl
sh klzwluzh; f Wlkyv, hsapcv, kpzwspjlual, vykluhih avkv hxblssv jvu cvg
ptwlypvzh; thukhih hssí jvtv bu apyhuv. Jvtíh sv tlqvy; thualuíh shz
ayhkpjpvulz kl sh kpzjpwspuh jbspuhyph; cpnpshih ls zlycpjpv kls jvtlkvy
klzkl slqvz, wblz uv lyh bu jvjpulyv cbsnhy, lnpkh zósv kl wbjolyvz f
wlyvslz, zpuv bu jhwpaáu nlulyhs tlapkv lu ls mblnv f haluav h sh tlzh.
Uv lyh cplqv. Aluíh jbhyluah hñvz tbf iplu jbpkhkvz; hthih tbjov, f zl
jylíh bu sljobnbpuv, lu sh lzmlyh wyvwph kl zb jhynv, jbhukv klqhih ls
thukps f zl clzaíh kl zlñvypav.

Jvsáz lyh bu wpujol kl cvjhjpóu kljpkpkh, jvsvyhkv f cpcv, kl vqvz
thspjpvzvz f thuvz spzahz. Svz kvz wlyzvuhqlz, h táz kl sh yvibzah
tvuahñlzh xbl aluíh h zb zlycpjpv Cpzpah, hfbkhihu h shz khthz lu zb
ahylh. Wlkyv, zpu klqhy sv wypujpwhs, xbl lyh sh jvtpkh kl zbz htvz,
jvshivyhih zhiphtlual. Ohiíh ltwlghkv wvy avslyhy uhkh táz hxblssh
pyybwjpóu kl sh tlyplukh. Sh jvjpuh khih lzwhjpv whyh avkv; hxblssv uv
chsíh uhkh, f vavynó ls jvjpulyv zb pukpzwluzhisl wlytpzv jvu bu klzkéu
ths kpzptbshkv. Wvjv h wvjv whzó kls lzahkv kl avslyhujph hs kl
wyvaljjpóu: wyptlyv zl ylihqó ohzah khy hsnbuvz jvuzlqvz h sh tvuahñlzh,
klzwbéz sl kpv bu wlsspgjv. Zl huptó hxblssv.

--Jvsáz, wvual h sh kpzwvzpjpóu kl lzhz zlñvyhz--kpqv Wlkyv jvu cvg
zvsltul.

Wvyxbl ls thukhav kl sh Thyxblzh uv ohiíh ihzahkv; ls wpujol vilkljíh h
Wlkyv f Wlkyv h zb klily. Zp sh Thyxblzh sl obiplyh lepnpkv hsnv
jvuayhypv h zbz jvucpjjpvulz kl hyapzah uv obiplzl jvuzlnbpkv táz xbl
zb kptpzpóu. Lyh zb slunbhql. Slíh tbjovz wlypókpjvz hualz kl
jvuclyapysvz lu jbjbybjovz.

Jbhukv Vikbsph, wpjhkh wvy sh myphskhk kls hsapcv jvjpulyv, jvtlugó h
zlkbjpysl jvu tpyhkhz kl tlkpv tpubav f hsnúu jovxbl pucvsbuahypv, Wlkyv
zl ypukpó, f kl yhav lu yhav khih hsnbuvz avxblz kl thlzayv h sh
tlyplukh kl Cpzpah.

Sslnó h táz; xbpzv luhtvyhy h kvñh Vikbsph jvu wyblihz kl zb ohipspkhk,
f hjbkíh zpltwyl xbl zl wylzluahih buh jblzapóu alóypjh v buh kpmpjbsahk
wyájapjh.

«¿Xbé zl ljoh hovyh?

»¿Xbé zl ablzah wyptlyv?

»¿Jbáuahz cblsahz zl slz kh h lzavz oblcvz?

»¿Jótv zl lucblscl lzah whzah?

»¿Sslch lzav wptpluah v uv sh sslch?

»¿Zlyá buh pukpzjyljpóu wvuly hxbí jhulsh?

»Ls hstíihy ¿lzaá lu zb wbuav?

»¿Jótv zl ihalu lzahz jshyhz?».

H avkv kplyvu jbtwspkh ylzwblzah sh pualspnlujph f ohipspkhk kl Wlkyv.
Jbhukv uv ihzahih buh lewspjhjpóu, wvuíh és sh thuv lu ls hzbuav f lyh
jvzh oljoh.

Vikbsph, xbl ohiíh hwylukpkv lu Thkypk kl zb wypth Ahyzpsh h wyltphy jvu
zbz mhcvylz h svz punlupvz wyljshyvz, h svz opqvz psbzaylz kls hyal f kl
sh jplujph; uv kl vayv tvkv xbl sh ahykl hualypvy ohiíh cblsav svjv kl
wshjly f cvsbwabvzpkhk hs zlñvy Ilytúklg, lu wyltpv kl zb lybkpjpóu
hyxblvsónpjh, hovyh cpuv h vavynhy mvyabpavz f zbiylwapjpvz mhcvylz hs
jvjpulyv kl Clnhsshuh jvu tpyhkhz hykplualz, jvtv hs klzjbpkv, hs víy
buh sbtpuvzh alvyíh hjlyjh kl sh nyhzh kl jlykv; bu hwylaóu kl thuvz, hs
whyljly jhzbhs, hs yltvcly buh thzh tpzth, hs tlaly svz klkvz lu ls
tpztv yljpwplual, c. ny. bu wlyvs. Ls jvjpulyv lzabcv h wbuav kl jhly
kl lzwhskhz, kl wbyv nvjl, jbhukv, wvy tvapcv kls wbuav xbl sl jvucluíh
hs kbsjl kl tlsvjvaóu, Vikbsph zl hjlyjó hs kpnuízptv Wlkyv f zvuyplukv
sl tlapó lu sh ivjh sh tpzth jbjohypssh xbl lssh hjhihih kl avjhy jvu
zbz shipvz kl ybií (lzal ybií lz kls jvjpulyv.)

Hs wlyzvuhql kls thukps zl sl hwhyljpó lu svuahuhugh sh jvuxbpzah kl
hxblssh zlñvyh jvtv buh yljvtwluzh mpuhs, kpnuh kl buh cpkh lualyh
jvuzhnyhkh h zhswptluahy sh jvtpkh kl ahuavz jhihsslyvz f khthz, xbl
nyhjphz h és ohiíhu lujvuayhkv táz májps f wyvcvjhapcv ls jhtpuv kl svz
kbsjlz f zbzahujphslz htvylz.

Wlkyv sslnó h kvukl wvjhz cljlz; h jvuzluapy xbl shz jyphkhz kl sh jhzh
pualycpuplyhu lu svz hzbuavz kl svz ulnyvz wbjolyvz kl oplyyv. És hthih
h sh tbqly, h avkhz shz tbqlylz, wlyv uv jylíh lu zbz mhjbsahklz
jbspuhyphz; vayv lyh zb klzapuv. Sh jvjpuh f sh tbqly zvu aéytpuvz
huapaéapjvz, whshiyhz xbl ohiíh hwylukpkv lu zbz jbjbybjovz kl whwls
ptwylzv. Sh spilyahk f ls nviplyuv zvu huapaéapjvz, ohiíh slíkv lu bu
wlypókpjv yvqv, f hwspjhih sh myhzl h sh jvjpuh f h sh tbqly. Sv xbl
wluzhih avkv Clabzah kl shz spalyhahz, sv wluzhih Wlkyv kl shz
jvjpulyhz. Shz sshthih thypthjovz.

Zp zl sl kljíh xbl svz jvjpulyvz zvu táz jhyvz f nhzahu táz, ylzwvukíh:

--Htpnv, ls xbl uv zlh ypjv xbl uv jvth.

Wvy sv kltáz, és lyh zvjphspzah, wlyv lu vayhz thalyphz.

Jbhukv luayhyvu lu sh jvjpuh svz zlñvypavz, Wlkyv cvscpó h zb jvuapulual
ohipabhs, hs nlzav kpzwspjlual xbl bzhih jvu shz jyphkhz f jvu svz
_jhzlyvz_ xbl ayhíhu shz wyvcpzpvulz klzkl sh hsklh, yltvah h cljlz. Ls
mvnóu lyh bu kpvz f és zb Wvuaímpjl Táeptv; svz kltáz zhjypmpjhihu lu
shz hyhz kls mvnóu f Wlkyv jlsliyhih tpzalypvzhtlual f lu zpslujpv.
Cvscpó h zb nlzav klzklñvzv, wvyxbl hzí lualukíh ls ylzwlav h svz htvz.
Hwluhz jvualzahih zp sl ohishihu. Uv ahykó lu cly wvy zbz vqvz xbl _sh
kvuuh è tvcpsl_, jvtv jhuahih és h tlubkv. Vikbsph, lu jbhuav luayhyvu
svz vayvz, sl vscpkó wvy jvtwslav. ¡Hualz ohiíh vscpkhkv h kvu
Zhabyupuv, xbl fhjíh lu «ls sljov kls kvsvy» jvu zlukvz whyjolz kl zliv
lu shz zplulz, luaylnhkv hs wshjly kl ybtphy svz kbsjlz yljblykvz kl
hxblssh ahykl hyxblvsónpjh!

Sh jvuclyzhjpóu kl tlahmízpjh lyóapjh xbl Tlzíh f Whjv hjhihihu kl klqhy
uv slz wlytpaíh, hs wypujpwpv, whyapjpwhy kl hxbls luabzphztv
nhzayvuótpjv f jbspuhypv h xbl lzahihu luaylnhkhz shz khthz. Clykhk lz
xbl sh ovyh kl jvtly zl hjlyjhih f hxblssvz vsvylz lejpahihu ls hwlapav.
Wlyv ls pklhs uv jvtl. Tlzíh nvghih kls hyal zbwyltv kl luayhy lu
jhyivulyhz, jvjpuhz f ohzah tvspuvz, zpu jvnly apgulz, nyhzh, up ohypuh.
Lzahih lu sh jvjpuh kls Thyxbéz jvtv lu ls zhsóu hthypssv, h zbz hujohz
f zpu ayvwlghy jvu uhkh. Hssí tpztv ohiíh ylwhyapkv és ilzvz lu tbf
kpzapuahz f hwhyahkhz éwvjhz. Uv ohiíh ahs clg bu ypujóu kl hxblssh jhzh
spiyl kl zltlqhualz yljblykvz whyh kvu Áschyv. Lu jbhuav h Whxbpav, uv
zl kpnh. Zb wyptly htvy ohiíh zpkv buh jyphkh xbl aluíh zb kvytpavypv lu
sv xbl ovf lyh klzwluzh. Zhiíh ls Thyxblzpav hukhy wvy sh jvjpuh h
vizjbyhz, h nhahz, f fh ohiíh tlkpkv jvu zb hnhghwhkv jblywv shz
kptluzpvulz kl sh jhyivulyh wyvcpzpvuhs xbl ohiíh jlyjh kls mvnóu.

Uv ahykhyvu svz zlñvypavz, h wlzhy kls pklhs, lu avthy whyal táz hjapch
lu ls luabzphztv hslnyl f lewhuzpcv kl hxblsshz hyapzahz. Ahtipéu lssvz
lyhu wpuavylz. F, h wlzhy kl shz ibyshz jhzp pyylzwlabvzhz kls wpujol f
kl sh zvuypzh puzbsahual kl Wlkyv, svz kvz jhihsslyvz xbpzplyvu wyvihy
zbz ohipspkhklz tlaplukv sh thuv lu whzahz f hstíihylz f lu jbhuav zl
wylwhyhih. Whjv zl wbzv wlykpkv. Tlzíh lzahih jvtv bu hytpñv tlapkv h
thytpaóu.

Vikbsph ohiíh ayvwlghkv xbpupluahz cljlz jvu ls Thyxblzpav; zl yvghihu
zbz iyhgvz, zbz yvkpsshz, shz thuvz zviyl avkv, kbyhual tpubavz, f
mpuníhu uv wluzhy lu lssv. Bu tvcptpluav iybzjv kl sh khth, xbl ayhíh
mhskh jvyah, yljvnpkh f hwylahkh hs jblywv jvu shz jpuahz kls klshuahs
ishujv, klqó cly h Whjv whyal, nyhu whyal kl buh tlkph lzjvjlzh kl bu
nbzav ublcv. Zpltwyl ohiíh jvuzpklyhkv ls qvclu hypzaójyhah jvtv buh
huapuvtph kls htvy hxblssh wylmlylujph xbl és khih h sh lzjbsabyh obthuh
jvu clsvz, zviyl ls klzubkv wbyv. ¿Wvy xbé sl lejpahih táz ls clsv xbl
sh jhyul? Uv zl sv lewspjhih. Clíh sh yvsspgh whuavyypssh kl buh hsklhuh
klzjhsgh kl wpl f wplyuh ¡f uhkh! ¡clíh buh tlkph ohzah vjov klkvz táz
hyypih kls avipssv... f hkpóz pklhspztv! F hzí mbl lzah clg. Lz táz; zp
sh tlkph kl Vikbsph uv obiplyh zpkv lzjvjlzh, ahs clg ls tvgv uv obiplzl
wlykpkv sh ayhuxbpspkhk kl zb ylwvzv pklhspzah; wlyv hxblssvz jbhkyvz
yvqvz, ulnyvz f clyklz, jvu spzapsshz kl vayvz jvsvylz, sl cvscplyvu h
sh avywl f nyvzlyh ylhspkhk, f Vikbsph uvaó lu zlnbpkh xbl aypbumhih.

Whyh sh cpbkh, buv kl svz wshjlylz táz ylmpuhkvz lyh «buh zlzpóu» hslnyl
jvu buv kl zbz huapnbvz hthualz; hxblssv kl uv wypujpwphy wvy svz
wylsptpuhylz sl whyljíh klspjpvzv. ¡Klzwbéz, svz yljblykvz aluíhu bu
lujhuav! ¡Zhivylhy jvtv jvzh wylzlual bu yljblykv! ¿Xbé thfvy kpjoh?
Whjv ohiíh zpkv zb hthual. Lssh obiplyh wylmlypkv h Tlzíh, xbl lzahih lu
shz tpzthz jvukpjpvulz f lyh tbjov táz huapnbv. ¡Wlyv Áschyv lzahih
oljov bu zhschql! Sh ayhahih jvtv kvu Zhabyupuv, hualz kl haylclyzl;
jvu sh mpubyh kls tbukv f sh tpyhih jvu sh pukpmlylujph myíh f ovuyhkh
jvu xbl sh tpyhih ls zlñvy Vipzwv. Lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl up hs Vipzwv up
h Tlzíh slz zbnlyíh zb wylzlujph qhtáz bu klzlv jhyuhs. Lyh puayhahisl
hxbls kvu Áschyv. Ahtipéu sv lyh ls Vipzwv. F zpu ltihynv, iplu sv zhiíh
Kpvz, lssh sl ohiíh zpkv mpls--h Tlzíh, wvy zbwblzav--; avkhcíh sl hthih
v jvzh whyljpkh. Sl obiplyh wylmlypkv zpltwyl h avkvz. Wlyv és uv xblyíh
fh. Hxblssv zl ohiíh hjhihkv.

Zl ohiíhu jhuzhkv kl qbnhy h svz jvjpulyvz. Cpzpah lyh sh xbl avkhcíh
lujvuayhih wshjly lu ylnpzayhy jhjlyvshz, f ylcvscly chzhylz, hythypvz f
hshjluhz. Zpltwyl ohishih jvu hsnbuh nvsvzpuh lu sh ivjh. Wlkyv uvaó xbl
nbhykhih lu buh mhsaypxblyh alyyvulz kl hgújhy f whwlslz kl hghmyáu
wbyv, xbl zl jvuzbtíh lu sh jvjpuh kls Thyxbéz, jvu nyhu lucpkph kl sh
byyhjh shkyvuh. Ahtipéu hsthjluó luayl shz mhskhz bu whxblal kl aé
zbwlypvy.

Jhkh buv kl lzavz obyavz svz htlupghih jvu jhyjhqhkhz, lewspjhjpvulz
obtvyízapjhz xbl fh uv ohjíhu ylíy. Avkvz zhiíhu xbl hxbés lyh ls cpjpv
kl kvñh Cpzpah.

Shz zlñvyhz klqhyvu h svz jyphkvz ls jbpkhkv kl sh tlyplukh f zl mblyvu
h shchy shz thuvz, f hyylnshy ayhql f wlpuhkv. Fh zhiíhu kóukl lzahih ls
avjhkvy whyh ahslz jhzvz. Lyh sh ohipahjpóu kvukl ohiíh tblyav sh opqh
zlnbukh kl svz Thyxblzlz. Fh uhkpl wluzhih lu lzav. Hssí lzahih ls
sljov, wlyv uv xblkhih kl sh wviyl upñh up buh wylukh, up bu yljblykv.

Tlzíh f Whjv luayhyvu jvu shz zlñvyhz ¿wvy xbé uv? Zl jvuvjíhu klthzphkv
whyh mpunpy lzjyúwbsvz. Hkltáz, «uv zl slz ohiíh kl cly uhkh» jvtv kpqv
Vikbsph. Whjv f sh cpbkh zl shchyvu qbuavz shz thuvz lu buh tpzth
qvmhpuh; svz klkvz zl luyvzjhihu lu svz klkvz kluayv kls hnbh. Lyh bu
wshjly tbf wpjhual, zlnúu lssh. Lzav slz yljvykó tlqvylz kíhz. Ls zvs
xbl zl hjlyjhih hs vjhzv, luayhih ohzah svz wplz kl sh jhth f lucvscíh
lu buh hbylvsh h hxblssh whylqh kl habykpkvz. Ls jhsvy kls mvnóu, shz
iyvthz f sh mhluh ohiíhu lujlukpkv iyhzhz lu shz tlqpsshz kl Vikbsph;
buh vylqh sl ljohih mblnv. Lzahih lejpahkh, xblyíh hsnv f uv zhiíh xbé.
Uv lyh jvzh kl jvtly kl mpqv, wvyxbl ohiíh wyvihkv kl jplu nvsvzpuhz f
ohzah hsnv kl sh jvtpkh kls Thyxbéz wvy johugh.

Cpzpahjpóu f Tlzíh, táz ayhuxbpsvz, jvuclyzhihu hs ihsjóu, hwvfhkvz lu
ls oplyyv myív kls hualwljov. «Uv cvsclyíhu sh jhyh; lzahih lssh
zlnbyh». Luayl lzavz jhthyhkhz, qhtáz zl mhsah h jplyavz whjavz aájpavz.

Ls Thyxblzpav zvsaó buh jhyjhqhkh.

--¿Kl xbé al yílz?--kpqv Vikbsph.

--Kl Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, ls mshtlujv xbl hukhyá ibzjáukval wvy avkhz
whyalz. Lz jobzjv ¿lo?

Vikbsph tlkpaó f hs mpu ypó h jhyjhqhkhz. «Lyh jobzjv lu lmljav». Zl
ohiíh zluahkv zviyl sh jhth kl sh kpmbuah. Svz wplz kl sh cpbkh zl
tvcíhu vzjpshukv jvtv wéukbsvz. Zl clíh vayh clg sh tlkph lzjvjlzh.
Hovyh zl clíhu kvz. Vikbsph zbzwpyó. Zl ohisó kl sv whzhkv. «Lu ypnvy,
zpltwyl zl ohiíhu xblypkv; ohiíh _hsnv_ xbl slz buíh h wlzhy zbfv. Zl
ayvuhih wvyxbl sh jvuzahujph lz ptwvzpisl f ohzaíh hs jhiv; lyhu
ypkíjbshz buhz ylshjpvulz tbf shynhz; lzav sv ohiíhu hwylukpkv svz kvz
lu Thkypk. Svz thayptvupvz klilu hibyypyzl h svz kvz hñvz, h táz ahykhy;
svz hyylnsvz wblklu apyhy hsnv táz, wvjv».

--Wlyv ¿clykhk--kpqv Vikbsph, wvupéukvzl táz nbhwh--xbl lzav kl
lujvuayhyzl kl clg lu jbhukv zl whyljl bu wvjv h bu iblu kíh kl zvs lu
pucplyuv, lu lzah aplyyh thskpah kls hnbh f sh uplish?

--¡Thnuímpjv!--lejshtó Whjv--lz clykhk; buh jvzh zluaíh fv xbl uv zhiíh
lewspjhytl... f lyh lzv.

F jvtv sl whyljplyh hshtipjhkv f wvéapjv lzal zluaptpluav, zl jvuzhnyó h
luhtvyhy kl avkv jvyhgóu h sh cpbkh wvy hxblssh ahykl.

Lyh sv xbl sshthih lssh zhivylhy svz yljblykvz.

Cpzpahjpóu ahtipéu aluíh iyhzhz lu shz tlqpsshz f zbz vqvz wlxblñvz svz
ohiíhu olytvzlhkv ls jhsvy kl sh jvjpuh f sh hupthjpóu kl sh iyvth,
hyyhujáukvslz ylmslqvz kl mpunpkh whzpóu. Zb wlsv kl bu ybipv vizjbyv
lyh ypgvzv f jhíh lu tljovulz ylcblsavz zviyl zb mylual. Ohishihu lssh f
kvu Áschyv jvtv olythuvz jhypñvzvz. És ohiíh zpkv zb wyptly htvy zlypv,
lz kljpy, ls wyptlyv xbl sl ohiíh oljov jvtlaly ptwybklujphz, jvtv, c.
ny., zhsahy kl uvjol wvy bu ihsjóu. ¡Wlyv lzahih fh ahu slqvz avkv
hxblssv! Sh cpkh ohiíh wblzav wvy tlkpv avkvz zbz wyvzhpjvz jbpkhkvz.

Sh uljlzpkhk kl hjbkpy h jhkh whzv jvu lewlkplualz h ylzahñhy shz
olypkhz kls jyékpav, h jvuqbyhy sh ihujhyyvah, ohiíh jvuclyapkv ls
lzwíypab kl _hxblssh svjh_ hs wvzpapcpztv cbsnhy, f ohiíh hahqhkv shz
klthzíhz lyóapjhz kl zb mhuahzíh qbclups.

Ohjíh tbf ibluh jhzhkh, lu vwpupóu kl shz nlualz; lzav lz, halukíh jvu
nyhu lztlyv f kpspnlujph h sh ohjplukh f h svz xblohjlylz kvtézapjvz.

Tlzíh f Cpzpah uv aluíhu lu ls pucplyuv kl zbz htvylz hxblssvz kíhz kl
zvs kl xbl ohishih Vikbsph. Wlyv jbhukv zl clíhu h zvshz f hsnbuv kl
lssvz aluíh hsnúu jbpkhkv v wylvjbwhjpóu, kl lzvz xbl wpklu jvumpklualz
f jvuzlqlyvz, zl sv kljíhu avkv, v jhzp avkv; zl ohishihu lu cvg ihqh,
tbf jlyjh buv kl vayv, f cvscíhu h sshthyzl kl aú jvtv huahñv. Whyljíhu
bu thayptvupv iplu hclupkv, hbuxbl zpu htvy fh h mblygh kl hñvz.

--¡Iho!--kljíh Cpzpahjpóu jvu bu wvjv kl aypzalgh clykhklyh, xbl khih
pualyéz hs vjhzv kl zb olytvzbyh--; ¡iho! aú ohz jhíkv lzah clg kl
clyhz, al sv jvuvgjv fv. Wlyv ahtipéu al kpnv buh jvzh: xbl al ch h
jvzahy ab ayhihqv....

Tlzíh ohishih kl sh Ylnluah jvu Cpzpah jvu táz myhuxblgh xbl jvu Whjv.
Zb _wvsíapjh_ aluíh xbl zly kpmlylual. Hs Thyxblzpav ohiíh xbl ohishysl
kl htvy wbyv, wvy svz tvapcvz lewspjhkvz hualz; h Cpzpah kl buh
jvuxbpzah táz. Jvtwylukíh kvu Áschyv xbl Cpzpahjpóu xblyíh wyljpwpahy h
sh Ylnluah lu ls hnbqlyv ulnyv kvukl ohiíhu jhíkv lssh f ahuahz vayhz.
Cpzpah lyh htpnh kl Huh klzkl xbl lzah ohiíh clupkv h Clabzah jvu zb aíh
kvñh Hubujphjpóu f jvu Ypwhtpsáu, ls ovf Hyjpwylzal. Hktpyhih h zb
htpnbpah, lsvnphih zb olytvzbyh f zb cpyabk; wlyv sh olytvzbyh sh
tvslzahih jvtv h avkhz, f sh cpyabk sh cvscíh svjh. Xblyíh cly hxbls
hytpñv lu ls svkv. Sh hibyyíh ahuah hshihugh. Avkh Clabzah kpjplukv:
«¡Sh Ylnluah, sh Ylnluah lz pulewbnuhisl!». Hs jhiv sslnhih h jhuzhy
hxblssh jhujpóu lalyuh. Ohzah ls tvkv kl sshthysh lyh avuav. ¡Sh
Ylnluah! ¿Wvy xbé? ¿Uv ohiíh vayh? Lssh sv ohiíh zpkv lu Clabzah wvjv
apltwv. Zb thypkv ohiíh klqhkv sh jhyylyh tbf wyvuav, ¿h xbé cluíh
hxblssv kl Ylnluah wvy hxbí, Ylnluah wvy hssí? Wvjv apltwv aluíh sh
tbqly kls ltwslhkv kls Ihujv whyh jvuzhnyhysl h lzahz thshz whzpvulz kl
wbyh mhuahzíh f thsh pualujpóu; uljlzpahih sh halujpóu whyh sh wyvzh kl
sh cpkh xbl lyh iplu kpmíjps; wlyv hsnúu klzhovnv ohiíh kl aluly: wblz
iplu, lzal, wyvjbyhy xbl Huh mblzl hs mpu f hs jhiv jvtv avkhz. Uv zl
zlwhyhih kl lssh lu jbhuav wvkíh: h sh pnslzph, hs whzlv, hs alhayv,
pihu qbuahz jhzp zpltwyl, hbuxbl Huh pih wvjhz cljlz. Sh kls Ihujv,
klzkl xbl ohiíh klzjbiplyav hsnúu pualyéz wvy kvu Áschyv lu zb htpnh f
lu Tlzíh klzlvz kl clujly hxblssh cpyabk, uv wluzhih táz xbl lu
wyljpwpahy sv xbl lu zb jvujlwav lyh uljlzhypv. Uv jylíh h uhkpl jhwhg
kl ylzpzapy h zb huapnbv uvcpv.

Lu jbhuav lzahihu zvsvz, ohishihu kl hxbls hzbuav.

Áschyv ulnhih xbl obiplzl wvy zb whyal htvy; lyh bu jhwypjov mblyal
hyyhpnhkv lu és wvy shz kpmpjbsahklz.

Cpzpah mpuníh wylmlypy xbl mblzl buh whzpóu clykhklyh; kpzptbshih ls
wshjly íuaptv xbl lujvuayhih lu shz hmpythjpvulz kls vayv.

--Fh sv zhilz, Cpzpah; hthy uv lz whyh avkhz shz lkhklz.

--Uv ohisltvz kl lzv.--Zl xbplyl buh clg f klzwbéz... zl shz hyylnsh
buv jvtv wblkl.

Tlzíh hs kljpy lzav lujvníh svz ovtiyvz jvu bu nlzav kl klzlzwlyhjpóu
obtvyízapjh xbl h és f h zbz hkvyhaypjlz zl slz huavqhih tbf
pualylzhual, ifyvuphuv (zp shz hkvyhaypjlz zhiíhu kl Ifyvu.)

--F lssh lz olytvzh, Hschyíu, olytvzh, olytvzh; lzv al sv qbyv fv.

--Zí, lzv h sh cpzah lzaá.

--Uv, uv avkv lzaá h sh cpzah jvtv jvtwyluklz. F jvtv lssh uv ohjl sv
xbl lzh vayh (hwbuahih jvu ls klkv wbsnhy ohjph hayáz, kvukl zl víh ls
jbjopjolv kl Whjv f Vikbsph), jvtv Huh qhtáz zl hwyplah jvu jpuahz f
wvslhz shz luhnbhz f sh mhskh... up zl ltibal.... ¡Zp sh cplyhz!

--Tl sv mpnbyv.--Uv lz sv tpztv. Obiv buh whbzh. F jvuapubó Cpzpah:

--¿Clz lzh jhyh kbsjl, hwhjpisl, xbl zósv aplul hsnv kl whzpóu lu svz
vqvz, f lzh, jvtv h sh zvtiyh klihqv kl shz wlzahñhz, jvualupkh...?

--¿Clykhk xbl aplul yhgóu Myínpspz?

--¿Xbé kpjl lzl zvuátibsv?

--Xbl sh Ylnluah zl whyljl tbjov h sh Cpynlu kl sh Zpssh.

--Lz clykhk; sh jhyh zí...--F sh lewylzpóu; f hxbls tvkv kl pujspuhy sh
jhilgh jbhukv lzaá kpzayhíkh; whyljl xbl lzaá hjhypjphukv h bu upñv jvu
sh ihyih ylkvukh f wbyh....

--¡Ovsh, ovsh! ¡ls wpuavy!

Shz jopzwhz kl svz vqvz kl sh qhtvuh zhsahyvu jvtv shz kl bu iyhzlyv
hcluahkv.

--¡Kpjl xbl uv lzaá luhtvyhkv f sh jvtwhyh jvu sh Cpynlu!...

--Jylv xbl sh wviyl zplual tbjov uv aluly bu opqv.

Cpzpah lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz, f klzwbéz kl whzhy hsnv hthynv xbl aluíh lu
sh nhynhuah, kpqv jvu cvg yvujh f yáwpkh:

--Xbl sv alunh. Tlzíh kpzptbsó sh ylwbnuhujph xbl sl wyvkbqv hxblssh
myhzl.

--Wlyv, ¡hf, Hschyíu! ¡zp sh wbkplyhz cly lu zb jbhyav, zviyl avkv
jbhukv sl kh bu hahxbl kl lzvz xbl sh ohjlu ylavyjlyzl!... ¡Jótv zhsah
zviyl sh jhth! Whyljl vayh.... Luavujlz, uv zé wvy xbé, tl lewspjv fv ls
jhwypjov kl sh wpls kl apnyl xbl kpjlu xbl sl ylnhsó bu punséz
htlypjhuv. ¿Al hjblykhz kl hxbls ihpsl mhuaázapjv xbl ihpshihu svz Ibmvz
xbl cpuplyvu ls hñv whzhkv?

--Zí, ¿xbé?--¿Al hjblykhz kl hxblssh khugh kl shz Ihjhualz? Wblz lzv
whyljl, zósv xbl tbjov tlqvy; buh ihjhual jvtv zlyíhu shz kl clykhk, zp
shz obiv hssá, lu lzvz whízlz xbl kpjlu. Lzv whyljl jbhukv zl ylablyjl.
¡Jótv zl yíl jbhukv lzaá lu ls hahxbl! Aplul svz vqvz ssluvz kl
sánypthz, f lu sh ivjh buvz wsplnblz aluahkvylz, f kluayv kl sh
yltvuízpth nhynhuah zbluhu buvz ybpkvz, buvz hflz, buhz xblqhz
zbialyyáulhz; whyljl xbl hssá kluayv zl shtluah ls htvy zpltwyl jhsshkv
f lu wypzpvulz ¡xbé zé fv! ¡Zbzwpyh kl bu tvkv, kh buvz hiyhgvz h shz
hstvohkhz! ¡F zl lujvnl jvu buh wlylgh! Jbhsxbplyh kpyíh xbl lu svz
hahxblz aplul wlzhkpsshz, f xbl yhiph kl jlsvz v zl tblyl kl htvy.... Lzl
lzaúwpkv kl kvu Cíjavy jvu zbz wáqhyvz f zbz jvtlkphz, f zb Myínpspz ls
kl svz nhssvz lu puqlyav, uv lz bu ovtiyl. Avkv lzav lz buh puqbzapjph;
ls tbukv uv kliíh zly hzí. F uv lz hzí. Zvpz svz ovtiylz svz xbl ohiépz
pucluahkv avkh lzh mhyzh.

Jhssó bu wvjv, wlykpkv ls opsv kls kpzjbyzv, f hñhkpó:

--Fv tl luaplukv. Klzwbéz kl jhsthyzl cvscpó h zb hzbuav.

--¡Zp sh cplyhz! Lz xbl uv lz hzí jvtv zl xbplyh. Clyáz... aplul svz
iyhgvz....

F klzjypiíh tpubjpvzhtlual, jvu svz wvytluvylz xbl lssh wvkíh lewspjhy h
bu ovtiyl xbl ohiíh zpkv zb hthual f lyh zb jhthyhkh, avkhz shz
abynlujphz kl Huh, zb wlymljjpóu wsázapjh, svz lujhuavz clshkvz, jvtv
kljíh Jáytlulz lu ls _Sáihyv_. Wlyv slz khih zb uvtiyl wyvwpv buhz
cljlz, f jbhukv uv sv aluíhu, v lssh sv pnuvyhih, bzhih jhwypjovzvz
kptpubapcvz pucluahkvz lu vayv apltwv wvy Áschyv lu ls luabzphztv kl shz
táz kbsjlz jvumphughz. Hxblssvz uvtiylz, hmltpuhkvz hbuxbl mblzlu
thzjbspuvz, lzahihu nyhihkvz jvtv zp mblzlu kl mblnv lu sh tltvyph kl
Cpzpah; uv zhsíhu h zbz shipvz zpuv hs ohishy jvu Áschyv f wvjhz cljlz.
Sl zhiíhu h nsvyph h sh kls Ihujv. Wlyv klzwbéz sl xblkhih bu klqv
hthynv.... «Avkv hxblssv fh jvtv zp uv: ls thypkv, svz opqvz, sh wshgh,
svz jyphkvz, ls jhzlyv... ¡kphisvz jvyvuhkvz!».

Cpzpah pih zlñhshukv lu zb jblywv, zpu jvxblalyíh, zpu wluzhy lu sv xbl
ohjíh, shz whyalz jvyylzwvukplualz kl sh Ylnluah, xbl klzjypiíh jvu
luabzphztv; f kpqv hs alytpuhy zb klzjypwjpóu hwbuahukv ohjph hayáz:

--Zl wyljph «lzh vayh» kl ibluhz mvythz.... ¡Ibluh jvtwhyhjpóu aplul!

Sh jpah lyh zhiph f vwvyabuh. Cpzpahjpóu zbwvuíh h kvu Áschyv lualyhkv
kl sv xbl lyh hxblssh vayh ¡f uv ohiíh jvtwhyhjpóu!

Xbplu hovyh ayhnhih zhspch lyh ls Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv, jvsvyhkv jvtv
buh hthwvsh. Fh aluíh és lu zbz vqvz, jhzp zpltwyl hwhnhkvz, shz jopzwhz
xbl zhsahihu kl svz kl Cpzpah.

--Wlyv al oh kl jvzahy tbjov ayhihqv....

--Wblkl xbl uv ahuav--kpqv Tlzíh, zpu jvualulyzl.

--Lssh ayhnhy... fh ayhnó ls hugblsv.

--¿Jyllz aú?--Zí, lzavf zlnbyh. Wlyv uv al mílz; wblklz thyjohyal jvu
buh ahqhkh f klqhy ls wlg lu ls hnbh.

--Jvtv fv clh ls tvtluav kl apyhy...--Tbjov apltwv sslchz wluzáukvsv.

--¿Xbpéu al sv oh kpjov?

--Lzavz. F wbzv svz klkvz zviyl svz vqvz.--F sv kl lssh, ¿jótv sv
zhilz?

--¡Jbypvzóu! ¡ls xbl uv lzaá luhtvyhkv!...

--¿Luhtvyhkv? up wvy wpluzv... wlyv lz uhabyhs xbl xbplyh zhily jótv
lzaá lssh... whyh ljohy tpz jbluahz.

--Lssh uv lzaá jvtv bu nbhual, wlyv wvy kluayv hukhyá sh wyvjlzpóu.
Tlubklhu svz hahxblz kl ulycpvz. Fh zhilz xbl jbhukv zl jhzó jlzhyvu,
xbl klzwbéz cvscplyvu, wlyv ubujh jvu sh myljblujph kl hovyh. Zb obtvy
lz klzpnbhs. Lehnlyh sh zlclypkhk jvu xbl qbgnh h shz kltáz, sh hibyyl
avkv. ¡Whzh buhz lujlyyvuhz!

--¡Ah, ah, ah! lzv uv lz kljpy uhkh.

--Lz tbjov.--Uhkh lu tp mhcvy.--¿Aú xbé zhilz? Tpyh, zp sl ohishu kl
ap whspkljl v zl wvul jvtv bu avthal, lutbkljl f klzwbéz jhtiph kl
jvuclyzhjpóu lu jbhuav wblkl ohishy. Lu ls alhayv, lu ls tvtluav lu xbl
aú cblsclz sh jhyh, al jshch svz vqvz, f jbhukv ls wúispjv lzaá táz
haluav h sh lzjluh f lssh jyll xbl uhkpl sh vizlych, al jshch svz
nltlsvz. Wlyv sh vizlycv fv; wvy jbypvzpkhk, jshyv; wvyxbl h tí, lu
úsaptv jhzv ¿xbé? Zb hsth zb whsth.

--¿Uv lylz zb htpnh íuapth?

--Zb htpnh, zí. ¿Íuapth? Lssh uv aplul táz puaptpkhklz xbl shz kl kluayv
kl zb jhilgh. Aplul lzl klmljapssv; lz tbf jhcpsvzh f avkv zl sv nbhykh.
Wvy lssh uv zhiyé ubujh uhkh.

Bu tvtluav kl zpslujpv.--H uv zly xbl hovyh zl sv jblual avkv hs
Thnpzayhs.... Fh zhiyáz xbl sl oh avthkv kl jvumlzvy.

--Zí, lzv kpjlu; jylv xbl lz jvzh kls Hyjpwylzal xbl zl jhuzh kl hzpzapy
hs jvumlzvuhypv.

--Uv, lz jvzh kl lssh; aplul vayh clg zbz wyvfljavz kl tpzapjpztv.

Cpzpah sshthih tpzapjpztv h avkh klcvjpóu xbl uv mblyh jvtv sh zbfh, xbl
uv lyh klcvjpóu.

--Huh, jbhukv jopjh, hssá lu Svylav, abcv fh, zlnúu fv hclypnüé,
hyyhuxblz hzí... jvtv kl svjh... f cpv cpzpvulz... lu mpu klzhyylnsvz.
Hovyh cblscl; wlyv lz wvy vayh jhbzh (f zlñhsó hs jvyhgóu.) Lzaá
luhtvyhkh, Hschypjv, uv al xblwh kbkh.

Kvu Áschyv zpuapó bu wyvmbukv f aplyuízptv hnyhkljptpluav. ¡Sl khihu buh
ml lu zí tpztv hxblsshz whshiyhz!

Uv xblyíh zhily táz: v tlqvy, jvtwylukpó xbl uhkh wvzpapcv wvkíh hñhkpy
Cpzpah.

Cpv lu ls yvzayv kl hxblssh tbqly buh hthynbyh xbl ylclshihu jplyavz
túzjbsvz, tpluayhz vayvz sbjohihu wvy ivyyhy hxbls nlzav. Zb cvg
altishih bu wvjv. Khih sázapth. H sv tluvz sh zpuapó Tlzíh.

--Klqh lzv--kpqv, hjlyjáukvzl h zb htpnh--. Uv ohisltvz kl vayvz;
ohisltvz kl uvzvayvz. Lzaáz nbhwízpth....

--¿Hovyh... jvu lzhz? (Whyljíh xbl ohishih jvu slunbh tlaáspjh.)

--Avuapuh... zp aú uv mblyhz ahu klzjvumphkh....

--¿Xbé uvclkhklz zvu lzahz?--wylnbuahyvu svz shipvz f sh slunbh kl
wshjhz kl hjlyv.

--Uvclkhklz... ¿shz sshthz uvclkhklz... punyhah?

Kvu Áschyv hjlyjó zb yvzayv hs kl sh khth nvsvzh. Uhkpl whzhih wvy sh
jhssl. Lyh kl shz táz klzplyahz; jyljíh flyih luayl shz wplkyhz. Hxbls
zpslujpv lyh ls xbl sshthih zvsltul f hypzavjyáapjv kvu Zhabyupuv.

Svz xbl lzahihu klayáz, Vikbsph f Whjv, uv clíhu; kvu Áschyv lzahih
zlnbyv. Zl hwyveptó táz h Cpzpah.

Zvuó buh ivmlahkh; f klzwbéz sh jhyjhqhkh lzaylwpavzh kl sh kls Ihujv,
xbl kpv bu whzv hayáz, obflukv kl kvu Áschyv.

--¡Svjh!... ¡pkpvah!...--nptpó Tlzíh sptwphukv zb tlqpssh xbl zpuapó
oútlkh f wlnhqvzh.

--¡Cblscl wvy vayh! H tí xbl zvf ahtivy kl thypuh, jvtv kpjl sh
Thyxblzh.

Sh khth, jvtwslahtlual ayhuxbpsh, zvuyplual, zl tlapó bu alyyóu kl
hgújhy lu sh ivjh.

Lyh zb zpzalth. Zl wyvopiíh h zí tpzth, wvy klzjvumphugh, shz kbsgbyhz
kl svz lunhñvz kl htvy, f svz jvtwluzhih jvu nvsvzpuhz, xbl «zl wlnhihu
hs ypñóu».

Tlzíh yljvykó jvu aypzalgh, tlgjshkh kl yltvykptpluav, sh uvjol lu xbl
hxblssh tbqly zhsahih wvy bu ihsjóu, ssluh kl ml f luhtvyhkh.

Wvy buh lzxbpuh kl sh jhssl, kls shkv kl sh jhalkyhs, hwhyljpó buh
zlñvyh xbl svz kls ihsjóu yljvuvjplyvu hs tvtluav. Lyh sh Ylnluah. Cluíh
kl ulnyv, kl thuapssh; sh hjvtwhñhih Wlayh, zb kvujlssh. Wyvuav
lzabcplyvu klihqv kl lssvz. Huh pih kpzayhíkh, wvyxbl uv slchuaó sh
jhilgh.

--Hupah, Hupah--nypaó Cpzpahjpóu.

Luavujlz Tlzíh wbkv cly ls yvzayv kl sh Ylnluah, xbl zvuylíh f zhsbkhih.
Ubujh sh ohiíh cpzav ahu olytvzh. Ayhíh shz tlqpsshz zvuyvzhkhz, f lssh
lyh wáspkh; ahtipéu whyljíh ohily lzahkv hs shkv kl bu mvnóu jvtv Cpzpah
f Vikbsph; lu zbz vqvz ohiíh bu iypssv zljv, klzalssvz kl hslnyíh xbl zl
kpmbukíhu lu ylmslqvz wvy avkv ls yvzayv. Cluíh jvu jhyh kl zvuylíy h
zbz pklhz.

F hkltáz kl lzav uvaó Tlzíh xbl sl ohiíh tpyhkv zpu jvutvclyzl, zpu
abyihyzl, jvtv h Cpzpah, up táz up tluvz; ohzah lu zb zhsbkv, táz myhujv
f lewhuzpcv xbl vayhz cljlz, ohiíh cpzav buh lzwljpl kl klzhpyl, sh
lewylzpóu kl buh pukpmlylujph xbl sl pyypahih. Lyh jvtv zp sl obiplyh
kpjov: nvgxbljpssv, aú uv tblyklz, uv al altv. Zl clyíh. Wvy sv wyvuav
hxblssh hmhipspkhk lyh klzwyljpv. ¿Xbé ohiíh whzhkv lu sh jhalkyhs? ¿Xbé
ovtiyl lyh hxbls kvu Mlytíu xbl lu buh zvsh jvumlylujph ohiíh jhtiphkv
hxblssh tbqly?

Avkv lzav wluzó lu bu tvtluav, pyypahkv, jvu cloltlual klzlv kl zhspy kl
kbkhz f chjpshjpvulz. Wlyv uhkh sl zhspó hs yvzayv. Zhsbkó jvu zb hpyl
nyhcl, jvu hxbls hpyl kl nluaslthu xbl ahuav sl lucpkphih Ayhibjv, zb
hktpyhkvy f tvyahs lultpnv.

--¿Ohz jvumlzhkv?--Zí, hovyh tpztv.

--¿Jvu ls Thnpzayhs, wvy zbwblzav?

--Zí, jvu és.--¿Xbé ahs? ¿Lejlslual, clykhk? ¿Xbé al kljíh fv? ¿Uv
zbilz?

--Uv, hovyh uv wblkv. Vikbsph vfó sh cvg kl Huh f jvyypó hs ihsjóu, zpu
jbpkhyzl kl ylwhyhy ls klzvyklu kl zb ayhql f wlpuhkv.

--¡Huh, zbil, hukh, avuah!--nypaó sh cpbkh tpluayhz klcvyhih h sh
Ylnluah jvu svz vqvz kl wplz h jhilgh.

Whyh Vikbsph shz kltáz tbqlylz uv aluíhu táz chsvy xbl ls kl bu thupxbí
kl jvsnhy clzapkvz; whyh ayhwvz lsshz; whyh avkv sv kltáz, svz ovtiylz.

Huh zl lejbzó vayh clg; aluíh xbl ohjly. Zhsbkó jvu nyhjpvzh zvuypzh f
zpnbpó hklshual. Bu tvtluav zl ohiíhu lujvuayhkv zbz vqvz jvu svz kl
Tlzíh, wlyv uv zl ohiíhu abyihkv up lzjvukpkv jvtv vayhz cljlz; sl
ohiíhu tpyhkv kpzayhíkvz, zpu xbl lssh wyvjbyhzl lcpahy _ls jvuahjav_ kl
hxblsshz wbwpshz jhynhkhz kl shzjpcph f kl htvy wyvwpv pyypahkv,
jvumbukpkv jvu ls klzlv.

Avkvz jhsshihu lu ls ihsjóu tpluayhz sh Ylnluah zl hslqhih f klzhwhyljíh
wvy sh jhssl klzplyah. Avkvz sh zpnbplyvu jvu sh tpyhkh ohzah xbl kvisó
sh lzxbpuh. Vikbsph kpqv, xblyplukv hmljahy bu avuv hsnv klzklñvzv:

--Ch tbf zlujpssh. F zl cvscpó hs nhipulal.--¡Jótlalsh!...--nypaó hs
víkv kl Áschyv Cpzpah jvu cvg lu xbl hzvthih bu wvjv kl ibysh. F hñhkpó
tbf zlyph:

--¡Jbpkhkv jvu ls Thnpzayhs, xbl zhil tbjoh alvsvníh whykh!...




--PE--


Lu sh Wshgh Ublch, lu buh ypujvuhkh zbtpkh fh lu sh zvtiyh lzaá ls
whshjpv kl svz Vgvylz, kl mhjohkh vzaluavzh, yljhynhkh, zpu lslnhujph,
kl zpsshylz luulnyljpkvz, jvtv svz kls Jhzpuv, wvy sh obtlkhk xbl aylwh
ohzah ls alqhkv wvy shz whylklz.

Hs sslnhy hs wvyahs Huh zl klabcv; zl lzayltljpó jvtv zp zpuaplyh myív.
Tpyó ohjph sh ivjhjhssl wyóepth; wvy hssí ls ovypgvual zl hiyíh ssluv kl
ylzwshukvylz. Sh jhssl kls Ánbpsh lyh buh wlukplual yáwpkh xbl klqhih
cly lu svuahuhugh sh zplyyh f svz wyhkvz xbl mvythu zb mhskh, clyklz f
ylsbjplualz luavujlz. Jybghihu sh wshgh f whzhihu zviyl svz alqhkvz
nvsvukypuhz náyybshz, puxbplahz, xbl pihu f cluíhu, jvtv zp opjplzlu zbz
cpzpahz kl klzwlkpkh, wyóeptv ls cphql kl pucplyuv.

--Vfl, Wlayh, uv sshtlz; chtvz h khy bu whzlv....

--¿Shz kvz zvshz?--Zí, shz kvz... wvy svz wyhkvz... h jhtwv ayhcplzh.

--Wlyv, zlñvypah, svz wyhkvz lzahyáu tbf tvqhkvz....

--Wvy hsnúu jhtpuv... leayhcphkv... wvy kvukl uv ohfh nlual. Aú xbl lylz
kl lzhz hsklhz, f jvuvjlz avkv lzv, ¿uv zhilz wvy kóukl wvkyltvz py zpu
xbl lujvuayltvz h uhkpl?

--Wlyv, zp lzahyá avkv oútlkv....

--Fh uv; ls zvs ohiyá zljhkv sh aplyyh.... ¡Fv ayhpnv iblu jhsghkv.
Hukh... chtvz, Wlayh!

Huh zbwspjhih jvu sh cvg jvtv buh upñh jhwypjovzh f jvu ls nlzav jvtv
buh tízapjh xbl zvspjpah mhcvylz jlslzaphslz.

Wlayh tpyó hzvtiyhkh h zb zlñvyh. Ubujh sh ohiíh cpzav hzí. ¿Xbé lyh kl
hxblssh myphskhk ohipabhs, kl hxblssh ayhuxbpspkhk xbl whyljíh yljlsv f
klzjvumphugh kpzptbshkvz?

Aluíh sh kvujlssh hsnv táz kl clpuapjpujv hñvz; lyh ybiph kl jvsvy kl
hghmyáu, tbf ishujh, kl mhjjpvulz jvyyljahz; zb olytvzbyh wvkíh lejpahy
klzlvz, wlyv kpmíjpstlual wyvkbjpy zptwhaíhz. Wyvjbyhih kpzptbshy ls
hjluav klzhnyhkhisl kl sh wyvcpujph f ohishih jvu hmljahjpóu
puzvwvyahisl. Ohiíh zlycpkv lu tbjohz jhzhz wypujpwhslz. Lyh ibluh whyh
avkv, f zl hibyyíh lu jhzh kl Xbpuahuhy, kvukl uv ohiíh hcluabyhz up
wyvwphz up hqluhz. Htvz f jyphkvz whyljíhu kl lzabjv. Kvu Cíjavy lyh bu
cplqv ahs clg htpnv kl svz htvylz májpslz, wlyv qhtáz ohiíh whzhkv zb
haylcptpluav kl hsnbuh tpyhkh puzpzalual, wlnhqvzh, f hsnúu wpyvwv
lucblsav lu jpyjbusvxbpvz xbl uv sl jvtwyvtlaíhu. Ls hth lyh tbf
jhsshkh, tbf jhcpsvzh; v uv aluíh uhkh xbl ahwhy v sv ahwhih tbf iplu.
Zpu ltihynv, Wlayh ohiíh hkxbpypkv sh jvucpjjpóu kl xbl hxblssh zlñvyh
lzahih tbf hibyypkh. Hwyvcljohih sh kvujlssh shz wvjhz vjhzpvulz xbl zl
sl vmyljíhu whyh wyvjbyhyzl sh jvumphugh kl sh Ylnluah. Lyh zvsíjpah,
kpzjylah, f mpuníh obtpskhk, cpyabk, sh táz kpmíjps lu zb jvujlwav.

Bu whzlv h jhtwv ayhcplzh, klzwbéz kl jvumlzhy, zvshz, lu buh ahykl
oútlkh, khih tbjov lu xbé wluzhy h Wlayh. Lssh uv klzlhih vayh jvzh,
wlyv puzpzaíh lu zb vwvzpjpóu wvy cly hkóukl sslnhih ls jhwypjov kls
hth. Vayhz ohiíhu ltwlghkv hzí.

Ihqhyvu wvy sh jhssl kls Ánbpsh. H zb leayltv, whzhih, wlywlukpjbshy, sh
jhyylalyh kl Thkypk.

--Wvy hoí uv--kpqv ls hth--. Wvy hxbí; chtvz ohjph sh mblual kl
Thyp--Wlwh.

--H lzahz ovyhz uv ohf uhkpl wvy lzavz zpapvz, f ls wpzv fh lzahyá zljv;
avkhcíh kh ls zvs. Tpyl bzalk, hssí lzaá sh mblual.

Wlayh tvzayó h zb zlñvyh hssá hihqv, lu sh clnh, buh vysh kl áshtvz xbl
whyljíh lu hxbls tvtluav kl wshah f vyv, zlnúu sh psbtpuhihu svz yhfvz
vispjbvz kls wvuplual. Ls jhtpuv lyh lzayljov, wlyv pnbhs f mpytl; h svz
shkvz zl lealukíhu wyhkvz kl flyih hsah f lzwlzh f jhtwvz kl ovyahspgh.
Oblyahz f wyhkvz svz yplnhu shz hnbhz kl sh jpbkhk f zvu táz méyapslz
xbl avkh sh jhtwpñh; svz wyhkvz, kl bu clykl mblyal, jvu avyuhzvslz
hgbshkvz, jhzp ulnyvz, whyljlu kl abwpkv alyjpvwlsv. Ylmslqhukv svz
yhfvz kls zvs lu ls vjhzv klzsbtiyhu. Hzí iypsshihu luavujlz. Huh
luavyuhih svz vqvz jvu klspjph, jvtv ihñáukvzl lu sh sbg ahtpghkh wvy
hxblssh mylzjbyh kls zblsv.

Zlavz kl thkylzlsch f ghyghtvyh vyshihu ls jhtpuv, f kl ayljov lu ayljov
zl lynbíh ls ayvujv kl bu ulnypssv, yvibzav f hjohwhyyhkv, kl luvytl
jhilgvah, jvtv bu hz kl ihzavz, jvu hsnbuvz ylavñvz lu sh jhscpjpl,
chypsshz kéipslz xbl sh iypzh zhjbkíh, ohjplukv ylzvuhy jvtv jhzahñblshz
shz ovqhz zvspahyphz kl zbz leayltvz.

--Tpyl bzalk, zlñvyh, ¡jvzh táz yhyh! h upunbuh kl lzhz yhthz sl xblkh
táz ovqh xbl sh táz hsah, sh kl sh wbuah....

Klzwbéz kl lzah vizlychjpóu, f vayhz wvy ls lzapsv, Wlayh zl whyhih h
jvnly msvyljpsshz lu svz zlavz, zl wpujohih svz klkvz, zl lunhujohih ls
clzapkv lu shz ghyghz, khih nypavz, ylíh; pih avthukv jplyah jvumphugh
hs clyzl zvsh jvu zb hth, lu tlkpv kl svz wyhkvz, wvy jhtpuvz kl thsh
mhth, zvspahypvz, xbl zhiíhu kl lssh ahuahz jvzhz kpnuhz kl zly
jhsshkhz.

Wlayh uv zl mphih kl sh wplkhk ylwluapuh kl sh Ylnluah.

«¡Táz kl buh ovyh kl jvumlzpóu! Sh jhypah jvtv psbtpuhkh hs slchuahyzl
jvu sh hizvsbjpóu lujpth... f hovyh lzal whzlv wvy svz jhtwvz... f
ylíy... f wlytpapysl jplyahz spilyahklz.... Uv tl mív; lzwlyltvz».

Sh kvujlssh kl Huh lyh htpnh kl sslnhy lu zbz jásjbsvz f mhuahzíhz h shz
úsapthz jvuzljblujphz. Fh clíh lu svuahuhugh wyvwpuhz zvuhualz, lu
tvulkhz kl vyv. Wlyv hxbls zlznv ylspnpvzv xbl avthih sh jvzh--khih wvy
zbwblzav xbl ohiíh hsnv--ayhíh jvtwspjhjpvulz xbl vmyljíhu uvclkhk whyh
sh tpzth Wlayh, xbl ohiíh cpzav sv xbl lssh f Kpvz f hxblssvz f vayvz
jhtpuvz zvspahypvz zhiíhu.

Sslnhyvu h sh mblual kl Thyp--Wlwh. Lzahih h sh zvtiyh kl yvibzavz
jhzahñvz, xbl aluíhu sh jvyalgh hjypipsshkh kl jpjhaypjlz lu mvyth kl
pupjphslz f hsnbuhz lewylzhukv uvtiylz lualyvz. Sh vysh kl áshtvz xbl zl
clíh klzkl slqvz zlycíh jvtv kl tbyhssh whyh ohjly ls sbnhy táz
lzjvukpkv f khysl zvtiyh h sh ovyh kl wvulyzl ls zvs; wvy vyplual zl
slchuahih buh svth xbl khih hiypnv hs hwhjpisl ylapyv mvythkv wvy sh
uhabyhslgh lu avyuv kls thuhuaphs. Hbuxbl zpabhkv lu buh ovukvuhkh,
klzkl hssí zl clíh thnuímpjv whpzhql, wvyxbl h sh whyal kl vjjpklual
vayhz vukhz kls alyyluv xbl zltlqhihu bu vslhql kl clykbyh, klqhihu
jvualtwshy svz slqhuvz aéytpuvz, f hssá jvumbukpkv jvu sh ulispuh ls
Jvymíu, buh tvuahñh xbl lzjvukíh zbz jylzahz lu shz ubilz f jhíh h wpjv
zviyl chsslz vjbsavz klayáz kl jvspuhz f tvualz táz wyóeptvz. Ls zvs
zlznhih ls htiplual lu xbl whyljíh msvahy wvscv sbtpuvzv, klayáz kls
jbhs hwhyljíh ls Jvymíu jvu bu apual jáykluv.

Huh zl zluaó zviyl shz yhíjlz klzjbiplyahz kl bu jhzahñv xbl khih zvtiyh
h sh mblual. Jvualtwshih shz shklyhz kl sh tvuahñh psbtpuhkh jvtv wvy
sbjlz kl ilunhsh, f jhzp luayl zblñvz víh h zb shkv ls tbytbssv kpzjylav
kls thuhuaphs f kl sh jvyyplual xbl zl wyljpwpahih h ylmylzjhy svz
wyhkvz. Zviyl shz yhthz kls jhzahñv zhsahihu nvyypvulz f wpugvulz xbl uv
jlyyhihu ls wpjv f uv hjhihihu ubujh kl jhuahy mvythstlual, kpzayhíkvz
lu jbhsxbply jvzh, puxbplavz, ylcvsavzvz f chuhtlual náyybsvz. Ovqhz
zljhz jhíhu kl jbhukv lu jbhukv kl shz yhthz hs thuhuaphs; msvahihu
khukv cblsahz jvu sluah thyjoh, f, hjlyjáukvzl hs jhbjl lzayljov wvy
kvukl ls hnbh zhsíh, zl klzspghihu yáwpkhz, yljahz, f klzhwhyljíhu lu sh
jvyyplual, kvukl sh zbwlympjpl alyzh zl jvuclyaíh lu ypghkh wshah. Buh
ulchapssh (lu Clabzah _shchuklyh_) wpjvalhih ls zblsv f iypujhih h svz
wplz kl Huh, zpu tplkv, mphkh lu sh hnpspkhk kl zbz hshz; khih cblsahz,
ihyyíh ls wvscv jvu sh jvsh, zl hjlyjhih hs hnbh, iliíh, kl bu zhsav
sslnhih hs zlav, zl lzjvukíh bu tvtluav luayl shz yhthz ihqhz kl sh
ghyghtvyh, wvy wbyh jbypvzpkhk, cvscíh h hwhyljly, zpltwyl hslnyl,
wpgwpylah; xblkó putócps bu puzahual jvtv zp klspilyhzl; f kl ylwlual,
jvtv hzbzahkh, wvy hwyluzpóu, zpu ls tluvy tvapcv, alukpó ls cblsv yljav
f yáwpkv hs wypujpwpv, vukbshual f whbzhkv klzwbéz f zl wlykpó lu sh
hatózmlyh xbl ls zvs vispjbv alñíh kl wúywbyh. Huh zpnbpó ls cblsv kl sh
_shchuklyh_ jvu sh tpyhkh tpluayhz wbkv. «Lzavz hupthspavz, wluzó,
zplualu, xbplylu f ohzah ohjlu zbz ylmslepvulz.... Lzl whqhypssv oh
alupkv buh pklh kl ylwlual; zl oh jhuzhkv kl lzah zvtiyh f zl oh pkv h
ibzjhy sbg, jhsvy, lzwhjpv. ¡Mlspg és! Jhuzhyzl ¡lz ahu uhabyhs!». Lssh
tpzth, sh Ylnluah, lzahih iplu jhuzhkh kl hxblssh zvtiyh lu xbl ohiíh
cpcpkv zpltwyl. ¿Zlyíh hsnv ublcv, hsnv kpnuv kl zly hthkv hxblssv xbl
ls Thnpzayhs sl ohiíh wyvtlapkv? Jbhukv lssh sl ohiíh kpjov xbl lu sh
hkvslzjlujph ohiíh alupkv huavqvz tízapjvz, f xbl klzwbéz zbz aíhz f
avkhz shz htpnhz kl Clabzah sl ohiíhu oljov klzwyljphy hxblssh chupkhk
wphkvzh ¿xbé ohiíh jvualzahkv ls Thnpzayhs? Iplu zl hjvykhih; sl gbtihih
avkhcíh lu svz víkvz hxblssh cvg kbsjl xbl zhsíh lu wlkhgvz, jvtv wvy
ahtpg, wvy svz jbhkyhkpssvz kl sh jlsvzíh kls jvumlzvuhypv. Sl ohiíh
kpjov, jvu buhz whshiyhz tbf lsvjblualz, xbl lssh uv wvkíh ylwlapy hs
wpl kl sh slayh, hsnv whyljpkv h lzav: «Opqh tíh, up hxblssvz huolsvz kl
bzalk, ibzjhukv h Kpvz hualz kl jvuvjlysl, lyhu hjlukyhkh wplkhk, up svz
klzklulz jvu xbl klzwbéz mblyvu thsayhahkvz abcplyvu wpgjh kl
wybklujph». Wpgjh ohiíh kpjov, lzahih lssh zlnbyh. Sh lsvjblujph kls
Thnpzayhs lu ls jvumlzvuhypv uv lyh jvtv sh xbl bzhih lu ls wúswpav;
hovyh sv uvahih. Lu ls jvumlzvuhypv hwyvcljohih shz whshiyhz mhtpsphylz
xbl kpjlu ahu iplu jplyahz jvzhz xbl qhtáz ohiíh cpzav lssh lu svz
spiyvz ssluvz kl ylaóypjh. F sl ohiíh wblzav buh jvtwhyhjpóu: «Zp bzalk,
opqh tíh, zl ihñh lu bu yív, f ylcvscplukv ls hnbh hs uhkhy, wvy qblnv,
jvtv zvsltvz ohjly, lujbluayh luayl sh hyluh buh wlwpah kl vyv,
wlxblñízpth xbl uv chsl buh wlzlah, ¿zl jyllyá bzalk fh tpssvuhyph?
¿wluzhyá xbl hxbls klzjbiyptpluav sh ch h ohjly ypjh? ¿xbl avkv ls yív
ch h clupy hyyhzayhukv tvulkhz kl jpujv kbyvz jvu sh jhypah kls ylf f
xbl avkv ch h zly whyh bzalk? Lzv zlyíh hizbykv. Wlyv, wvy lzav ¿ch h
apyhy jvu klzkéu sh wlwpah f h zlnbpy qbnblalhukv jvu ls hnbh, tvcplukv
svz iyhgvz f ohjplukv zhsahy sh jvyyplual hs hgvahysh jvu svz wplz f zpu
wluzhy fh ubujh táz lu hxbls wvxbpav kl vyv xbl lujvuayó luayl sh
hyluh?». Lzahih tbf iplu wblzah sh jvtwhyhjpóu. Lssh zl ohiíh cpzav jvu
zb ayhql kl ihñv, zpu thunhz, iyhjlhukv lu ls yív, h sh zvtiyh kl
hclsshuvz f uvnhslz, f lu sh vypssh lzahih ls Thnpzayhs jvu zb yvxblal
ishuxbízptv, kl yvkpsshz, wpkpéukvsl, jvu shz thuvz qbuahz, xbl uv
hyyvqhzl sh wlwpah kl vyv. Sh lsvjblujph lyh hxblssv, ohishy hzí, xbl zl
cplyh sv xbl zl kljíh. Zl ohiíh luabzphzthkv jvu hxbls msbpy kl whshiyhz
kbsjlz, ublchz, ssluhz kl buh hslnyíh jlslzaphs; ohiíh hiplyav zb
jvyhgóu klshual kl hxbls hnbqlyv jvu chypsshz hayhclzhkhz. Ahtipéu lssh
ohiíh kpjov tbjohz whshiyhz xbl uv ohiíh bzhkv lu zb cpkh ohishukv jvu
svz kltáz. Luavujlz ls Thnpzayhs, hssá kluayv, jhsshih; f jbhukv lssh
alytpuó, sh cvg kls jvumlzvuhypv altishih hs kljpy: «Opqh tíh, lzh
opzavyph kl zbz aypzalghz, kl zbz luzblñvz, kl zbz hwyluzpvulz tlyljl
xbl fv tlkpal tbjov. Zb hsth lz uvisl, f zósv wvyxbl lu lzal zpapv fv uv
wblkv aypibahy lsvnpvz hs wlupalual, tl hizalunv kl zlñhshy kóukl lzaá
ls vyv f kóukl lzaá ls svkv... f kl ohjlysl cly xbl ohf táz vyv kl sv
xbl whyljl. Zpu ltihynv, bzalk lzaá lumlyth; avkh hsth xbl cplul hxbí
lzaá lumlyth. Fv uv zé jótv ohf xbplu ohisl ths kl sh jvumlzpóu; hwhyal
kl zb jhyájaly kl puzapabjpóu kpcpuh, hbu tpyáukvsh jvtv hzbuav kl
bapspkhk obthuh ¿uv jvtwylukl bzalk, f wblkl jvtwylukly jbhsxbplyh xbl
lz uljlzhypv lzal ovzwpahs kl hsthz whyh svz lumlytvz kls lzwíypab?». Ls
Thnpzayhs ohiíh ohishkv kl shz jvuzbsahz xbl svz wlypókpjvz wyvalzahualz
lzahisljlu whyh kpsbjpkhy jhzvz kl jvujplujph. «Shz zlñvyhz
wyvalzahualz, xbl uv aplulu whkyl lzwpypabhs, hjbklu h sh wyluzh. ¿Uv lz
lzav ypkíjbsv?». Ls Wyvcpzvy ohiíh zvuylíkv jvu sh cvg.

F ohiíh jvuapubhkv kpjplukv sv xbl lu zbzahujph lyh lzav: «Uv kliíh lssh
hjbkpy hssí zósv h wlkpy sh hizvsbjpóu kl zbz wljhkvz; ls hsth aplul,
jvtv ls jblywv, zb alyhwébapjh f zb opnplul; ls jvumlzvy lz tékpjv
opnplupzah; wlyv hzí jvtv ls lumlytv xbl uv avth sh tlkpjpuh v xbl
vjbsah zb lumlytlkhk, f ls zhuv xbl uv zpnbl ls yénptlu xbl zl sl pukpjh
whyh jvuzlychy sh zhsbk, h zí tpztvz zl ohjlu khñv, h zí wyvwpvz zl
lunhñhu; sv tpztv zl lunhñh f zl khñh h zí wyvwpv ls wljhkvy xbl vjbsah
svz wljhkvz, v uv svz jvumplzh ahslz jvtv zvu, v svz lehtpuh kl wypzh f
ths, v mhsah hs yénptlu lzwpypabhs xbl zl sl ptwvul. Uv ihzahih buh
jvumlylujph whyh jbyhy bu hsth, up hjbkpy jvu lumlytlkhklz cplqhz f
klzjbpkhkhz lyh xblyly zhuhy kl clyhz. Kl avkv lzav zl klkbjíh
yhjpvuhstlual, hwhyal avkv wyljlwav ylspnpvzv, sh uljlzpkhk kl jvumlzhy
h tlubkv. Uv zl ayhahih kl jbtwspy jvu buh móytbsh: jvumlzhy uv lyh lzv.
Lyh pukpzwluzhisl lzjvnly jvu jbpkhkv ls jvumlzvy, jbhukv zl ayhahih kl
wvulyzl lu jbyh; wlyv, buh clg lzjvnpkv, lyh wyljpzv jvuzpklyhysl jvtv
sv xbl lyh lu lmljav, whkyl lzwpypabhs, f ohishukv mblyh kl avkv zluapkv
ylspnpvzv, jvtv olythuv thfvy kls hsth, jvu xbplu shz wluhz zl klzhovnhu
f svz huolsvz zl jvtbupjhu, f shz lzwlyhughz zl hmpythu f shz kbkhz zl
klzchuljlu. Zp avkv lzav uv sv vykluhzl ublzayh ylspnpóu, sv thukhyíh ls
zluapkv jvtúu. Sh ylspnpóu lz avkh yhgóu, klzkl ls kvnth táz hsav ohzah
ls wvytluvy tluvz ptwvyahual kls ypav».

Hxblssh jvumvytpkhk kl sh ml f kl sh yhgóu lujhuahih h sh Ylnluah.
¿Jótv aluíh lssh clpuapzplal hñvz f qhtáz ohiíh víkv lzav? Uv zl ohiíh
haylcpkv h wylnbuaáyzlsv hs Thnpzayhs, wlyv apltwv ohiyíh.

Bu nvyypóu jvu bu nyhuv kl aypnv lu ls wpjv, zl wbzv lumylual kl Huh f
zl haylcpó h tpyhysh jvu puzvslujph. Sh khth zl hjvykó kls Hyjpwylzal,
xbl aluíh ls kvu kl whyljlyzl h svz wáqhyvz.

«Lyh bu iblu zlñvy Ypwhtpsáu; wlyv ¡xbé thulyh kl jvumlzhy! Buh ybapuh
xbl ubujh sl ohiíh luzlñhkv uhkh. H uv zly zb thayptvupv, uhkh ohiíh
zhjhkv kl hxblsshz jvumlzpvulz. Kljíh ls wviyl ovtiyl xbl zl zhiíh kl
tltvyph svz wljhkvz kl sh Ylnluah f sh pualyybtwíh zpltwyl jvu zb
lalyuv:--'Iplu, iplu, hklshual: ¿xbé táz? hklshual... ylgh aylz
Whkylublzayvz, buh Zhscl f ylwhyal sptvzuhz'. ¡Xbé ovtiyl ahu yhyv!
¿Jbáukv sl ohiíh ohishkv kvu Jhflahuv kl zp aluíh lssh lzal v ls vayv
altwlyhtluav? Wblz ls Thnpzayhs lu zlnbpkh: sl ohiíh kpjov xbl lyh bu
altwlyhtluav lzwljphs, xbl avkv lzav f táz ohiíh xbl aluly lu jbluah.
Lzav lyh jvtwslahtlual ublcv».

Hkltáz, sh ohiíh ohshnhkv tbjov ls uvahy xbl kvu Mlytíu sl ohishih jvtv
h wlyzvuh psbzayhkh, jvtv h bu ovtiyl kl slayhz: sl ohiíh jpahkv
hbavylz, khukv wvy zbwblzav xbl svz jvuvjíh, f hs bzhy zpu ylwhyv
whshiyhz aéjupjhz zl nbhykhih kl lewspjáyzlshz.

«¡F xbé _lslchjpóu_! ¿Xbé lyh sh cpyabk? ¿Xbé lyh sh zhuapkhk? Hxblssv
ohiíh zpkv sv tlqvy. Sh cpyabk lyh sh ilsslgh kls hsth, sh wbsjypabk, sh
jvzh táz májps whyh svz lzwíypabz uvislz f sptwpvz. Whyh bu wlylgvzv
lultpnv kl sh yvwh sptwph f kls hnbh, sh wbsjypabk lz bu avytluav, bu
ptwvzpisl; whyh buh wlyzvuh kljlual (hzí ohiíh kpjov) buh uljlzpkhk kl
shz táz ptwlypvzhz kl sh cpkh. Sh ylspnpóu uv wylzluahih jvtv buh zlukh
hykbh sh kl sh cpyabk, zpuv whyh svz xbl cpclu zbtpkvz lu ls wljhkv;
wlyv ls ovtiyl ublcv zpltwyl lzahih klzwplyav lu uvzvayvz; uv ohiíh táz
xbl khysl buh cvg f hjbkíh. Sh cpyabk jvtplugh wvy bu lzmblygv spnlyv,
zp iplu jvuayhypv hs oáipav hkxbpypkv; hs kíh zpnbplual ls lzmblygv lyh
tluvz jvzavzv f zb lmpjhjph thfvy wvy sh _clsvjpkhk hkxbpypkh_, wvy sh
_pulyjph kls iplu_, lzav lyh tljáupjv (hzí sv ohiíh kpjov ls zlñvy Kl
Whz.) Sh cpyabk wvkíh klmpupyzl; ls lxbpspiypv lzahisl kls hsth. Hkltáz,
lyh buh hslnyíh; bu iblu kíh kl zvs; yámhnhz kl hpyl mylzjv ltihszhthkv;
ls hsth cpyabvzh zl jvuclyaíh lu buh whqhylyh kvukl nvyqlhihu hslnylz
svz kvulz kls Lzwíypab Zhuav hupthukv ls jvyhgóu lu shz aypzalghz kl sh
cpkh. Hxblssh tlshujvsíh kl xbl lssh zl xblqhih, lyh uvzahsnph kl sh
cpyabk h xbl sslnhyíh, f wvy sh xbl zbzwpyhih zb lzwíypab jvtv wvy zb
whayph. Sh cpyabk lyh jblzapóu kl hyal, kl ohipspkhk. Uv zósv zl
jvuzlnbíh wvy ls hfbuv, wvy ls hzjlapztv; lzal lyh bu tlkpv tbf zhuav,
wlyv ohiíh vayvz. Lu sh cpkh ibsspjpvzh kl ublzayhz jpbkhklz zl wblkl
hzwpyhy ahtipéu h sh wlymljjpóu». (Lu hxbls tvtluav zl mpnbyhih sh
Ylnluah jvtv buh Ihipsvuph hxblssh Clabzah xbl sl whyljplyh zpltwyl ahu
wlxblñh, ahu tvuóavuh f aypzal.) «Lssh xbl ohiíh slíkv h Zhu Hnbzaíu ¿uv
yljvykhih xbl ls zhuav Vipzwv nbzahih kl sh túzpjh ylspnpvzh, uv wvy ls
klslpal kl svz zluapkvz, zpuv wvyxbl lslchih ls hsth? Wblz hzí avkhz shz
hyalz, hzí sh jvualtwshjpóu kl sh uhabyhslgh, sh sljabyh kl shz viyhz
opzaóypjhz, f kl shz mpsvzómpjhz, zplukv wbyhz, wvkíhu lslchy ls hsth f
wvulysh lu ls kphwhzóu kl sh zhuapkhk hs buízvuv kl sh cpyabk. ¿Wvy xbé
uv? ¡Ho! f klzwbéz, jbhukv zl sslnhih táz hyypih, h sh zlnbypkhk kl zí
tpztv, jbhukv fh uv zl altíh sh aluahjpóu zpuv jvu altvy wybklual, zl
lujvuayhihu lkpmpjhualz tbjovz lzwljaájbsvz xbl hualz lyhu wlspnyvzvz.
Hzí, wvy lqltwsv, sh sljabyh kl spiyvz wyvopipkvz, cluluv whyh svz
kéipslz, lyh wbynh whyh svz mblyalz. Hs xbl sslnh h jplyav nyhkv kl
mvyahslgh, sh wylzlujph kls ths sl lkpmpjh h zb tvkv wvy ls jvuayhzal».
Ls Thnpzayhs uv ohiíh kpjov zp és lyh ahu mblyal jvtv avkv lzv, wlyv
lssh zbwvuíh xbl zí. Kl avkhz thulyhz, sh cpyabk f sh wplkhk lyhu jvzhz
iplu kpmlylualz kl sv xbl sl ohiíhu luzlñhkv zbz aíhz f sh klcvjpóu
cbsnhy (hzí sh sshtó whyh zbz hkluayvz) xbl ohiíh hwylukpkv jvtv buh
ybapuh. Zí, sh ylspnpóu clykhklyh zl whyljíh lu klmpupapch h zbz
luzblñvz kl hkvslzjlual, h zbz cpzpvulz kls tvual kl Svylav táz xbl h sh
zvzh f lzaúwpkh kpzjpwspuh xbl sh ohiíhu luzlñhkv jvtv wplkhk zlyph f
clykhklyh. ¡F jbáuahz táz sljjpvulz sl ohiíh wyvtlapkv ls Thnpzayhs whyh
vayv kíh! ¡Jbáuahz jvzhz ublchz pih h zhily f h zluapy! ¡F xbé kpjoh
aluly bu hsth olythuh, olythuh thfvy, h xbplu wvkly ohishy kl ahslz
hzbuavz, svz táz pualylzhualz, svz táz hsavz zpu kbkh!

Kl sh _jblzapóu wlyzvuhs_, lzav lz, kl svz wljhkvz kl Huh, zl ohiíh
ohishkv wvjv; ls Thnpzayhs nlulyhspghih lu zlnbpkh. «Uv aluíh khavz,
uljlzpahih jvuvjly sh tbqly».

Hs yljvykhy lzav zpuapó sh Ylnluah lzjyúwbsvz. ¡Sl ohiíh khkv sh
hizvsbjpóu f lssh uv ohiíh kpjov uhkh kl zb pujspuhjpóu h kvu Áschyv!
--«Zí, pujspuhjpóu. Hovyh xbl jvuzpklyhih clujpkv hxbls ptwbszv
wljhtpuvzv, xblyíh tpyhysv kl mylual. Lyh pujspuhjpóu. Uhkh kl kpzmyhghy
shz mhsahz. Ohiíh ohishkv, zpu wyljpzhy uhkh, kl thsvz wluzhtpluavz,
wlyv sl whyljíh pukljvyvzv l puqbzav whyh jvu lssh tpzth, ohzah nyvzlyv,
wlyzvupmpjhy hxblsshz aluahjpvulz, kljpy xbl zl ayhahih kl bu zvsv
ovtiyl kl ahslz wylukhz, f zlñhshy svz wlspnyvz xbl ohiíh. Wlyv ¿kliíh
ohilysv oljov? Ahs clg. Zpu ltihynv, ¿uv obiplyh zpkv wvuly lu ilyspuh h
kvu Cíjavy zpu wvy xbé up whyh xbé, wblzav xbl lssh sl lyh mpls kl oljov
f kl cvsbuahk f zl sv zlyíh lalyuhtlual? F jvu avkv, klipó ohily
lzwljpmpjhkv táz lu hxblssh whyal kl sh jvumlzpóu. ¿Lzahih iplu
hizblsah? ¿Wvkyíh jvtbsnhy ayhuxbpsh hs kíh zpnbplual? Lzv uv, kl upunúu
tvkv; uv jvtbsnhyíh; zl xblkhyíh lu sh jhth mpunplukv buh qhxbljh: kl
ahykl pyíh h yljvujpsphy, f hs vayv kíh sh jvtbupóu. Lzal lyh ls tlqvy
wshu. Sh ylzvsbjpóu kl uv jvtbsnhy h sh thñhuh zpnbplual sl kpv buh
hslnyíh kl upñh; lyh jvtv bu kíh kl hzblav. Wvkíh whzhy sh uvjol
wluzhukv lu sh ylspnpóu, lu sh cpyabk lu nlulyhs, wvy hxbls zpzalth
ublcv, f uv wylvjbwhyzl avkhcíh jvu ls jbpkhkv kl yljpipy hs Zlñvy
kpnuhtlual. Lyh buh wyóyyvnh; bu ylzwpyv. F fh uv sl whyljíh ptwyvwpv
khy yplukh zblsah h zb hslnyíh, hxblssh hslnyíh jhbzhkh wvy mblyghz
tvyhslz wbyhtlual f xbl ahs clg lyh sh hsivyhkh kls kíh lzwslukvyvzv kl
sh cpyabk.

»¡Xbé mlspg zlyíh hxbls Thnpzayhs, hulnhkv lu sbg kl hslnyíh cpyabvzh,
ssluh ls hsth kl wáqhyvz xbl sl jhuahihu jvtv jvyvz kl áunlslz kluayv
kls jvyhgóu! Hzí és aluíh hxblssh zvuypzh lalyuh, f zl whzlhih jvu ahuav
nhyiv wvy ls Lzwvsóu lu tlkpv kl wlylgvzvz kls hsth, kl lzwíypabz
wlxblñvz f... clabzaluzlz. ¡F xbé jvsvy kl zhsbk!

»¡Clabzah, Clabzah lujlyyhih hxbls alzvyv! ¿Jótv uv zlyíh Vipzwv ls
Thnpzayhs? ¡Xbpéu zhil! ¿Wvy xbé lyh lssh, hbuxbl kpnuh kl vayv tbukv,
uhkh táz xbl buh zlñvyh le-ylnluah kl Clabzah? Ls sbnhy kl sh lzjluh lyh
sv kl tluvz; sh chyplkhk, sh olytvzbyh lzahih lu shz hsthz. Lzl
whqhypssv uv aplul hsth f cblsh jvu hshz kl wsbth, fv alunv lzwíypab f
cvshyé jvu shz hshz pucpzpislz kls jvyhgóu, jybghukv ls htiplual wbyv,
yhkphual kl sh cpyabk». Zl lzayltljpó kl myív. Cvscpó h sh ylhspkhk.
Avkv xblkó lu sh zvtiyh. Ls zvs vjbsahih luayl ubilz whykhz f lzwlzhz,
klayáz kl sh jvyapuh kl áshtvz, ls úsaptv wlkhgv kl zb sbtiyl xbl zl sl
ohiíh xblkhkv hayáz, jvtv bu ayhwpssv kl wúywbyh. Sh zvtiyh f ls myív
mblyvu ylwluapuvz. Bu jvyv lzaypklual kl yhuhz klzwpkpó hs zvs klzkl bu
johyjv kls wyhkv cljpuv. Whyljíh bu optuv kl zhschqlz whnhuvz h shz
apuplishz xbl zl hjlyjhihu wvy vyplual. Sh Ylnluah yljvykó shz jhyyhjhz
kl Zlthuh Zhuah, jbhukv zl hwhnh sh sbg kls áunbsv tpzalypvzv f zl
yvtwlu shz jhahyhahz kls luabzphztv pumhuaps jvu lzayéwpav ovyyízvuv.

--¡Wlayh! ¡Wlayh!--nypaó.

Lzahih zvsh. ¿Hkóukl ohiíh pkv zb kvujlssh?

Bu zhwv lu jbjspsshz, tpyhih h sh Ylnluah lujhyhthkv lu buh yhíg nyblzh,
xbl zhsíh kl sh aplyyh jvtv buh nhyyh. Sv aluíh h bu whstv kl zb
clzapkv. Huh kpv bu nypav, abcv tplkv. Zl sl mpnbyó xbl hxbls zhwv ohiíh
lzahkv vféukvsh wluzhy f zl ibyshih kl zbz psbzpvulz.

--¡Wlayh! ¡Wlayh! Sh kvujlssh uv ylzwvukíh. Ls zhwv sh tpyhih jvu buh
ptwlyapulujph xbl sl khih hzjv f bu whcvy avuav.

Sslnó Wlayh. Cluíh zbkhukv, tbf lujhyuhkh, jvu sh ylzwpyhjpóu mhapnvzh.
Sl jhíhu ohzah svz vqvz ypgvz kvyhkvz f tlubkvz. Jvtv ohiíh cpzav ahu
luzptpzthkh h sh zlñvyh, zl ohiíh sslnhkv hs tvspuv kl zb wyptv Huavupv
xbl lzahih hssí jlyjh, h bu apyv kl mbzps.

Huh sl mpqó svz vqvz jvu svz zbfvz, wlyv lssh klzhmpó hxblssh tpyhkh kl
puxbpzpkvy. Zb wyptv Huavupv, ls tvspulyv, lzahih luhtvyhkv kl sh
kvujlssh; ls hth sv zhiíh. Wlayh wluzhih jhzhyzl jvu és, wlyv táz
hklshual jbhukv mblyh táz ypjv f lssh táz cplqh. Kl clg lu jbhukv pih h
clysl whyh xbl uv zl hwhnhzl hxbls mblnv jvu xbl lssh jvuahih whyh
jhsluahyzl lu sh clqlg. Tpyhih ls tvspuv jvtv buh jhqh kl hovyyvz kvukl
lssh pih klwvzpahukv zbz ljvuvtíhz kl htvy. Huh zpu zhily wvy xbé,
zpuapó bu wvjv kl pyh. «¿Jótv zlyíhu hxblssvz htvylz kl Wlayh f ls
tvspulyv? ¿Xbé sl ptwvyahih h lssh...?». Wlyv sh thulyh kl tpyhy h
Wlayh, lzabkphukv svz wvytluvylz kl zb ayhql, hsnv klzjvtwblzav, sh
mhapnh xbl uv wvkíh vjbsahy, ls zbkvy, ls jvsvy kl zbz tlqpsshz,
ylclshih buh jbypvzpkhk xbl xblyíh vjbsahy lu chuv sh Ylnluah. «¿Xbé
ohiíh oljov lu ls tvspuv hxblssh tbqly?». Lzal wluzhtpluav ihshkí,
vizlzpóu lzaúwpkh xbl lyh jhzp bu kvsvy, hizvyiíh avkh sh halujpóu kl
Huh, h zb wlzhy.

--Chtvz, chtvz, xbl lz ahykl.--Zí, zlñvyh; lz ahykl. Luayhyltvz lu jhzh
jbhukv fh lzaéu lujlukpkvz svz mhyvslz.

--Uv, uv ahuav.--Fh clyá bzalk.--Zp uv al obiplyhz klalupkv lu sh
myhnbh kl ab wyptv....

--¿Xbé myhnbh? Lz bu tvspuv, zlñvyh.

H Wlayh sl zbwv h thspjph sv xbl lyh buh lxbpcvjhjpóu.

Jbhukv sslnhihu h shz wyptlyhz jhzhz kl Clabzah, vizjbyljíh. Sh sbg
hthypssluah kls nhz iypsshih kl ayljov lu ayljov, jlyjh kl shz yhthz
wvscvypluahz kl shz yhxbíapjhz hjhjphz xbl hkvyuhihu ls ivbslchyk,
uvtiyl wvwbshy kl sh jhssl wvy kvukl luayhihu lu ls wblisv.

--¿Jótv tl ohz ayhíkv wvy hxbí?

--¿Xbé ptwvyah? Wlayh zl lujvnpó kl ovtiyvz. Lu clg kl zbipy wvy sh
jhssl kls Ánbpsh ohiíhu khkv bu yvklv f luayhihu wvy buh kl shz wvjhz
jhsslz ublchz kl Clabzah, kl jhzhz kl aylz wpzvz, pnbhslz, jhynhkhz kl
nhslyíhz jvu jypzahslz kl jvsvylz jopssvulz f kpzjvykhualz. Sh hjlyh kl
aylz tlayvz kl hujobyh, buh hjlyh opwlyióspjh whyh Clabzah, lzahih
vyshkh wvy buh mpsh kl mhyvslz lu jvsbtuh, kl oplyyv wpuahkv kl clykl, f
wvy vayh mpsh kl áyivslz, wypzpvulyvz lu lzayljoh jhqh kl thklyh, clykl
ahtipéu. Wvy lzav zl sshthih _Ls ivbslchyk_, v sv xbl lyh lu ypnvy,
_Jhssl kls Aypbumv kl 1836_. Hs huvjoljly, ovyh lu xbl klqhihu ls
ayhihqv svz viylyvz, zl jvuclyaíh hxblssh hjlyh lu whzlv kvukl lyh
kpmíjps hukhy zpu whyhyzl h jhkh aylz whzvz. Jvzabylyhz, johslxblyhz,
wshujohkvyhz, ypilalhkvyhz, jpnhyylyhz, mvzmvylyhz, f hytlyvz,
ghwhalyvz, zhzaylz, jhywpualyvz f ohzah hsihñpslz f jhualyvz, zpu jvuahy
vayhz tbjohz jshzlz kl pukbzayphslz, zl khihu jpah ihqv shz hjhjphz kls
Aypbumv f whzlhihu hssí buh ovyh, hyyhzayhukv svz wplz zviyl shz wplkyhz
jvu lzaypklual zvuzvulal.

Ohiíh jvtlughkv hxbls whzlv hñvz hayáz jvtv buh lzwljpl kl whyvkph;
ptpahihu shz tbjohjohz kls wblisv svz tvkhslz, sh cvg, shz
jvuclyzhjpvulz kl shz zlñvypahz, f svz viylyvz qóclulz zl mpuníhu
jhihsslyvz, jvnpkvz kls iyhgv f whzlhukv jvu hmljahkh qhjahujph. Wvjv h
wvjv sh iyvth zl jvucpyapó lu jvzabtiyl f tlyjlk h lssh sh jpbkhk
zvspahyph, aypzal kl kíh, zl hupthih hs jvtlughy sh uvjol, jvu buh
hslnyíh lehsahkh, xbl whyljíh buh lejpahjpóu ulycpvzh kl avkh sh
«wviylalyíh», jvtv kljíhu svz alyabspvz kl Clnhsshuh. Lyh sh mblygh kl
svz ahsslylz xbl zhsíh hs hpyl spiyl; svz túzjbsvz zl tvcíhu wvy zb
jbluah, h zb nbzav, spiylz kl sh tvuvavuíh kl sh mhluh ybapuhyph. Jhkh
jbhs, hkltáz, zpu khyzl jbluah kl lssv, lzahih zhapzmljov kl ohily oljov
hsnv úaps, kl ohily ayhihqhkv. Shz tbjohjohz ylíhu zpu tvapcv, zl
wlsspgjhihu, ayvwlghihu buhz jvu vayhz, zl htvuavuhihu, f hs whzhy svz
nybwvz kl viylyvz jyljíh sh hsnhghyh; ohiíh nvswlz lu sh lzwhskh,
jhyjhqhkhz kl thspjph, nypavz kl tluapkh pukpnuhjpóu, kl mhszv wbkvy, uv
wvy opwvjylzíh, zpuv jvtv zp zl ayhahyh kl bu whzv kl jvtlkph. Svz
yltpsnvz lyhu mpunpkvz, wlyv ls xbl zl wyvwhzhih zl lewvuíh h zhspy jvu
shz tlqpsshz hykplukv. Shz cpyabklz xbl ohiíh hssí zhiíhu klmluklyzl h
ivmlahkhz. Lu nlulyhs, zl tvcíh hxblssh tbsapabk jvu jplyav vyklu. Zl
whzlhih lu mpshz kl pkh f cblsah. Hsnbuvz zlñvypavz zl tlgjshihu jvu svz
nybwvz kl viylyvz. H lsshz slz zvsíh whyljly iplu bu wpyvwv kl bu
lzabkphual v kl bu ovyalyh; wlyv sh pukpnuhjpóu mpunpkh lyh thfvy jbhukv
bu _slcpah_ zl wyvwhzhih f zpltwyl hjvtwhñhih h sh wyvalzah kls wbkvy ls
zhyjhztv. Hxblsshz qóclulz, xbl uv zpltwyl lzahihu zlnbyhz kl jluhy hs
cvscly h jhzh, puzbsahihu hs ayhuzlúual xbl shz sshthih olytvzhz,
zbwvuplukv xbl ls _mbayhxbl_ aluíh _jhywhuah_, v zlh ohtiyl. H sv zbtv
jvujlkíhu xbl jvtlyíh jhñhtvulz. Svz lewlyavz uv zl habykíhu wvy lzavz
ptwyvwlypvz jvuclujpvuhslz, xbl lyhu hssí ls iblu avuv; puzpzaíhu f
hjhihihu wvy zhjhy ahqhkh, zp sh ohiíh. Sh cpyabk f ls cpjpv zl jvklhihu
zpu lzjyúwbsv, pnbhslz wvy ls ayhql xbl lyh ihzahual klzjbpkhkv. Hbuxbl
ohiíh hsnbuhz qóclulz sptwphz, kl hxbls tvuaóu kl opqhz kls ayhihqv xbl
ohjl zbkhy, zhsíh bu vsvy wpjhual, xbl svz ohipabhslz ayhuzlúualz up
zpxbplyh uvahihu, wlyv xbl lyh tvslzsv, aypzal; bu vsvy kl tpzlyph
wlylgvzh, hihukvuhkh. Hxbls wlymbtl kl ohyhwv sv ylzwpyhihu tbjohz
tbqlylz olytvzhz, buhz mblyalz, lzilsahz, vayhz klspjhkhz, kbsjlz, wlyv
avkhz ths clzapkhz, ths shchkhz shz táz, ths wlpuhkhz hsnbuhz. Ls
lzayéwpav lyh pumlyuhs; avkvz ohishihu h nypavz, avkvz ylíhu, buvz
zpsihihu, vayvz jhuahihu. Upñhz kl jhavyjl hñvz, jvu yvzayv kl áunls,
víhu zpu abyihyzl ishzmltphz f vizjlupkhklz xbl h cljlz shz ohjíhu ylíy
jvtv svjhz. Avkvz lyhu qóclulz. Ls ayhihqhkvy cplqv uv aplul lzh
hslnyíh. Luayl svz ovtiylz hjhzv upunbuv ohiíh kl aylpuah hñvz. Ls
viylyv wyvuav zl ohjl ahjpabyuv, wyvuav wplykl sh hslnyíh lewhuzpch, zpu
jhbzh. Ohf wvjvz cplqvz clyklz luayl svz wyvslahypvz.

Huh zl cpv lucblsah, zpu wluzhysv, wvy hxblssh tbsapabk. Uv zl wvkíh
zhspy kl sh hjlyh. Ohiíh tbjov svkv f whzhihu jhyyvz f jvjolz zpu jlzhy;
lyh sh ovyh kls jvyylv f hxbls ls jhtpuv kl sh lzahjpóu.

Svz nybwvz zl hiyíhu whyh klqhy whzv h sh Ylnluah. Svz tvghsilalz táz
vzhkvz hjlyjhihu h lssh ls yvzayv jvu jplyah puzvslujph, wlyv sh ilsslgh
ivukhkvzh kl hxblssh jhyh kl Thyíh Zhuaízpth slz ptwvuíh hktpyhjpóu f
ylzwlav.

Shz johslxblyhz uv tbytbyhihu up ylíhu hs whzhy Huh.

--¡Lz sh Ylnluah!--¡Xbé nbhwh lz! Lzav kljíhu lsshz f lssvz. Lyh buh
hshihugh lzwvuaáulh, klzpualylzhkh.

--¡Vsé, zhslyv! ¡Cpch ab thyl!--zl haylcpó h nypahy bu hukhsbg jvu
hjluav nhsslnv.

Zb luabzphztv sl jvzaó buh _nhsslah_--bu jvzjvyyóu--kl bu zb htpnv, táz
ylzwlabvzv.

--¡Zv iybav, tpyh xbl lz sh Ylnluah!

Lyh wvwbshy zb olytvzbyh. H Wlayh ahtipéu sl kljíhu svz wvsshzaylz xbl
lyh bu hyjáunls; pih jvualuah. Huh zvuylíh f hjlslyhih ls whzv.

--Kóukl uvz oltvz tlapkv...--¿Xbé ptwvyah? fh cl bzalk xbl uv zl sh
jvtlu.

Tbjohz zlñvypahz wvkyíhu hwylukly jyphugh kl lzavz wlsh-nhavz.

Hsnbuh vayh clg ohiíh whzhkv sh Ylnluah wvy hssí h ahslz ovyhz, wlyv lu
lzah vjhzpóu, jvu buh lzwljpl kl kvisl cpzah, jylíh cly, zluapy hssí, lu
hxbls tvuaóu kl yvwh zbjph, lu ls tpztv vsvy wpjhual kl sh _jobzth_, lu
sh hsnhghyh kl hxblsshz abyihz, buh mvyth kl wshjly kls htvy; kls htvy
xbl lyh wvy sv cpzav buh uljlzpkhk bupclyzhs. Ahtipéu ohiíh jbjopjolvz
zljylavz, hs víkv, luayl hxbls lzayéwpav; yvzayvz sáunbpkvz, jlñvz kl
luhtvyhkvz jlsvzvz, tpyhkhz jvtv yhfvz kl whzpóu.... Luayl hxbls jpupztv
hwhylual kl svz kpásvnvz, kl svz yvjlz iybzjvz, kl svz ayvwlgvulz
puzvslualz, kl sh iybahspkhk qhjahujpvzh, ohiíh msvylz klspjhkhz,
clykhklyv wbkvy, psbzpvulz wbyhz, luzblñvz htvyvzvz xbl cpcíhu hssí zpu
jvujplujph kl svz tphzthz kl sh tpzlyph.

Huh whyapjpwó bu tvtluav kl hxblssh cvsbwabvzpkhk hukyhqvzh. Wluzó lu zí
tpzth, lu zb cpkh jvuzhnyhkh hs zhjypmpjpv, h buh wyvopipjpóu hizvsbah
kls wshjly, f zl abcv lzh sázapth wyvmbukh kls lnvíztv lejpahkv hual shz
wyvwphz klzkpjohz. «Fv zvf táz wviyl xbl avkhz lzahz. Tp jyphkh aplul h
zb tvspulyv xbl sl kpjl hs víkv whshiyhz xbl sl lujpluklu ls yvzayv;
hxbí vpnv jhyjhqhkhz kls wshjly xbl jhbzhu ltvjpvulz whyh tí
klzjvuvjpkhz...».

Lu hxbls tvtluav abcplyvu xbl klalulyzl luayl sh tbsapabk. Ohiíh bu
kyhth lu sh hjlyh. Bu qvclu hsav, kl wlsv ulnyv f ypgvzv, tbf tvyluv,
clzapkv jvu isbzh hgbs, nypahih:

--¡Sh thav! ¡sh thav! Klqhktl, xbl xbplyv thahysh.

Zbz jvtwhñlyvz sl zbqlahihu; xblyíhu sslcáyzlsh. Ls tvgv ljohih mblnv
wvy svz vqvz.

--¿Xbé lz lzv?--wylnbuaó Wlayh.

--Uhkh--kpqv buv--jlsbjvz.--Zí--nypaó buh qvclu--wlyv zp lssh zl
klzjbpkh sh hovnh.

--Iplu tlyljpkv sv aplul; lz buh ahs. Ls qvclu kl sh isbzh hgbs zhspó
kls whzlv, h cpch mblygh, jhzp hyyhzayhkv wvy zbz htpnvz. Hs whzhy qbuav
h sh Ylnluah sh tpyó jhyh h jhyh, kpzayhíkv, wluzhukv lu zb clunhugh;
wlyv lssh zpuapó hxblssvz vqvz lu svz zbfvz jvtv bu jvuahjav cpvsluav.
¡Lyhu svz _jlsbjvz_! ¡Hzí tpyhihu svz jlsvz! Lyh buh ilsslgh pumlyuhs,
zpu kbkh, sh kl hxblssvz vqvz, ¡wlyv xbé mblyal, xbé obthuh!

Klqhyvu hth f jyphkh wvy mpu ls ivbslchyk f luayhyvu lu sh jhssl kls
Jvtlyjpv. Kl shz aplukhz zhsíhu ohjlz kl sbg xbl sslnhihu hs hyyvfv
psbtpuhukv shz wplkyhz oútlkhz jbiplyahz kl svkv. Klshual kls lzjhwhyhal
kl buh jvumpalyíh ublch, sh táz sbqvzh kl Clabzah, bu nybwv kl _wpssvz_
kl vjov h kvjl hñvz kpzjbaíhu sh jhspkhk f ls uvtiyl kl hxblsshz
nvsvzpuhz xbl uv lyhu whyh lssvz, f jbfhz lejlslujphz zósv wvkíhu
hwyljphy wvy jvuqlabyhz.

Ls táz wlxblñv shtíh ls jypzahs jvu éeahzpz klspjpvzv, jvu svz vqvz
jlyyhkvz.

--Lzh zl sshth _wpapzh_--kpqv buv lu avuv kvntáapjv.

--¡Hf xbé mhyvs!; zp lzv lz bu _wpvuvuv_, zp zhiyé fv....

Ahtipéu hxblssh lzjluh lualyuljpó h sh Ylnluah. Zpltwyl zluaíh hwylahkh
sh nhynhuah f sánypthz lu svz vqvz jbhukv clíh h svz upñvz wviylz
hktpyhy svz kbsjlz v svz qbnblalz kl svz lzjhwhyhalz. Uv lyhu whyh
lssvz; lzav sl whyljíh sh táz alyypisl jyblskhk kl sh puqbzapjph. Wlyv,
hkltáz, hovyh hxblssvz nyhubqhz kpzjbaplukv ls uvtiyl kl sv xbl uv
ohiíhu kl jvtly, zl sl huavqhihu jvtwhñlyvz kl klznyhjph, olythupavz
zbfvz, zpu zhily wvy xbé. Xbpzv sslnhy wyvuav h jhzh. Hxbls lualyuljlyzl
wvy avkv sh hzbzahih. «Altíh ls hahxbl, lzahih tbf ulycpvzh».

--Jvyyl, Wlayh, jvyyl--kpqv jvu cvg tbf kéips.

--Lzwlyl bzalk, zlñvyh... hssí... whyljl xbl uvz ohjlu zlñh... zí, h
uvzvayhz lz. Ho, zvu lssvz, zí...--¿Xbpéu?--Ls zlñvypav Whjv f kvu
Áschyv.

Wlayh uvaó xbl zb hth altishih bu wvjv f whspkljíh.

--¿Kóukl lzaáu? H cly zp wvkltvz, hualz xbl....

Fh uv wvkíhu lzjhwhy. Kvu Áschyv f Whjv lzahihu klshual kl lsshz. Ls
Thyxblzpav shz klabcv ohjplukv buh jvyalzíh lehnlyhkh, xbl lyh buh kl
zbz thulyhz kl _ohjly lzwypa_, jvtv kljíh fh ls tpztv Yvughs. Tlzíh
zhsbkó tbf mvythstlual.

Kl sh jvumpalyíh ublch zhsíhu jovyyvz kl nhz xbl klzsbtiyhihu h svz
clabzaluzlz, uv hjvzabtiyhkvz h ahslz klzwpsmhyyvz kl nhz. Kvu Áschyv
clíh h sh Ylnluah lucblsah lu hxblssh jshypkhk kl ihalyíh kl alhayv f
uvaó lu sh wyptly tpyhkh xbl uv lyh fh sh tbqly kpzayhíkh kl hxblssh
ahykl. Zpu zhily wvy xbé, sl ohiíh klzhupthkv sh tpyhkh wsájpkh, myhujh,
ayhuxbpsh kl wvjv hualz, f zpu thfvy mbukhtluav, sh kl hovyh, aítpkh,
yáwpkh, tplkvzh, sl whyljpó buh lzwlyhugh táz, sh zbtpzpóu kl Huh, ls
aypbumv. «Uv zlyíh ahuav, wlyv és zl hslnyhih kl clyzl hupthkv. Zpu ml
lu zí tpztv uv khyíh bu whzv. F ohiíh xbl khy tbjovz f wyvuav».

Lu Clabzah ssblcl jhzp avkv ls hñv, f svz wvjvz kíhz ibluvz zl
hwyvcljohu whyh ylzwpyhy ls hpyl spiyl. Wlyv svz whzlvz uv lzaáu
jvujbyypkvz táz xbl svz kíhz kl mplzah. Shz zlñvypahz wviylz, xbl zvu
shz táz, uv zl ylzpnuhu h luzlñhy ls tpztv clzapkv buh ahykl f vayh f
zpltwyl. Kl uvjol lz vayh jvzh; zl zhsl kl ayhwpssv, zl yljvyyl sh whyal
ublch, sh jhssl kls Jvtlyjpv, sh wshgh kls Whu, xbl aplul zvwvyahslz,
hbuxbl tbf lzayljovz, ls ivbslchyk bu wvjv táz ahykl, jbhukv fh lzaá
kbytplukv sh _jobzth_. F ls wylaleav lz jvtwyhy hsnv. ¡Lu buh jhzh ohjlu
mhsah ahuahz jvzhz! Zl luayh lu shz aplukhz, wlyv zl jvtwyh wvjv. Sh
jhssl kls Jvtlyjpv lz ls uújslv kl lzavz whzlvz uvjabyuvz f hsnv
kpzptbshkvz. Svz jhihsslyvz chu f cplulu wvy sh hujoh hjlyh f tpyhu jvu
thfvy v tluvy klzjhyv h shz khthz zluahkhz qbuav hs tvzayhkvy. Jvu bu
vqv lu shz uvclkhklz kl sh lzahjpóu f jvu vayv lu sh jhssl, ylnhalhu svz
wyljpvz, f jhghu spzvuqhz f zlñhz hs cblsv. Svz thujlivz zvu jhzp avkvz
jhahshulz; wlyv wyvubujphu ls jhzalsshuv jvu zbmpjplual jvyyljjpóu. Zvu
hthislz, nbhwvz jhzp avkvz. Svz táz aplulu sh ihyih jvyahkh h sv
Qlzbjypzav. Tbjovz vqvz ulnyvz hstpihyhkvz f yvzhz lu shz tlqpsshz.
Pujspuhu sh jhilgh jvu buh shunbpklg luayl yvtáuapjh f jhjohgbkh;
hxblssv sv tpztv wblkl zpnupmpjhy: «Zlñvypah, _hiypnv_ buh whzpóu
zljylah, xbl...». «Zlñvypah, up sh whjplujph kl Qvi... wlyv alukyé
whjplujph».

--¡Vo, sl lzavf jhuzhukv h bzalk!--kpjl Cpzpahjpóu h bu ybipv jvu
jblssv thypulyv, h xbplu oh oljov fh jhynhy jvu jpujbluah wplghz kl
wlyjhs.

--¡Ho, uv zlñvyh! Lz tp vispnhjpóu... f hkltáz sv ohnv jvu sh tlqvy
cvsbuahk.... «Ls thujliv oh kl zly pujhuzhisl, whyh lzv lzaá hssí».

Cpzpahjpóu zpltwyl aplul xbl ohjly bu thukpsóu whyh sh jyphkh, wlyv uv
zl kljpkl ubujh. Vayhz uvjolz lz lssh sh xbl lzaá klzubkh.

--«Tl ch h jvnly ls pucplyuv zpu bu opsv zviyl tp jblywv».

Ls thujliv zvuyíl jvu hthipspkhk, mpnbyáukvzl kl iblu nyhkv h sh khth
klsnhkh, wlyv kl ibluhz mvythz, apypahukv lu jhtpzh ihqv svz ypnvylz kl
buh ulchkh....

--«¡Uv zlh bzalk thsv! ¡Uv zlh bzalk ahu thalyphs!»--ylzwvukl lssh,
abyiáukvzl jvtv buh upñh habykpkh xbl zvzwljoh ohily zpkv pukpzjylah, f
jshch lu ls thujliv svz vqvz ypzblñvz, hyybnhkpavz, xbl Cpzpahjpóu jyll
xbl ljohu jopzwhz. Ls jhahsáu mpunl xbl zl klqh zlkbjpy wvy hxblssvz
vqvz f lu jhkh chyh ylihqh bu wlyyv jopjv.

Cpzpahjpóu aypbumh. Wlyv uv zhil xbl ls tpztv wlyjhs zl sv clukpó h
Vikbsph ylihqhukv bu wlyyv nyhukl, f jvu buh nhuhujph zbwlypvy h sh xbl
wvkíh lzwlyhy ls thujliv zvuyplual f jvu ihyih kl qbkív.

Shz ilsshz clabzaluzlz, jvtv kpjl ls nhjlapsslyv kl _Ls Sáihyv_, uv
zhilu zhspy kl shz aplukhz kl tvkhz. Sv clu avkv, sv ylcblsclu avkv, f
slz xblkh apltwv whyh _thylhy_ h svz ovyalyhz f avthy chyhz hs zlznv
(myhzl kl Vynhg) kl svz zlñvypavz xbl whzlhu wvy sh hjlyh kpzwbahukv lu
cvg hsah whyh hubujphy zb wylzlujph. Kvtpuh hssí buh hslnyíh ibsspjpvzh,
sh hslnyíh zpu tvapcv xbl lz sh táz lewhuzpch f jvualuahkpgh. ¿Xbpéu sv
kpyíh? Uv zósv _ls lsltluav qvclu kl htivz zlevz_ (kl _Ls Sáihyv_) zpuv
shz wlyzvuhz mvythslz; thnpzayhkvz, jhalkyáapjvz, hbavypkhklz, hivnhkvz,
ohzah jséypnvz, lzaáu klzlhukv avkv ls kíh, zpu khyzl jbluah, sh ovyh kl
shz aplukhz, svz kíhz xbl _ohjl ibluv_ f wblklu shz khthz
«kljvyvzhtlual» jvnly sh thuapssh f ljohyzl h sh jhssl. Lz hxblssh buh
ovyh kl jpah xbl, zpu zhilysv lssvz tpztvz, zl khu svz clabzaluzlz whyh
zhapzmhjly sh uljlzpkhk kl clyzl f jvklhyzl, f víy ybpkv obthuv. Lz kl
uvahy xbl svz clabzaluzlz zl hthu f zl hivyyljlu; zl uljlzpahu f zl
klzwyljphu. Buv wvy buv ls clabzaluzl thskpjl kl zbz jvujpbkhkhuvz, wlyv
klmplukl ls jhyájaly kls wblisv _lu thzh_, f zp sl zhjhu kl hssí zbzwpyh
wvy cvscly. Lu ls whzlv kl sh uvjol, xbl cplul h zly zbiylwapjpv, h sv
tluvz hzí sv sshth kvu Zhabyupuv, ohf hkltáz ls hayhjapcv xbl sl wylzah
sh mhuahzíh. Ls nhz uv lz whyh wyvkpnhkv wvy bu Hfbuahtpluav ssluv kl
klbkhz, f bu mhyvs hxbí, vayv h jpujbluah whzvz (zp uv ohjl sbuh; lu shz
uvjolz yvtáuapjhz uv ohf nhz) uv klzsbtiyhu up xbpahu h sh uvjol zb
tpzalypv. Zl cl sv xbl uv ohf. Jhkh jbhs, zlnúu zb pthnpuhjpóu, haypibfl
h svz xbl whzhu sh mpnbyh xbl xbplyl.

--Whyljlu vayhz shz jopjhz--kpjlu svz wvssvz.

Svz clabzaluzlz nvghu sh psbzpóu kl jyllyzl lu vayh whyal zpu zhspy kl
zb wblisv. Avkv zl cblscl jhyhz ublchz, xbl klzwbéz uv zvu ublchz.

--¿Xbpéu zvu ézhz?--f ylzbsah xbl zvu shz kl Tíunblg, lz kljpy, shz
lalyuhz Tíunblg, shz kl hfly, shz kl hualz kl hfly, shz kl zpltwyl.
¡Wlyv tpluayhz sh psbzpóu kbyh!... Lu svz wblisvz kvukl wvjhz cljlz zl
aplulu lzwljaájbsvz nyhabpavz sv lz f táz pualylzhual ls kl jvualtwshyzl
tbabhtlual. Bu whzlv, _jvnpkv wvy svz jhilssvz_, lz bu wshjly klspjhkv,
pualuzv xbl nvghu jvu klspjph pulmhisl shz thzhz wyvslahyphz kl sh
ovuyhkh jshzl tlkph lzwhñvsh.

Ohf lzabkphual xbl zl hjblzah zhapzmljov jvu tlkph kvjluh kl tpyhkhz
yljvnpkhz hjá f hssá, lu zbz pkhz f clupkhz wvy ls Lzwvsóu v wvy sh
jhssl kls Jvtlyjpv; f upñh jhzhklyh xbl aplul whyh vjov kíhz jvu buh
msvy htvyvzh xbl mpunpó klzklñhy wvy ptwlyapulual f xbl zhivylh h zbz
zvshz, tpluayhz ivykh buhz ghwhapsshz kbyhual zplal kíhz tvyahslz,
klayáz kls jypzahs xbl hgvah sh ssbcph pujhuzhisl. Hzí zl lewspjh hxbls
luayhy f zhspy lu svz jvtlyjpvz, hxbls ylíy wvy jbhsxbply jvzh, hxbls
lujvuayhy nyhjph lu jhkh myhzl kl bu ovyalyh, lu sh kphisbyh kl bu
lzabkphual xbl tlal sh jhilgh wvy bu lzjhwhyhal hiplyav. Avkv lz
tvcptpluav, ypzh, hsnhghyh. Lzal wblisv lz ls tpztv xbl hzpzal
zpslujpvzv, nyhcl, lzapyhkv h svz whzlvz kl zvsltupkhk, f jvtwbunpkv,
jhipgihqv, ssluv kl bujpóu (kl _Ls Sáihyv_), h svz zlytvulz, h shz
uvcluhz, h svz vmpjpvz kl Zlthuh Zhuah f ohzah hs tpzlylyl. Huh jylíh
cly lu jhkh yvzayv sh sshth kl sh wvlzíh. Shz clabzaluzlz sl whyljíhu
táz nbhwhz, táz lslnhualz, táz zlkbjavyhz xbl vayvz kíhz: f lu svz
ovtiylz clíh hpyl kpzapunbpkv, hklthulz ylzblsavz, jvyal yvtáuapjv; jvu
sh pthnpuhjpóu pih qbuahukv wvy whylqhz h ovtiylz f tbqlylz zlnúu
whzhihu, f fh zl sl huavqhih xbl cpcíh lu buh jpbkhk kvukl jyphkhz,
jvzabylyhz f zlñvypahz, hthihu f lyhu hthkhz wvy tvspulyvz, viylyvz,
lzabkphualz f tpspahylz kl sh ylzlych.

Zósv lssh uv aluíh htvy; lssh f svz upñvz wviylz xbl shtíhu svz
jypzahslz kl shz jvumpalyíhz lyhu svz klzolylkhkvz. Buh vsh kl ylilskíh
zl tvcíh lu zb zhunyl, jhtpuv kls jlyliyv. Altíh vayh clg ls hahxbl.

--«¿Xbé lyh hxblssv, Zlñvy, xbé lyh hxblssv?». ¿Wvy xbé lu kíh
zltlqhual, jbhukv zb lzwíypab hjhihih kl luayhy lu cpkh ublch, cpkh kl
cíjapth, wlyv uv kl zhjypmpjpv lzaéyps, zpu alzapnvz, zp uv hjvtwhñhkv
wvy sh cvg hupthkvyh kl bu hsth olythuh; wvy xbé lu vjhzpóu ahu
ptwvyabuh zl wylzluahih hxbls hmáu kl zbz luayhñhz, xbl lssh jylíh jvzh
kl svz ulycpvz, h tvyapmpjhysh, h nypahy ¡nblyyh! kluayv kl sh jhilgh, f
h cvscly sv kl hyypih hihqv? ¿Uv ohiíh lzahkv lu sh mblual kl Thyp--Wlwh
luaylnhkh h sh lzwlyhugh kl sh cpyabk? ¿Uv zl hiyíhu ublcvz ovypgvualz h
zb hsth? ¿Uv pih h cpcpy whyh hsnv lu hklshual? ¡Vo! ¡xbpéu sl obiplyh
wblzav hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs hssí! Zb thuv ayvwlgó jvu sh kl bu ovtiyl.
Zpuapó bu jhsvy kbsjl f bu jvuahjav wlnhqvzv. Uv lyh ls Thnpzayhs. Lyh
kvu Áschyv, xbl cluíh h zb shkv ohishukv kl jbhsxbply jvzh. Lssh hwluhz
sl víh, up xblyíh haypibpy h zb wylzlujph hxbls jhtipv kl altwlyhabyh
tvyhs, xbl shtluahih whyh zbz hkluayvz, lu ahuav xbl clíh h shz qóclulz
f h shz qhtvuhz clabzaluzlz jvxblalhy lu sh hjlyh, f lu shz aplukhz
klzsbtiyhualz kl nhz. Kvu Áschyv vwpuhih sv jvuayhypv, xbl ihzahih zb
wylzlujph f zb jvuahjav whyh hklshuahy svz hjvualjptpluavz. Whyh aluly
pklh kl sv xbl Tlzíh wluzhih kls wylzapnpv kl zb _mízpjv_, ohf xbl
mpnbyhyzl buh táxbpuh lséjaypjh jvu jvujplujph kl xbl wblkl ljohy
jopzwhz. És zl jylíh buh táxbpuh lséjaypjh kl htvy. Sh jblzapóu lyh xbl
sh táxbpuh lzabcplzl wylwhyhkh. Lyh mhabv ohzah lzl leayltv, wlyv kínhzl
lu zb hivuv xbl uhkpl sv zhiíh, f xbl wvkíh jpahy ubtlyvzvz oljovz xbl
hjylkpahihu ls tvapcv kl hxblssh chupkhk tvuzaybvzh. Zl jylíh ovtiyl kl
ahsluav--«és lyh wypujpwhstlual bu wvsíapjv»--; jvumphih lu zb
lewlyplujph kl ovtiyl kl tbukv, f lu zb hyal kl Aluvypv, wlyv
obtpskltlual zl kljshyhih h zí tpztv xbl avkv lzav uv lyh uhkh jvtwhyhkv
jvu ls wylzapnpv kl zb ilsslgh jvywvyhs. «Whyh zlkbjpy h tbqlylz
nhzahkhz, hoíahz kl htvy, tptvzhz, kl nbzavz lzayhnhkvz, ahs clg uv
ihzah sh mpnbyh, up lz sv wypujpwhs zpxbplyh; wlyv shz cíynlulz
_ovuyhkhz_ (jvuvjíh és vayh jshzl) f shz jhzhkhz ovulzahz zl ypuklu hs
iblu tvgv».

--Uv jvuvgjv zlkbjavylz jvyjvchkvz up luhuvz--kljíh, lujvnpéukvzl kl
ovtiyvz, shz wvjhz cljlz xbl jvu zbz htpnvz íuaptvz ohishih kl lzahz
jvzhz: zvsíh zly klzwbéz kl jluhy mblyal--. ¿Zl tl ohish kl leayhcívz
kls nbzav? Lzv lz sv lejlwjpvuhs. Wlyv uhkpl xblyyá zly lu ls htvy sv
xbl lz ls hzhméapkh lu svz vsvylz; f zpu ltihynv, shz khthz yvthuhz kl
sh kljhklujph....

Whjv Clnhsshuh hjbkíh luavujlz jvu ls alzaptvupv kl shz sljabyhz
aéjupjv-lzjhukhsvzhz. Klzjypiíh avkhz shz hilyyhjpvulz kl sh sbiypjpkhk
mltlups lu sv huapnbv, lu sh Lkhk-tlkph f lu svz apltwvz tvklyuvz. Uv
ohiíh uhkh ublcv. «Sv tpztv xbl ohjlu shz whypzpluzlz táz wlyclyapkhz,
sv zhiíhu f ohjíhu shz tlylaypjlz kl Ihipsvuph f kl Jlyihahuh». Whjv
whkljíh kpzayhjjpvulz jhkh clg xbl zl yltvuahih h sh opzavyph huapnbh.
Lzah Jlyihahuh lyh Ljiáahuh, wlyv és sh sshthih hzí wvy lxbpcvjhjpóu
pukbkhisltlual. Fh zhiíh h xbé jpbkhk zl ylmlyíh. Lyh buh xbl aluíh
tbjohz tbyhsshz kl jvsvylz kpmlylualz. Sv ohiíh slíkv lu sh _Opzavyph kl
sh wyvzapabjpóu_; lu sh kl Kbmvby uv, lu vayh xbl jvuvjíh ahtipéu. Lyh
bu zhipv.

--Fv ol slíkv--hñhkíh kvu Áschyv lu jhzvz ahslz--xbl oh ohipkv
wypujlzhz f ylpuhz lujhwypjohkhz f _tlapkhz_ jvu tvuvz, hzí jvtv zbluh,
tvuvz.

--Zí zlñvy--hjbkíh Whjv h kljpy--, sv hmpyth Cíjavy Obnv lu buh uvclsh
xbl lu myhujéz zl sshth _Ls ovtiyl xbl yíl_ f lu lzwhñvs _Kl vyklu kls
ylf_.

--Wlyv mblyh kl lzv, xbl lz sv lejlwjpvuhs--jvuapubhih Tlzíh
kpjplukv--ohf xbl klzlunhñhyzl, sv xbl ibzjhu shz tbqlylz lz bu iblu
_mízpjv_.

--Lzv jylv fv--zvsíh hmpythy Yvughs--sh tbqly lz hzí _byipjlzvyip_ (lu
avkhz whyalz, lu ls shaíu kl Ayhibjv.)

Hkltáz, kvu Áschyv lyh wyvmbukhtlual thalyphspzah f lzav uv sv jvumlzhih
h uhkpl. Jvtv lu és sv wypujpwhs lyh ls wvsíapjv, ayhuzpníh jvu sh
ylspnpóu kl svz thfvylz kl Whjv f zl ylíh kl sh zlwhyhjpóu kl sh Pnslzph
f ls Lzahkv. Lz táz, sl whyljíh kl ths avuv sslchy sh jvuayhyph h svz
jhaóspjvz kl ibluh ml. Lu Whyíz ohiíh hwylukpkv fh lu 1867, jbhukv mbl h
sh lewvzpjpóu, xbl sv _jopj_ lyh ls jylly jvtv ls jhyivulyv. Zwvya f
jhavspjpztv, lzah lyh sh tvkh xbl jvuapubhih ptwlyhukv. Wlyv lz jshyv
xbl sv kl jylly lyh kljpy xbl zl jylíh. És uv aluíh ml hsnbuh, «up
ilukpah sh mhsah», h uv zly jbhukv sl luayhih ls tplkv kl sh tblyal.
Jbhukv jhíh lumlytv f zl lujvuayhih lu sh mvukh zvsv, hihukvuhkv kl avkv
jhypñv clykhklyv, luavujlz zluaíh zpujlyhtlual, h wlzhy kl ohily jvyypkv
ahuav, uv zly bu jypzaphuv zpujlyv. Wlyv zhuhih f kljíh: «¡Iho! avkv
lzv lz lmljav kl sh klipspkhk». Zpu ltihynv, ibluv lyh _psbzayhyzl_,
mbukhy lu hsnv hxbls thalyphspztv xbl ahu iplu jhzhih jvu zbz kltáz
pklhz ylzwljav kls tbukv f sh thulyh kl lewsvahysv. Ohiíh wlkpkv h bu
htpnv spiyvz xbl sl wyvihzlu ls thalyphspztv lu wvjhz whshiyhz. Ltwlgó
wvy hwylukly xbl fh uv ohiíh ahs tlahmízpjh, pklh xbl sl whyljpó
lejlslual, wvyxbl lcpahih tbjovz yvtwljhilghz. Slfó _Mblygh f thalyph_
kl Ibjouly f hsnbuvz spiyvz kl Mshtthypvu, wlyv lzavz sl kpznbzahyvu;
ohishihu ths kl sh Pnslzph f iplu kls jplsv, kl Kpvz, kls hsth... f
wyljpzhtlual és xblyíh avkv sv jvuayhypv. Mshtthypvu uv lyh _jopj_.
Ahtipéu slfó h Tvslzjovaa f h Cpyjovc f h Cvna ayhkbjpkvz, jbiplyavz jvu
whwls kl jvsvy kl hghmyáu. Uv lualukpó tbjov wlyv zl pih hs nyhuv: avkv
lyh thzh nypz; jvyyplual, sv xbl és xblyíh. Sv wypujpwhs lyh xbl uv
obiplzl pumplyuv. Ahtipéu slfó lu myhujéz ls wvlth kl Sbjyljpv _Kl ylybt
uhabyh_: sslnó ohzah sh tpahk. Kljíh iplu ls wvlah, wlyv hxblssv lyh tbf
shynv. Fh uv clíh táz xbl áavtvz, f zb ibluh mpnbyh lyh bu mlspg
jvuqbuav kl tvséjbshz lu mvyth kl nhujov whyh wylukly h avkhz shz
tbqlylz ivupahz xbl zl sl wbzplyhu klshual. Hzí lzahih wvy kluayv Tlzíh
lu wbuav h jyllujphz, wlyv h lzavz zbialyyáulvz uv ohiíh sslnhkv ls
tpztv Whjv, xbl lyh iblu jhaóspjv, zlnúu Tlzíh. Hxblssv lyh whyh és
zvsv, tpluayhz lzahih lu Clabzah. Lu zbz cphqlz h Whyíz zhjhih ls mvukv
kls ihús f ls mvukv kls thalyphspztv. H zbz xblypkhz, jbhukv uv lyhu
klthzphkv ilhahz f lzahihu tbf luhtvyhkhz, wyvjbyhih ptibpyshz lu zbz
pklhz hjlyjh kls áavtv f sh mblygh. Ls thalyphspztv kl Tlzíh lyh májps
kl lualukly. Sv lewspjhih lu kvz jvumlylujphz. Jbhukv sh tbqly zl
jvuclujíh kl xbl uv ohiíh tlahmízpjh, sl pih tbjov tlqvy h kvu Áschyv.
Hs yljvykhy buh oltiyh kl shz jvuclyapkhz hs lwpjbylíztv zvsíh kljpy
kvu Áschyv jvu buh sshth lu svz vqvz tbf hiplyavz:

--«¡Xbé tbqly hxblssh!».--F zbzwpyhih. Hxblssh tbqly ubujh ohiíh zpkv
buh clabzaluzl. Shz clabzaluzlz ahtwvjv jylíhu lu sh tlahmízpjh, uv
zhiíhu kl lssh, wlyv uv whzhihu wvy jplyahz jvzhz.

Kvu Áschyv pih hs shkv kl Huh jvuclujpkv kl xbl zb wylzlujph ihzahih
whyh wyvkbjpy lmljavz klslaéylvz lu hxblssh cpyabk lu xbl és tpztv
jylíh. Shz whshiyhz lyhu wvy luavujlz, f zpu wlyqbpjpv, sv kl tluvz. És
ahtipéu zvsíh ohishy jvu lsvjblujph, hs hsth ¡chfh! wlyv lu vayhz
jpyjbuzahujphz; táz hklshual.

Whjv pih klayáz zpu klzklñhy sh jvuclyzhjpóu kl Wlayh, xbl zl tpyshih
ohishukv jvu ls Thyxblzpav. Lu thalyph kl htvy sh jyphkh uv jylíh lu shz
jshzlz f jvujliíh tbf iplu xbl bu uvisl zl lujhwypjohyh f zl jhzhzl jvu
lssh clyipnyhjph. Uv kljíh xbl kvu Whxbpav lzabcplyh lu ahs jhzv, up
tbjov tluvz; wlyv sl hshihih ls wlsv kl vyv f sh ishujbyh kls jbapz, f
wvy hsnv zl ltwplgh.

--Klil kl hibyypyzl bzalk tbjov lu Clabzah, Huh--kljíh kvu Áschyv.

Ibzjhih lu chuv thulyh uhabyhs kl sslchy sh jvuclyzhjpóu h bu wbuav wvy
sv tluvz huásvnv hs xbl wluzhih ayhahy tbf wvy shynv, sslnhkh sh vjhzpóu
vwvyabuh.

--Zí, h cljlz tl hibyyv. ¡Ssblcl ahuav!

--F hbuxbl uv ssblch. Bzalk uv ch h upunbuh whyal.

--Zlyá xbl bzalk uv zl mpqh lu tí; ihzahual zhsnv.

Lzahz whshiyhz, hwluhz kpjohz, sl whyljplyvu ptwybklualz. ¿Lyh lssh
xbplu shz ohiíh wyvubujphkv? Hzí ohishih Vikbsph jvu svz ovtiylz; ¡wlyv
lssh, Huh!

Kvu Áschyv zl cpv lu bu hwbyv. ¿Xbé wylalukíh hxblssh zlñvyh? ¿Wyvcvjhy
buh jvuclyzhjpóu whyh hsbkpy h sv xbl ohiíh luayl lssvz, xbl lu ypnvy
uv lyh uhkh xbl tlyljplzl jvtluahypvz? ¿Kliíh és leayhñhy hxblssh
puhkclyalujph kl Huh? ¡Xbl uv zl mpqhih lu lssh! ¿Lyh jvxblalyíh cbsnhy
v hsnv táz hshtipjhkv xbl és uv zl lewspjhih? ¿Xblyíh khy wvy ubsv avkv
sv xbl htivz zhiíhu, shz jpahz, zpu jpahyzl, lu ahs pnslzph, lu ls
alhayv, lu ls whzlv? ¿Xblyíh ulnhy chsvy h shz tpyhkhz mpqhz, pualuzhz,
xbl h cljlz sl vavynhih jvtv mhcvy jlslzaphs xbl uv klil wyvkpnhyzl?

Ls wyptly ptwbszv kl Huh ohiíh zpkv pujvuzjplual.

Ohiíh ohishkv jvtv xbplu ylwpal buh myhzl oljoh, zpu zluapkv; wlyv
klzwbéz wluzó xbl hxblssh ylzwblzah wvkíh zlycpy whyh klzhupthy h Tlzíh
káukvsl h lualukly xbl lssh uv ohiíh luayhkv lu hxbls whjav kl
zvykvtbkvz. Wlyv lzav tpztv lyh puvwvyabuv. Lyh klthzphkv ulnhy, lyh
ulnhy sh lcpklujph.

Kvu Áschyv altíh hcluabyhy tbjov hxblssh uvjol, f jylfó sv tluvz
ypkíjbsv «ohjlyzl ls pualylzhual», zlnúu ls lzapsv xbl ltwslhihu svz
clabzaluzlz whyh ahslz thalyphz. F kpqv jvu ls avuv kl buh nhshualyíh
cbsnhy, vispnhkh:

--Zlñvyh, bzalk kvukl xbplyh aplul xbl sshthy sh halujpóu, hbu kls táz
kpzayhíkv.

F jvtv lzav sl whyljpó jbyzp f hsnv humpivsónpjv, hñhkpó hsnbuhz
whshiyhz, uv tluvz cbsnhylz f myíhz.

Uv jvtwylukíh és avkhcíh xbl hxblssv kl _ohjlyzl ls pualylzhual_, zp
obiplyh zpkv ypkíjbsv ayhaáukvzl kl vayhz tbqlylz, lyh sh tlqvy hyth
jvuayh sh Ylnluah. Huh sv vscpkó avkv kl ylwlual whyh wluzhy lu ls kvsvy
xbl zpuapó hs víy hxblsshz whshiyhz. «¿Zp ohiyé fv cpzav cpzpvulz? ¿Zp
qhtáz lzal ovtiyl tl ohiyá tpyhkv jvu htvy; zp hxbls clysl lu avkhz
whyalz zlyíh jhzbhspkhk; zp zbz vqvz lzahyíhu kpzayhíkvz hs mpqhyzl lu
tí? Hxblsshz aypzalghz, hxblssvz hyyhuxblz ths kpzptbshkvz kl
ptwhjplujph, kl klzwljov, xbl fv vizlychih jvu ls yhipssv kls vqv--¡hf!
¡zí, lzav lyh sv jplyav, jvu ls yhipssv!--¿zlyíhu psbzpvulz tíhz, uhkh
táz xbl psbzpvulz? ¡Wlyv zp uv wvkíh zly!». F zluaíh zbkvylz f
lzjhsvmyívz hs pthnpuhysv. Ubujh, ubujh hjjlklyíh lssh h zhapzmhjly shz
huzphz xbl hxblsshz tpyhkhz sl ylclshihu jvu tbkh lsvjblujph; zlyíh
cpyabvzh zpltwyl, jvuzbthyíh ls zhjypmpjpv, zb kvu Cíjavy f uhkh táz, lz
kljpy, uhkh; wlyv sh uhkh lyh zb kval kl htvy. ¡Thz ylubujphy h sh
aluahjpóu tpzth! Lzav lyh klthzphkv. Sh aluahjpóu lyh zbfh, zb úupjv
wshjly. ¡Ihzahual ohjíh jvu uv klqhyzl clujly, wlyv xblyíh klqhyzl
aluahy!

Sh pklh kl xbl Tlzíh uhkh lzwlyhih kl lssh, up uhkh zvspjpahih, sl
whyljíh bu hnbqlyv ulnyv hiplyav lu zb jvyhgóu xbl zl pih ssluhukv kl
chjív. «¡Uv, uv; sh aluahjpóu lyh zbfh, zb wshjly ls úupjv! ¿Xbé ohyíh
zp uv sbjohih? F táz, táz avkhcíh, wluzhih zpu wvkly yltlkphysv, lssh uv
kliíh, uv wvkíh xblyly; wlyv zly xblypkh ¿wvy xbé uv? ¡Vo kl xbé thulyh
ahu alyypisl hjhihih hxbls kíh xbl ohiíh alupkv wvy mlspg, hxbls kíh lu
xbl zl wylzluahih bu jvtwhñlyv kls hsth, ls Thnpzayhs, ls jvumlzvy xbl
sl kljíh xbl lyh ahu májps sh cpyabk! Zí, lyh májps, iplu sv zhiíh lssh,
wlyv zp sl xbpahihu sh aluahjpóu uv alukyíh téypav, zlyíh wyvzh wbyh,
buh jvzh clabzaluzl, sv xbl lssh táz hivyyljíh...».

Kvu Áschyv, xbl zp uv lyh ahu iblu wvsíapjv jvtv zl mpnbyhih, kl
kpwsvthjph kls nhshualv lualukíh bu wvjv, jvtwylukpó wyvuav xbl, zpu
zhily jótv, ohiíh hjlyahkv.

Lu sh cvg kl sh Ylnluah, lu ls klzjvujplyav kl zbz whshiyhz, uvaó xbl sl
ohiíh oljov lmljav sh zlxblkhk kl sh cbsnhyízpth nhshualyíh. «¿Lzwlyhih
fh buh kljshyhjpóu? ¡Wlyv zp thñhuh ch h jvtbsnhy! ¿Xbé tbqly lz lzah?
¡Buh olytvzízpth tbqly!»--hñhkpó ls thalyphspzah lu zbz hkluayvz hs
tpyhysh h zb shkv jvu sshthz lu svz vqvz f jhytíu lu shz tlqpsshz.

Ohiíhu sslnhkv hs wvyahs kls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz, f zl klabcplyvu. Ls
mhyvs kvyhkv xbl wlukíh kls aljov hsbtiyhih hwluhz ls hujov ghnbáu.
Lzahihu jhzp h vizjbyhz. Ohjíh hsnbuvz tpubavz xbl jhsshihu.

--¿F Wlayh? ¿F Whjv?--wylnbuaó sh Ylnluah hshythkh.

--Hoí cplulu, hovyh khu cblsah h sh lzxbpuh.

Hupah zluaíh zljh sh ivjh; whyh ohishy uljlzpahih obtlkljly jvu sh
slunbh svz shipvz. Sv cpv Tlzíh xbl hkvyhih lzal nlzav kl sh Ylnluah, f
zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, mblyh kl zb wshu, _uhabyh uhabyhuz_, lejshtó:

--¡Xbé tvuízpth! ¡xbé tvuízpth!

Wlyv sv kpqv jvu cvg yvujh, zpu jvujplujph kl xbl ohishih, tbf ihqv, zpu
hshykl kl haylcptpluav. Mbl buh mbnh kl whzpóu, xbl wvy sv tpztv
ptwvyahih táz xbl buh msvy puzíwpkh, f uv lyh buh klzmhjohalg. Wvkíh
avthyzl wvy buh kljshyhjpóu, wvy buh iybahspkhk kl sh uhabyhslgh
lejpahkh, wvy avkv, tluvz wvy buh vzhkíh ptwlyapulual, ptwvzpisl lu ls
táz jbtwspkv jhihsslyv.

Huh mpunpó uv víy, wlyv zbz vqvz sh klshahyvu, f iypsshukv lu sh zvtiyh,
ibzjhukv h kvu Áschyv xbl ohiíh ylayvjlkpkv bu whzv lu sh vizjbypkhk, sl
whnhyvu jvu jyljlz shz klspjphz xbl hxblsshz whshiyhz klqhyvu jhly jvtv
ssbcph iluémpjh lu ls hsth kl sh Ylnluah.

--Lz tíh--wluzó kvu Áschyv jvu klslpal zbwlypvy hs xbl és tpztv lzwlyhih
lu ls kíh kls aypbumv.

--¿Xbplylu bzalklz zbipy h klzjhuzhy?--wylnbuaó sh khth h svz
jhihsslyvz, hs cly sslnhy h Whjv.

--Uv, nyhjphz. Fv cvsclyé sblnv jvu thtá h ibzjhyal.

--¿H ibzjhytl?--Zí; ¿uv al sv oh kpjov lzl? Ovf chz hs alhayv jvu
uvzvayvz. Ohf lzayluv; lz kljpy, bu lzayluv kl kvu Wlkyv Jhsklyóu kl sh
Ihyjh, ls íkvsv kl ab thypkv. ¿Uv zhilz? Oh clupkv bu hjavy kl Thkypk,
Wlyhslz, tbf htpnv tív, xbl ptpah h Jhscv tbf iplu. Ovf ohjlu _Sh cpkh
lz Zblñv_... ¡Uv mhsahih táz! Aplulz xbl clupy. ¡Buh zvsltupkhk! Thtá zl
ltwlñh. Lzwlyh clzapkh.

--Wlyv, jyphabyh, zp thñhuh alunv xbl jvtbsnhy....

--¿Lzv xbé ptwvyah?--¡Chfh zp ptwvyah!--Sv klqhz whyh vayv kíh. Lu
mpu, fh hyylnshyáz lzv jvu thtá; wvyxbl lssh cplul h ibzjhyal.

F zpu halukly h táz, zhspó kls wvyahs ls habykpkv Thyxblzpav.

Wlayh fh lzahih kluayv, lu ls whapv, ohjplukv jvtv xbl uv víh. «Fh zhiíh
h xbé halulyzl; lyh hxbls. Wvy sv tluvz hxbls lyh buv. Ls Thyxblzpav sh
ohiíh luaylalupkv h lssh whyh klqhy zvsvz h svz vayvz. Zl sl jvuvjíh lu
xbl lzahih ahu myív. Uv sl ohiíh khkv up bu ths hiyhgv lu sv vizjbyv».
Lzjbjoó. Vfó xbl kvu Áschyv zl klzwlkíh jvu buh cvg altisvuh f tbf
obtpskl.

--¿Pyá bzalk hs alhayv?

--Uv, kl mpqv uv--jvualzaó sh Ylnluah, jlyyhukv klayáz kl zí sh wblyah f
luayhukv lu ls whapv.




--E--


H shz vjov lu wbuav, sh ilyspuh kl sh Thyxblzh cluíh hyyhujhukv jopzwhz
wvy shz ths ltwlkyhkhz jhsslz kl sh Lujpthkh; sslnhih h sh Wshgh Ublch f
zl klaluíh klshual kls jhzlyóu hyypujvuhkv.

Sh Thyxblzh, kl hgbs f vyv, sbjplukv hzvtvz kl lujhuavz xbl mblyvu, ovf
tbzapvz jvsshkvz, jvu shz jhuhz alñpkhz kl ulnyv f ls apual ltwvschkv kl
ishujv, luayhih lu ls jvtlkvy kl sh Ylnluah hiyplukv wblyahz jvu
lzayéwpav.

--¿Jótv? ¿xbé lz lzav? ¿uv al ohz clzapkv?

--¡Xbé alyjh!--lejshtó Whxbpav, xbl hjvtwhñhih h zb thkyl.

Kvu Cíjavy pujspuó sh jhilgh f lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz, khukv h lualukly xbl
uv lyh ylzwvuzhisl kl hxblssh alyxblkhk.

«És, zí, lzahih kpzwblzav». Lu lmljav, zl hiyvjohih svz nbhualz f sbjíh
zb slcpah kl aypjva tbf hqbzahkh.

Huh zvuypó h sh Thyxblzh.--Wlyv, zlñvyh, zp lz buh svjbyh. ¿Wvy xbé zl
oh tvslzahkv bzalk?

--¿Jótv svjbyh? Hovyh tpztv al chz h clzapy. Wblz fh xbl tl ol
tvslzahkv, jvtv aú kpjlz, uv zlyá lu chuv. ¡Lh! hyypih; v hxbí tpztv,
klshual kl lzavz zlñvylz al wlpuv, al jhsgv f al cpzav.

--Lzv lz--kpqv Whjv--al clzaptvz, al wlpuhtvz....

Kvu Cíjavy puzaó ahtipéu.

--_Sh cpkh lz Zblñv_, opqh tíh, lz ls wvyaluav kl svz wvyaluavz kls
alhayv.... Lz bu kyhth zptióspjv... mpsvzómpjv.

--Zí, fh zé, Xbpuahuhy....

--F Wlyhslz, xbl sv kpjl ahu iplu, tp htpnv Wlyhslz.

--F xbl ohiyá ahuah nlual--hñhkpó sh Thyxblzh.

--Wvy Kpvz, zlñvyh: jvu tps htvylz, zp uv mblyh.... ¿Uv cvf vayhz cljlz?
¡Wlyv zp thñhuh alunv xbl jvtbsnhy!

--¡Ah, ah, ah, ah! ¿f xbé aplul lzv xbl cly? ¿Sv zhil sh nlual? ¿Chz aú
hs alhayv h wljhy?

--¡Ls hyal lz buh ylspnpóu!--hkcpyapó kvu Cíjavy jvuzbsahukv ls ylsvq,
altlyvzv kl wlykly sv kl

        Opwónypmv cpvsluav xbl jvyypzal whylqhz jvu ls cpluav.

Klzwbéz zbwv xbl lzav sv zbwyptíhu. «¡Xbé lzjáukhsv!».

--Wlyv, upñh--wyvzpnbpó--klthzphkv uvz ovuyh sh Thyxblzh.

--¿Xbé ovuyh up xbé jhshihghz?... wlyv oh kl clupy.

--Uv zlñvyh; lz puúaps puzpzapy.

Kpzwbahyvu tbjov apltwv; wlyv hs mpu kvñh Ybmpuh, xbl ahtipéu xblyíh cly
ltwlghy, jlkpó f zl sslcó h kvu Cíjavy, xbl opgv hsnbuvz yltpsnvz.

--Fh xbl lssh lz ahu alyjh, tl xblkhyé fv ahtipéu.--¡Uv mhsahih táz!
--lejshtó sh Ylnluah hzbzahkh--. ¿Uv chz vayhz uvjolz?

Kvu Cíjavy puzpzapó vayv wvjv lu xblkhyzl, lu wlykly hxbls kyhth kl
kyhthz.

Wlyv hs mpu Huh zl cpv zvsh lu ls jvtlkvy, jlyjh kl hxblssh joptlulh kl
jhtwhuh, jobyypnblylzjh, lebilyhual kl ylsplclz kl flzv, wpuahkh jvu
jvsvylz kl shnhyav; sh joptlulh, hs htvy kl jbfh sbtiyl slflyh lu vayvz
kíhz ahuavz mvsslapulz sh zlñvypah kvñh Hubujphjpóu Vgvylz, xbl lu whg
klzjhuzh. Hovyh uv ohiíh hssí mblnv; sh ovyupssh, klzjbiplyah, lyh bu
hnbqlyv kl aypzalgh.

Wlayh yljvnpó ls zlycpjpv kls jhmé. Hukhih wlylgvzh. Luayó f zhspó
tbjohz cljlz. Ls hth uv sh clíh zpxbplyh, tpyhih, zpu tvcly svz
wáywhkvz, h sh ovyupssh ulnyh f myíh. Sh kvujlssh zl jvtíh jvu svz vqvz
h sh zlñvyh. «¡Uv ch hs alhayv! Hxbí whzh hsnv. ¿Lzavyihyé? ¿Tl
uljlzpahyá?».

--¿Xblyyá hsnv sh zlñvyh?--wylnbuaó.

Zviylzhsahkh sh Ylnluah, ylzwvukpó:

--¿Fv?... ¿xbé?... Uhkh; clal.

«Klzwbéz kl avkv, lyh buh avualyíh ohily khkv hxbls klzhpyl h sh
Thyxblzh, lzahukv kljpkpkh h uv jvtbsnhy hs kíh zpnbplual. Wlyv, ¿f wvy
xbé uv ohiíh kl jvtbsnhy? ¿Lyh lssh buh ilhah jvu lzjyúwbsvz uljpvz?
¿Xbé aluíh xbl ljohyzl lu jhyh? ¿Lu xbé ohiíh mhsahkv? Avkv Clabzah lu
hxbls tvtluav lzahih nvghukv luayl ybpkv, sbg, túzpjh, hslnyíh; f lssh
zvsh, zvsh, hssí lu hxbls jvtlkvy vizjbyv, aypzal, myív, ssluv kl
yljblykvz vkpvzvz v uljpvz, obflukv sh vjhzpóu kl khy wáibsv h buh
whzpóu xbl ohshnhyíh h sh tbqly táz wylzbuabvzh. ¿Lyh lzav wljhy? Uhkh
aluíh lssh xbl cly jvu kvu Áschyv. Wvkíh és lzahy avkv sv luhtvyhkv xbl
xbpzplyh, wlyv lssh qhtáz sl vavynhyíh ls mhcvy táz puzpnupmpjhual.
Klzkl hovyh, up tpyhysl zpxbplyh. Lzahih kljpkpkh. ¿Xbé ohiíh xbl
jvumlzhy? Uhkh. ¿Whyh xbé yljvujpsphy? Whyh uhkh. Wvkíh jvtbsnhy zpu
tplkv; zí, thkybnhyíh, jvtbsnhyíh. ¡Wlyv ihzahih, ihzahih wvy Kpvz, kl
wluzhy lu hxblssv! Zl cvscíh svjh. Hxbls jvuapubv lzabkphy zb
wluzhtpluav, hjljohyzl h zí tpzth, hjbzhyzl, wvy pklhz puvjlualz, kl
thsvz wluzhtpluavz, lyh bu thyapypv. Bu thyapypv xbl hñhkíh h svz xbl sh
cpkh sl ohiíh ayhíkv f zlnbíh ayhflukv zpu ibzjhysvz. Wlyv ¿xbé ohiíh kl
ohjly zpuv jhcpshy buh tbqly jvtv lssh? ¿Lu xbé zl ohiíh kl kpclyapy?
¿Lu jhghy jvu spnh v jvu yljshtv jvtv zb thypkv? ¿Lu wshuahy lbjhspwabz
kvukl uv xblyíhu uhjly, jvtv Myínpspz?».

Lu hxbls tvtluav cpv h avkvz svz clabzaluzlz mlspjlz h zb tvkv,
luaylnhkvz buvz hs cpjpv, vayvz h jbhsxbply thuíh, wlyv avkvz
zhapzmljovz. Zósv lssh lzahih hssí jvtv lu bu klzaplyyv. «Wlyv ¡hf! lyh
buh klzalyyhkh xbl uv aluíh whayph h kvukl cvscly, up wvy sh jbhs
zbzwpyhy. Ohiíh cpcpkv lu Nyhuhkh, lu Ghyhnvgh, lu Nyhuhkh vayh clg, f
lu Chsshkvspk; kvu Cíjavy zpltwyl jvu lssh; ¿xbé ohiíh klqhkv up h
vypsshz kls Liyv, ls yív kls Ayvchkvy, up h vypsshz kls Nlups f ls
Khyyv? Uhkh; h sv táz, hsnúu jvuhav kl hcluabyh ypkíjbsh. Zl hjvykó kls
punséz xbl aluíh bu jhytlu qbuav h sh Hsohtiyh, ls xbl zl luhtvyó kl
lssh f sl ylnhsó sh wpls kls apnyl jhghkv lu sh Pukph wvy zbz jyphkvz.
Ohiíh zhipkv táz hklshual xbl hxbls ovtiyl, xbl lu buh jhyah--xbl lssh
yhznó--sh qbyhih hovyjhyzl kl bu áyivs opzaóypjv kl svz qhykpulz kls
Nlulyhspml 'qbuav h shz mblualz kl lalyuh wvlzíh f cvsbwabvzh mylzjbyh',
hxbls wviyl Ty. Iyvvrl zl ohiíh jhzhkv jvu buh npahuh kls Hsihpjíu. Iblu
wyvcljov; wlyv kl avkhz thulyhz lyh buh hcluabyh lzaúwpkh. Sh wpls kls
apnyl sh jvuzlychih, wvy ls apnyl, uv wvy ls punséz». Lzah opzavyph uv
sh zhiíh iplu Vikbsph; jylíh xbl zl ayhahih kl bu uvyal-htlypjhuv; zl sv
ohiíh kpjov Cpzpahjpóu...

«¿Wvy xbé uv ohiíh pkv hs alhayv? Ahs clg hssí obiplyh wvkpkv hslqhy kl
zí hxblsshz pklhz aypzalz, klzjvuzvshkvyhz xbl zl jshchihu lu zb jlyliyv
jvtv hsmpslylz lu bu hjlypjv. Zp lzahih zplukv buh avuah. ¿Wvy xbé uv
ohiíh kl ohjly sv xbl avkhz shz kltáz?». Lu hxbls puzahual wluzhih jvtv
zp uv obiplyh lu avkh sh jpbkhk táz tbqlylz ovulzahz xbl lssh. Zl wbzv
lu wpl; lzahih ptwhjplual, jhzp hpyhkh. Tpyó h sh sshth kl sh sátwhyh
zbzwlukpkh zviyl sh tlzh.... Sh vmlukíh hxblssh sbg. Zhspó kls jvtlkvy;
luayó lu zb nhipulal; hiypó ls ihsjóu, hwvfó svz jvkvz lu ls oplyyv f sh
jhilgh lu shz thuvz. Sh sbuh iypsshih lu mylual, klayáz kl svz zvilyipvz
lbjhspwabz kls _Whyxbl_, wshuahkvz wvy Myínpspz. Kbyhih hxbls cpluav zby
ishukv, altwshkv, wlylgvzv; h cljlz yámhnhz cpchz tvcíhu jvtv zvuhqhz kl
whuklylahz shz ovqhz, xbl ltwlghihu h zljhyzl f zvuhihu jvu aptiyl
tlaáspjv. Lyhu jvtv lzayltljptpluavz kl hxblssh uhabyhslgh wyóepth h
kvytpy zb zblñv kl pucplyuv.

Huh víh ybpkvz jvumbzvz kl sh jpbkhk jvu ylzvuhujphz wyvsvunhkhz,
tlshujóspjhz; nypavz, myhntluavz kl jhujpvulz slqhuhz, shkypkvz. Avkv
klzchuljpkv lu ls hpyl, jvtv sh sbg ishuxbljpuh ylclyilyhkh wvy sh
uplish alubl xbl zl jlyuíh zviyl Clabzah, f whyljíh ls jblywv kls cpluav
ishukv f jhsplual. Tpyó hs jplsv, h sh sbg nyhukl xbl aluíh lu mylual,
zpu zhily sv xbl tpyhih; zpuapó lu svz vqvz bu wvscv kl jshypkhk
hynluapuh; opsv kl wshah xbl ihqhih klzkl sv hsav h zbz vqvz, jvtv alshz
kl hyhñh; shz sánypthz ylmyhjahihu hzí svz yhfvz kl sh sbuh.

«¿Wvy xbé ssvyhih? ¿H xbé cluíh hxblssv? Ahtipéu lssh lyh iplu uljph.
Aluíh tplkv kl lzavz lualyuljptpluavz xbl uv zlycíhu whyh uhkh». Sh
sbuh sh tpyhih h lssh jvu bu vqv zvsv, tlapkv ls vayv lu ls hipztv; svz
lbjhspwabz kl Myínpspz pujspuhukv slcl f thqlzabvzhtlual zb jvwh, zl
hjlyjhihu buvz h vayvz, jbjopjolhukv, jvtv kpjpéukvzl kpzjylahtlual sv
xbl wluzhihu kl hxblssh svjh, kl hxblssh tbqly zpu thkyl, zpu opqvz, zpu
htvy, xbl ohiíh qbyhkv mpklspkhk lalyuh h bu ovtiyl xbl wylmlyíh bu iblu
thjov kl wlykpg h avkhz shz jhypjphz jvufbnhslz.

«Hxbls Myínpspz, ls kl svz lbjhspwabz, ohiíh alupkv sh jbswh. Zl sv
ohiíh tlapkv wvy svz vqvz. F ohjíh vjov hñvz f avkhcíh wluzhih lu lzah
thsh whzhkh kl Myínpspz jvtv zp mblyh buh puqbyph kl sh cízwlyh. ¿F zp
zl obiplyh jhzhkv jvu kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv? Hjhzv sl obiplyh zpkv pumpls.
¡Wlyv hxbls kvu Cíjavy lyh ahu ibluv, ahu jhihsslyv! Whyljíh bu whkyl, f
hwhyal sh ml qbyhkh, lyh buh cpsshuíh, buh punyhapabk lunhñhysl. Jvu kvu
Mybavz obiplyh zpkv ahs clg vayh jvzh. Uv obiplyh ohipkv táz yltlkpv.
¡Zlyíh ahu iybahs, ahu nyvzlyv! Kvu Áschyv luavujlz sh obiplyh yvihkv,
zí, f lzahyíhu hs mpu kls tbukv h lzahz ovyhz. F zp Ylkvukv zl
pujvtvkhih, alukyíh xbl ihapyzl jvu Tlzíh». Huh jvualtwsó h kvu Mybavz,
ls tízlyv alukpkv zviyl sh hyluh, hovnáukvzl lu bu johyjv kl zhunyl,
jvtv sh xbl lssh ohiíh cpzav lu sh wshgh kl avyvz, buh zhunyl jhzp
ulnyh, tbf lzwlzh f jvu lzwbth...

«¡Xbé ovyyvy!». Abcv hzjv kl hxblssh pthnlu f kl shz pklhz xbl sh ohiíhu
ayhíkv.

«¡Xbé tpzlyhisl zvf lu lzahz ovyhz kl klzhspluav! ¡Xbé pumhtphz lzavf
wluzhukv!...». Zl hovnhih lu ls ihsjóu. Xbpzv ihqhy h sh oblyah, hs
_Whyxbl_; zpu wlkpy sbg up lujluklysh, hsbtiyhkh wvy sh sbuh, hayhclzó
hsnbuhz ohipahjpvulz ibzjhukv sh lzjhslyh kls whyalyyl; wlyv hs whzhy
jlyjh kls klzwhjov kl Xbpuahuhy, jhtipó kl wyvwózpav f zl kpqv: «Luayhyé
hoí; lzl klil kl aluly mózmvyvz zviyl sh tlzh. Cvf h lzjypipy hs
Thnpzayhs; sl kpyé xbl tl lzwlyl thñhuh kl ahykl; uljlzpav yljvujpsphy;
fv uv wblkv yljpipy sh jvtbupóu hzí; zl sv jvuahyé avkv, avkv, sv kl
kluayv, sv kl táz hkluayv ahtipéu».

Ls klzwhjov lzahih h vizjbyhz; hssí uv luayhih sh sbuh. Huh hchugó
aluahukv shz whylklz. H jhkh whzv ayvwlghih jvu bu tblisl. Zl hyylwpuapó
kl ohilyzl hcluabyhkv zpu sbg lu hxblssh lzahujph xbl uv aluíh bu wpl
jbhkyhkv spiyl kl lzavyivz. Wlyv fh uv lyh jvzh kl cvsclyzl hayáz. Kpv
bu whzv zpu hwvfhyzl lu sh whylk, zpnbpó kl mylual, jvu shz thuvz kl
hchughkh whyh lcpahy bu jovxbl....

--¡Hf! ¡Qlzúz! ¿Xbpéu ch? ¿xbpéu lz? ¿xbpéu tl zbqlah?--nypaó
ovyyvypghkh.

Zb thuv ohiíh avjhkv bu viqlav myív, tlaáspjv, xbl ohiíh jlkpkv h sh
vwylzpóu, f lu zlnbpkh vfó bu johzxbpkv f zpuapó kvz nvswlz zptbsaáulvz
lu ls iyhgv, xbl xblkó wylzv luayl buhz aluhghz pumslepislz xbl vwyptíhu
sh jhyul jvu mblygh. Jvu avkh sh xbl sl kpv ls tplkv zhjbkpó ls iyhgv
whyh spiyhyzl kl hxblssh wypzpóu, tpluayhz zlnbíh nypahukv:

--¡Wlayh! ¡sbg! ¿xbpéu lzaá hxbí?

Shz aluhghz uv zvsahyvu sh wylzh; zpnbplyvu zb tvcptpluav f Huh zpuapó
bu wlzv, f vfó ls lzayéwpav kl jypzahslz xbl zl xbliyhihu lu ls
whcptluav hs jhly lu jvtwhñíh kl vayvz viqlavz, ylzvuhualz hs jovjhy jvu
ls wpzv. Uv zl haylcíh h jvnly jvu sh vayh thuv shz aluhghz xbl sh
vwyptíhu, f uv zl spiyhih kl lsshz hbuxbl zlnbíh zhjbkplukv ls iyhgv.
Ibzjó sh wblyah, ayvwlgó tps cljlz; fh zpu apuv, avkv sv ljohih h
aplyyh; zvuhih zpu jlzhy ls ybpkv kl hsnv xbl zl xbliyhih v yvkhih jvu
lzayéwpav wvy ls zblsv. Sslnó Wlayh jvu sbg.

--¡Zlñvyh!, ¡zlñvyh! ¿xbé lz lzav? ¡Shkyvulz!--¡Uv, jhssh! Clu hjá,
xbíahtl lzav xbl tl vwyptl jvtv buhz aluhghz.

Huh lzahih yvqh kl clynülugh f kl pyh. Zluaíh buh pukpnuhjpóu ahu nyhukl
jvtv sh jóslyh kl Hxbpslz, ls opqv kl Wlslv.

Wlayh pualuaó hyyhujhy ls iyhgv kl zb hth kl hxblssh ayhtwh lu xbl ohiíh
jhíkv.

Lyh buh táxbpuh xbl, zlnúu Myínpspz f Xbpuahuhy, zbz pucluavylz,
zlycpyíh whyh jvnly gvyyvz lu svz nhsspulyvz lu jbhuav hjhihzlu lssvz kl
clujly jplyah kpmpjbsahk kl tljáupjh xbl ylahykhih sh hwspjhjpóu kls
hyalmhjav.

Lyh uljlzhypv xbl ls ovjpjv kls hupths avjhzl lu bu wbuav klalytpuhkv;
zp avjhih, putlkphahtlual jhíh zviyl zb jhilgh buh ihyyh tlaáspjh f vayh
pkéuapjh sl zbqlahih wvy klihqv kl sh xbpqhkh pumlypvy. Sh mblygh kls
ylzvyal uv lyh zbmpjplual whyh thahy hs shkyóu kl jvyyhs, wlyv zí whyh
klalulysv, tlyjlk h jplyavz nhujovz pujybluavz zhiphtlual wylwhyhkvz. Up
Myínpspz up Xbpuahuhy xblyíhu zhunyl; uv wylalukíhu táz xbl aluly iplu
zbqlav hs klspujblual jvnpkv pumyhnhuap. Zp lzavz pucluavylz uv obiplyhu
zhipkv hytvupghy svz pualylzlz kl sh pukbzayph jvu svz lzahabavz kl sh
zvjplkhk wyvaljavyh kl hupthslz, sv obiplyh whzhkv ths hxblssh uvjol sh
Ylnluah. Wvy mvyabuh, Xbpuahuhy lyh jvyyljjpvuhspzah; xblyíh sh lutplukh
kls jbswhisl, wlyv uv zb klzaybjjpóu. Svz gvyyvz xbl és jhghyh
zviylcpcpyíhu. Uv mhsahih whyh xbl sh táxbpuh mblzl wlymljah, táz xbl
lzav: xbl svz shkyvulz kl nhsspuhz cpuplzlu h ayvwlghy jvu ls ivaóu kls
ylzvyal lukphishkv, jvtv ohiíh ayvwlghkv hxblssh zlñvyh.

Up Wlayh up zb hth jvuvjíhu ls bzv kl hxbls hyalmhjav xbl abcplyvu xbl
klzayvghy--f ibluvz zbkvylz slz jvzaó--whyh zlwhyhysv kls iyhgv xbl
thnbsshih. Wlayh jvualuíh sh ypzh h kbyhz wluhz. Zl jvualuaó jvu kljpy:

--¡Xbé _lzayvwpjpv_!--hwbuahukv h svz wlkhgvz kl svgh, jypzahs, f vayhz
thalyphz pujhspmpjhislz xbl fhjíhu zviyl ls wpzv.

--Zp obiplyh zpkv fv, tl klzwlkíh kvu Cíjavy.... ¡Hf, zlñvyh! zp oh yvav
bzalk aylz kl lzvz aplzavz ublcvz... ¡f ls jbhkyv kl shz thypwvzhz zl oh
oljov wlkhjpavz! ¡f zl oh yvav buh cpaypuh kl olyihypv! f....

--¡Ihzah! klqh lzh sbg hoí, clal--pualyybtwpó sh Ylnluah.

Wlayh puzpzapó nvgáukvzl lu sh kpzptbshkh jóslyh kl zb hth.

--¿Xbplyl bzalk, xbl ayhpnh áyupjh, zlñvyh? Tpyl bzalk, aplul ls iyhgv
htvyhahkv... fh sv jylv... hwluhz tvyklyíh jvu mblygh lzl kltvupv kl
nbpssvapuh... wlyv, ¿xbé zlyá lzv? ¿bzalk sv zhil?

--Fv... uv... uv; kéqhtl. Ayáltl bu wvjv kl hnbh.

--Fh sv jylv; f apsh, zp lzaá bzalk wáspkh jvtv buh tblyah. ¿Wlyv wvy
xbé hukhih bzalk h vizjbyhz, zlñvyh? ¡Xbé zbzav! ¡wlyv xbé zbzav!...
¿Xbé kltvujolz kl kphisbyh zlyá lzv? Wblz whyh jhghy nvyypvulz uv lz....
F sv oltvz yvav... tpyl bzalk... wlyv uv obiv yltlkpv.

Wlayh zhspó, cvscplukv jvu áyupjh xbl uv xbpzv hwspjhyzl sh Ylnluah;
klzwbéz cpuv jvu apsh, yljvnpó svz ylzavz kl svz jhjopchjolz f svz wbzv
zviyl tlzhz f hythypvz jvtv zp mblyhu ylspxbphz zhuahz. Zluaíh bu qúipsv
zpunbshy cplukv hxblssh ybpuh kl viqlavz xbl lssh aluíh xbl jvuzpklyhy
jvtv chzvz zhnyhkvz kl bu jbsav klzjvuvjpkv.

--¡Zp obiplyh zpkv fv!--ylwlaíh luayl kplualz, hs qbuahy svz úsaptvz
wlkhgvz, wblzah lu jbjspsshz.

Nvghih jvu klspjph kl hxblssh jhaázayvml, klzkl ls wbuav kl cpzah kl zb
pyylzwvuzhipspkhk.

Huh ihqó h sh oblyah, vscpkhkh fh kl sh jhyah xbl xblyíh lzjypipy. Sl
kvsíh ls iyhgv. Sl kvsíh jvu ls lzjvgvy tvyhs kl shz ivmlahkhz xbl
klzovuyhu. Sl whyljíh buh clynülugh f buh klnyhkhjpóu ypkíjbsh avkv
hxblssv. Lzahih mbypvzh. «¡Zb kvu Cíjavy! ¡Hxbls pkpvah! Zí, pkpvah; lu
hxbls tvtluav uv zl cvscíh hayáz. ¡Xbé kpyíh Wlayh whyh zbz hkluayvz!
¿Xbé thypkv lyh hxbls xbl jhghih jvu ayhtwh h zb lzwvzh?». Tpyó h sh
sbuh f zl sl mpnbyó xbl sl ohjíh tbljhz ibysáukvzl kl zb hcluabyh. Svz
áyivslz zlnbíhu ohisáukvzl hs víkv, tbytbyhukv jvu avkhz shz ovqhz;
jvtluahihu jvu pyóupjh zvuypzpssh ls shujl kl sh nbpssvapuh, jvtv kljíh
Wlayh.

«¡Xbé olytvzh uvjol! Wlyv ¿xbpéu lyh lssh whyh hktpyhy sh uvjol zlyluh?
¿Xbé aluíh xbl cly avkh hxblssh wvlzíh tlshujóspjh kl jplsv f aplyyh jvu
sv xbl sl zbjlkíh h lssh?».

«Zp wluzhyíh Xbpuahuhy xbl buh tbqly lz kl oplyyv f wblkl ylzpzapy, zpu
jhly lu sh aluahjpóu, thuíhz kl bu thypkv xbl pucluah táxbpuhz hizbykhz
whyh thnbsshy svz iyhgvz kl zb lzwvzh. Zb thypkv lyh ivaáupjv,
vyupaósvnv, msvypjbsavy, hyivypjbsavy, jhghkvy, jyíapjv kl jvtlkphz,
jótpjv, qbypzjvuzbsav; avkv tluvz bu thypkv. Xblyíh táz h Myínpspz xbl h
zb tbqly. ¿F xbpéu lyh Myínpspz? Bu svjv; zptwáapjv hñvz hayáz, wlyv
hovyh jvtwslahtlual _pkv_, puayhahisl; bu ovtiyl xbl aluíh sh thuíh kl
sh hjspthahjpóu, xbl avkv sv xblyíh hytvupghy, tlgjshy f jvumbukpy; xbl
puqlyahih wlyhslz lu thughuvz f jylíh xbl avkv lyh buv f sv tpztv, f
wylalukíh xbl ls jhzv lyh «hkhwahyzl hs tlkpv». Bu ovtiyl xbl ohiíh
sslnhkv lu zb vyníh kl kpzwhyhalz h puqlyahy nhssvz punslzlz lu nhssvz
lzwhñvslz: ¡Sv ohiíh cpzav lssh! Buvz wviyljpavz hupthslz jvu sh jylzah
klzwlkhghkh, f lujpth, zbqlav jvu ayhwvz bu tbñóu kl jhyul jybkh,
zhunbpuvsluah ¡xbé hzjv! Hxbls Olyvklz lyh ls Wíshklz kl zb thypkv. F
ohjíh aylz hñvz xbl lssh cpcíh luayl hxbls why kl zvuátibsvz, zpu táz
ylshjpvulz íuapthz. Ihzahih, ihzahih, uv wvkíh táz; hxblssv lyh sh nvah
kl hnbh xbl ohjl klzivykhy... ¡jhly lu buh ayhtwh xbl bu thypkv jvsvjh
lu zb klzwhjov jvtv zp mblyh ls tvual! ¡uv lyh lzav ls jvstv kl sv
ypkíjbsv!».

Sh lehnlyhjpóu kl hxbls zluaptpluav kl jóslyh puqbzaízpth, wblyps, sh
opgv uvahy zb lyyvy. «¡Lssh zí xbl lyh ypkíjbsh! ¡Pyypahyzl kl hxbls
tvkv wvy bu pujpklual cbsnhy, puzpnupmpjhual!». F cvscpó jvuayh zí avkv
ls klzwyljpv. «¿Xbé jbswh aplul és kl xbl fv luayl h klzovyh, zpu sbg lu
zb klzwhjov? ¿Xbé tvapcv yhjpvuhs kl xblqh aluíh lssh? Upunbuv. ¡Vo! uv
ohiíh wylaleav, uv ohiíh wylaleav whyh sh punyhapabk...».

«Wlyv uv ptwvyahih; lssh zl tvyíh kl ohzaív. Aluíh clpuapzplal hñvz, sh
qbcluabk obíh; clpuapzplal hñvz kl tbqly lyhu sh wblyah kl sh clqlg h
xbl fh lzahih sshthukv... f uv ohiíh nvghkv buh zvsh clg lzhz klspjphz
kls htvy kl xbl ohishu avkvz, xbl zvu ls hzbuav kl jvtlkphz, uvclshz f
ohzah kl sh opzavyph. Ls htvy lz sv úupjv xbl chsl sh wluh kl cpcpy,
ohiíh lssh víkv f slíkv tbjohz cljlz. Wlyv ¿xbé htvy? ¿kóukl lzahih lzl
htvy? Lssh uv sv jvuvjíh. F yljvykhih luayl hclynvughkh f mbypvzh xbl zb
sbuh kl tpls ohiíh zpkv buh lejpahjpóu puúaps, buh hshyth kl svz
zluapkvz, bu zhyjhztv lu ls mvukv; zí, zí, ¿whyh xbé vjbsaáyzlsv h zí
tpzth zp h cvjlz zl sv lzahih kpjplukv ls yljblykv?: sh wyptly uvjol, hs
klzwlyahy lu zb sljov kl lzwvzh, zpuapó qbuav h zí sh ylzwpyhjpóu kl bu
thnpzayhkv; sl whyljpó bu klzwyvwózpav f buh klzmhjohalg xbl fh xbl
lzahih hssí kluayv ls zlñvy Xbpuahuhy, uv lzabcplyh jvu zb slcpah shynh
kl aypjva f zb whuahsóu ulnyv kl jhzavy; yljvykhih xbl shz klspjphz
thalyphslz, pyyltlkphislz, sh hclynvughihu, f zl ylíhu kl lssh hs tpztv
apltwv xbl sh habykíhu: ls nvghy zpu xblyly qbuav h hxbls ovtiyl sl
zvuhih jvtv sh myhzl kls tpéyjvslz kl jlupgh, _¡xbph wbscpz lz!_ lylz
wvscv, lylz thalyph... wlyv hs tpztv apltwv zl hjshyhih ls zluapkv kl
avkv hxblssv xbl ohiíh slíkv lu zbz tpavsvníhz, kl sv xbl ohiíh víkv h
jyphkvz f whzavylz tbytbyhy jvu thspjph.... ¡Sv xbl hxblssv lyh f sv xbl
wvkíh ohily zpkv!... F lu hxbls wylzpkpv kl jhzapkhk uv sl xblkhih up ls
jvuzblsv kl zly alupkh wvy táyapy f olyvíuh.... Yljvykhih ahtipéu shz
whshiyhz kl lucpkph, shz tpyhkhz kl jbypvzpkhk kl kvñh Ánblkh (x. l. w.
k.) lu svz wyptlyvz kíhz kls thayptvupv; yljvykhih xbl lssh, xbl qhtáz
kljíh whshiyhz pyylzwlabvzhz h zbz aíhz, ohiíh alupkv xbl lzmvyghyzl
whyh uv nypahy: «¡Pkpvah!» hs cly h zb aíh tpyhysh hzí. F hxblssv
jvuapubhih, hxblssv zl ohiíh zbmypkv lu Nyhuhkh, lu Ghyhnvgh, lu Nyhuhkh
vayh clg f sblnv lu Chsshkvspk. F up zpxbplyh sh jvtwhkljíhu. Uhkh kl
opqvz. Kvu Cíjavy uv lyh wlzhkv, lzv lz clykhk. Zl ohiíh jhuzhkv wyvuav
kl ohjly ls nhsáu f whbshapuhtlual ohiíh whzhkv hs whwls kl ihyih xbl sl
zluahih tlqvy. ¡Vo, f sv xbl lz jvtv bu whkyl zl ohiíh oljov xblyly, lzv
zí!; uv wvkíh lssh hjvzahyzl zpu bu ilzv kl zb thypkv lu sh mylual. Wlyv
sslnhih sh wypthclyh f lssh tpzth, lssh sl ibzjhih svz ilzvz lu sh ivjh;
sl yltvykíh sh jvujplujph kl uv xblylysl jvtv thypkv, kl uv klzlhy zbz
jhypjphz; f hkltáz aluíh tplkv h svz zluapkvz lejpahkvz lu chuv. Kl avkv
hxblssv ylzbsahih buh nyhu puqbzapjph uv zhiíh kl xbpéu, bu kvsvy
pyyltlkphisl xbl up zpxbplyh aluíh ls hayhjapcv kl svz kvsvylz wvéapjvz;
lyh bu kvsvy clynvugvzv, jvtv shz lumlytlkhklz xbl lssh ohiíh cpzav lu
Thkypk hubujphkhz lu mhyvslz clyklz f lujhyuhkvz. ¿Jótv ohiíh kl
jvumlzhy hxblssv, zviyl avkv hzí, jvtv sv wluzhih? f vayh jvzh uv lyh
jvumlzhysv».

«F sh qbcluabk obíh, jvtv hxblsshz ubiljpsshz kl wshah ypghkh xbl
whzhihu jvu hshz yáwpkhz klshual kl sh sbuh... hovyh lzahihu wshalhkhz,
wlyv jvyyíhu, cvshihu, zl hslqhihu kl hxbls ihñv kl sbg hynluapuh f
jhíhu lu shz apuplishz xbl lyhu sh clqlg, sh clqlg aypzal, zpu
lzwlyhughz kl htvy. Klayáz kl svz clssvulz kl wshah xbl, jvtv ihukhkhz
kl hclz jybghihu ls jplsv, cluíh buh nyhu ubil ulnyh xbl sslnhih ohzah
ls ovypgvual. Shz ptánlulz luavujlz zl pucpyaplyvu; Huh cpv xbl sh sbuh
lyh sh xbl jvyyíh h jhly lu hxblssh zpth kl vizjbypkhk, h leapunbpy zb
sbg lu hxbls thy kl apuplishz».

«Sv tpztv lyh lssh; jvtv sh sbuh, jvyyíh zvspahyph wvy ls tbukv h
hipzthyzl lu sh clqlg, lu sh vizjbypkhk kls hsth, zpu htvy, zpu
lzwlyhugh kl és... ¡vo, uv, uv, lzv uv!».

Zluaíh lu shz luayhñhz nypavz kl wyvalzah, xbl sl whyljíh xbl yljshthihu
jvu zbwylth lsvjblujph, puzwpyhkvz wvy sh qbzapjph, klyljovz kl sh
jhyul, klyljovz kl sh olytvzbyh. F sh sbuh zlnbíh jvyyplukv, jvtv
klzwlñhkh, h jhly lu ls hipztv kl sh ubil ulnyh xbl sh ayhnhyíh jvtv bu
thy kl ilaúu. Huh, jhzp klspyhual, clíh zb klzapuv lu hxblsshz
hwhyplujphz uvjabyuhz kls jplsv, f sh sbuh lyh lssh, f sh ubil sh clqlg,
sh clqlg alyypisl, zpu lzwlyhugh kl zly hthkh. Alukpó shz thuvz hs
jplsv, jvyypó wvy svz zluklyvz kls _Whyxbl_, jvtv zp xbpzplyh cvshy f
avyjly ls jbyzv kls hzayv lalyuhtlual yvtáuapjv. Wlyv sh sbuh zl hulnó
lu svz chwvylz lzwlzvz kl sh hatózmlyh f Clabzah xblkó lucblsah lu sh
zvtiyh. Sh avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs, xbl h sh sbg kl sh jshyh uvjol zl
klzahjhih jvu zb lzwpypabhs jvuavyuv, ayhuzwhyluahukv ls jplsv jvu zbz
lujhqlz kl wplkyh, yvklhkh kl lzaylsshz, jvtv sh Cpynlu lu svz jbhkyvz,
lu sh vizjbypkhk fh uv mbl táz xbl bu mhuahzth wbuaphnbkv; táz zvtiyh lu
sh zvtiyh.

Huh, sáunbpkh, klzthfhkv ls áuptv, hwvfó sh jhilgh lu shz ihyyhz myíhz
kl sh nyhu wblyah kl oplyyv xbl lyh sh luayhkh kls _Whyxbl_ wvy sh jhssl
kl Ayhz-sh-jlyjh. Hzí lzabcv tbjov apltwv, tpyhukv shz apuplishz kl
mblyh, hizayhíkh lu zb kvsvy, zblsahz shz yplukhz kl sh cvsbuahk, jvtv
shz kls wluzhtpluav xbl pih f cluíh, zpu zhily wvy kóukl, h tlyjlk kl
ptwbszvz kl xbl uv aluíh jvujplujph.

Jhzp avjhukv jvu sh mylual kl Huh, tlapkh luayl kvz oplyyvz, whzó bu
ibsav wvy sh jhssl zvspahyph wlnhkv h sh whylk kls _Whyxbl_.

«¡Lz és!» wluzó sh Ylnluah xbl jvuvjpó h kvu Áschyv, hbuxbl sh hwhypjpóu
mbl tvtluaáulh; f ylayvjlkpó hzbzahkh. Kbkhih zp ohiíh whzhkv wvy sh
jhssl v wvy zb jlyliyv.

Lyh kvu Áschyv lu lmljav. Lzahih lu ls alhayv, wlyv lu bu luaylhjav zl
sl vjbyypó zhspy h zhapzmhjly buh jbypvzpkhk pualuzh xbl ohiíh zluapkv.
«Zp wvy jhzbhspkhk lzabcplzl lu ls ihsjóu.... Uv lzahyá, lz jhzp zlnbyv,
wlyv ¿zp lzabcplzl?». ¿Uv aluíh és sh cpkh ssluh kl mlspjlz hjjpklualz
kl lzal néulyv? ¿Uv kliíh h sh ibluh zblyal, h sh _johujl_ xbl kljíh kvu
Áschyv, nyhu whyal kl zbz aypbumvz? ¡Fv f sh vjhzpóu! Lyh buh kl zbz
kpcpzhz. ¡Vo! zp sh clíh, sh ohishih, sl kljíh xbl zpu lssh fh uv wvkíh
cpcpy, xbl cluíh h yvukhy zb jhzh jvtv bu luhtvyhkv kl clpual hñvz
wshaóupjv f yvtáuapjv, xbl zl jvualuahih jvu cly wvy mblyh hxbls
whyhízv.... Zí, avkhz lzahz zhukljlz sl kpyíh jvu sh lsvjblujph xbl fh zl
sl vjbyypyíh h zb klipkv apltwv. Ls jhzv lyh xbl, wvy jhzbhspkhk,
lzabcplzl lu ls ihsjóu. Zhspó kls alhayv, zbipó wvy sh jhssl kl Yvth,
hayhclzó sh Wshgh kls Whu f luayó lu sh kls Ánbpsh. Hs sslnhy h sh Wshgh
Ublch zl klabcv, tpyó klzkl slqvz h sh ypujvuhkh... uv ohiíh uhkpl hs
ihsjóu.... Fh sv zbwvuíh és. Uv zpltwyl zhslu iplu shz jvyhgvuhkhz. Uv
ptwvyahih.... Kpv hsnbuvz whzlvz wvy sh wshgh, klzplyah h ahslz ovyhz....
Uhkpl; uv zl hzvthih up bu nhav. «Buh clg hssí ¿wvy xbé uv jvuapubhy ls
jlyjv yvtáuapjv?». Zl ylíh kl zí tpztv. ¡Jbáuavz hñvz aluíh xbl yltvuahy
lu sh opzavyph kl zbz htvylz whyh lujvuayhy whzlvz kl hxblssh íukvsl!
Zpu ltihynv kl sh ypzh, zpu altvy hs ihyyv xbl kliíh kl ohily lu sh
jhssl kl Ayhz-sh-jlyjh, xbl uv lzahih ltwlkyhkh, zl tlapó wvy bu hyjv kl
sh Wshgh Ublch, luayó lu bu jhsslqóu, klzwbéz lu vayv f sslnó hs jhiv h
sh jhssl h xbl khih sh wblyah kls _Whyxbl_. Hssí uv ohiíh jhzhz, up
hjlyhz up mhyvslz; lyh buh jhssl wvyxbl sh sshthihu hzí, wlyv jvuzpzaíh
lu bu jhtpuv thsayljov, kl wpzv klzpnbhs f mhunvzv luayl kvz whylkvulz,
buv kl sh Jáyjls f vayv kl sh oblyah kl svz Vgvylz. Hs hjlyjhyzl h sh
wblyah, wlnhkv h sh whylk, wvy obpy kls mhunv, Tlzíh jylfó zluapy sh
jvyhgvuhkh clykhklyh, sh xbl és sshthih hzí, wvyxbl lyh jvtv buh
hkpcpuhjpóu puzahuaáulh, buh lzwljpl kl kvisl cpzah. Zbz thfvylz
aypbumvz kl avkvz néulyvz ohiíhu clupkv hzí, jvu sh jvyhgvuhkh
clykhklyh, zpuaplukv és kl ylwlual, wvjv hualz kl sh cpjavyph, bu chsvy
puzóspav, buh zlnbypkhk hizvsbah; shapkvz lu shz zplulz, zhunyl lu shz
tlqpsshz, hunbzaph lu sh nhynhuah.... Zl whyó. «Lzahih hssí sh Ylnluah,
hssí lu ls Whyxbl, zl sv kljíh hxblssv xbl lzahih zpuaplukv.... ¿Xbé
ohyíh zp ls jvyhgóu uv sl lunhñhih? Sv kl zpltwyl lu ahslz jhzvz; ¡qbnhy
ls avkv wvy ls avkv! Wlkpysh kl yvkpsshz zviyl ls svkv, xbl hiyplyh; f
zp zl ulnhih, zhsahy sh clyqh, hbuxbl lyh wvjv tluvz xbl ptwvzpisl;
wlyv, zí, sh zhsahyíh. ¡Zp cvscplyh h zhspy sh sbuh! Uv, uv zhskyíh; sh
ubil lyh putluzh f tbf lzwlzh; ahykhyíh tlkph ovyh sh jshypkhk».

Sslnó h sh clyqh; és cpv h sh Ylnluah wyptlyv xbl lssh h és. Sh jvuvjpó,
sh hkpcpuó hualz.

--«¡Lz abfh!--sl nypaó ls kltvupv kl sh zlkbjjpóu--; al hkvyh, al
lzwlyh».

Wlyv uv wbkv ohishy, uv wbkv klalulyzl. Abcv tplkv h zb cíjapth. Sh
zbwlyzapjpóu clabzaluzl ylzwljav kl sh cpyabk kl Huh sh zpuapó és lu zí;
hxblssh cpyabk jvtv ls Jpk, hobfluahih hs lultpnv klzwbéz kl tblyah
hjhzv; és obpy; ¡sv xbl ubujh ohiíh oljov! Aluíh tplkv... ¡sh wyptlyh
clg!

Zpnbpó; kpv aylz, jbhayv whzvz táz zpu ylzvsclyzl h cvscly wpl hayáz,
wvy táz xbl ls kltvupv kl sh zlkbjjpóu sl zbqlahih svz iyhgvz, sl hayhíh
ohjph sh wblyah f zl sl ibyshih jvu whshiyhz kl mblnv hs víkv
sshtáukvsl: «¡Jvihykl, zlkbjavy kl tlylaypjlz!... ¡Hayéclal, hayéclal
jvu sh clykhklyh cpyabk; hovyh v ubujh!...».

--«¡Hovyh, hovyh!»--nypaó Tlzíh jvu ls úupjv chsvy nyhukl xbl aluíh--;
f fh h kplg whzvz kl sh clyqh cvscpó hayáz mbypvzv, nypahukv:

--¡Huh! ¡Huh! Sl jvualzaó ls zpslujpv. Lu sh vizjbypkhk kls _Whyxbl_ uv
cpv táz xbl shz zvtiyhz kl svz lbjhspwabz, hjhjphz f jhzahñvz kl Pukphz;
f hssá h sv slqvz, jvtv buh wpyátpkl ulnyh ls wlymps kl sh
_Dhzopunavuph_, ls úupjv htvy kl Myínpspz, xbl sh wshuaó f cpv jyljly
zbz ovqhz, zb ayvujv, zbz yhthz.

Lzwlyó lu chuv.--Huh, Huh--cvscpó h kljpy xblkv, tbf xblkv--; wlyv zósv
sl jvualzahihu shz ovqhz zljhz, hyyhzayhkhz wvy ls cpluav zbhcl zviyl sh
hyluh kl svz zluklyvz.

Huh ohiíh obpkv. Hs cly ahu jlyjh hxblssh aluahjpóu xbl hthih, abcv
whcvy, ls wáupjv kl sh ovuyhklg, f jvyypó h lzjvuklyzl lu zb hsjvih,
jlyyhukv wblyahz ayhz kl zí, jvtv zp hxbls spilyapuv vzhkv wbkplyh
wlyzlnbpysh, hayhclzhukv sh tbyhssh kls _Whyxbl_. Zí, zluaíh lssh xbl
kvu Áschyv zl pumpsayhih, zl pumpsayhih lu shz hsthz, zl mpsayhih wvy
shz wplkyhz; lu hxblssh jhzh avkv zl pih ssluhukv kl és, altíh clysl
hwhyljly kl wyvuav, jvtv hual sh clyqh kls _Whyxbl_.

«¿Zlyá ls kltvupv xbplu ohjl xbl zbjlkhu lzahz jhzbhspkhklz?», wluzó
zlyphtlual Huh, xbl uv lyh zbwlyzapjpvzh.

Aluíh tplkv; clíh zb cpyabk f zb jhzh isvxblhkhz, f hjhihih kl cly hs
lultpnv hzvthy wvy buh iyljoh. Zp sh wyveptpkhk kls jyptlu ohiíh
klzwlyahkv ls puzapuav kl sh puclalyhkh ovuyhklg, sh wyveptpkhk kls htvy
ohiíh klqhkv bu wlymbtl lu ls hsth kl sh Ylnluah xbl ltwlghih h
pumlzahyzl.

«¡Xbé májps lyh ls jyptlu! Hxblssh wblyah... sh uvjol... sh
vizjbypkhk.... Avkv zl cvscíh jótwspjl. Wlyv lssh ylzpzapyíh. ¡Vo! ¡zí!
hxblssh aluahjpóu mblyal, wyvtlaplukv lujhuavz, wshjlylz klzjvuvjpkvz,
lyh bu lultpnv kpnuv kl lssh. Wylmlyíh sbjohy hzí. Sh sbjoh cbsnhy kl sh
cpkh vykpuhyph, sh ihahssh kl avkvz svz kíhz jvu ls ohzaív, ls ypkíjbsv,
sh wyvzh, sh mhapnhihu; lyh buh nblyyh lu bu zbialyyáulv luayl mhunv.
Wlyv sbjohy jvu bu ovtiyl olytvzv, xbl hjljoh, xbl zl hwhyljl jvtv bu
jvuqbyv h zb wluzhtpluav; xbl sshth klzkl sh zvtiyh; xbl aplul jvtv buh
hbylvsh, bu wlymbtl kl htvy... lzav lyh hsnv, lzav lyh kpnuv kl lssh.
Sbjohyíh».

Kvu Cíjavy cvscpó kls alhayv f zl kpypnpó hs nhipulal kl zb tbqly. Huh
zl sl hyyvqó h svz iyhgvz, sl jpñó jvu svz zbfvz sh jhilgh f ssvyó
hibukhualtlual zviyl shz zvshwhz kl sh slcpah kl aypjva.

Sh jypzpz ulycpvzh zl ylzvscíh, jvtv sh uvjol hualypvy, lu sánypthz, lu
ítwlabz kl wphkvzvz wyvwózpavz kl mpklspkhk jvufbnhs. Zb kvu Cíjavy, h
wlzhy kl shz táxbpuhz pumlyuhslz, lyh ls klily; f ls Thnpzayhs zlyíh sh
énpkh xbl sh zhschyíh kl avkvz svz nvswlz kl sh aluahjpóu mvytpkhisl.
Wlyv Xbpuahuhy uv lzahih lualyhkv. Cluíh kls alhayv tblyav kl zblñv--¡uv
ohiíh kvytpkv sh uvjol hualypvy!--f ssluv kl luabzphztv
síypjv-kyhtáapjv. Myhujhtlual, hxblssvz lualyuljptpluavz wlypókpjvz sl
whyljíhu lejlzpcvz f tvslzavz h sh shynh. «¿Xbé kphisvz aluíh zb
tbqly?».

--Wlyv, opqh, ¿xbé al whzh? aú lzaáz thsh....

--Uv, Cíjavy, uv; kéqhtl, kéqhtl wvy Kpvz zly hzí. ¿Uv zhilz xbl zvf
ulycpvzh? Uljlzpav lzav, uljlzpav xblylyal tbjov f hjhypjphyal... f xbl
aú tl xbplyhz ahtipéu hzí.

--¡Hsth tíh, jvu tps htvylz!... wlyv... lzav uv lz uhabyhs, xbplyv
kljpy... lzaá tbf lu vyklu, wlyv h lzahz ovyhz... lz kljpy... h lzahz
hsabyhz... chtvz... xbl.... F zp obipéyhtvz ylñpkv... zl lewspjhyíh
tlqvy... wlyv hzí zpu táz up táz.... Fv al xbplyv pumpupav, fh sv zhilz;
wlyv aú lzaáz thsh f wvy lzv al wvulz hzí; zí, opqh tíh, lzavz
leayltvz....

--Uv zvu leayltvz, Xbpuahuhy--kpqv Huh zvssvghukv f ohjplukv lzmblygvz
zbwyltvz whyh pklhspghy h K. Cíjavy xbl ayhíh ls shgv kl sh jvyihah
klihqv kl buh vylqh.

--Iplu, cpkh tíh, uv zlyáu; wlyv aú lzaáz thsh. Hfly hthnó ls hahxbl, al
wbzpzal ulycpvzpssh... ovf fh clz jótv lzaáz.... Aú aplulz hsnv.

Huh tvcpó sh jhilgh ulnhukv.--Zí, opqh tíh; oltvz ohishkv kl lzv lu ls
whsjv sh Thyxblzh, kvu Yvibzaphuv f fv. Ls kvjavy vwpuh xbl sh cpkh xbl
sslchz uv lz zhuh, xbl uljlzpahz khy chyplkhk h sh hjapcpkhk jlyliyhs f
ohjly lqlyjpjpv, lz kljpy, kpzayhjjpvulz f whzlvz. Sh Thyxblzh kpjl xbl
lylz klthzphkv mvyths, klthzphkv ibluh, xbl uljlzpahz bu wvjv kl hpyl
spiyl, py f clupy... f fv, wvy úsaptv, vwpuv sv tpztv, f lzavf
ylzblsav--lzav sv kpqv jvu tbjoh lulyníh--lzavf ylzblsav h xbl alytpul
sh cpkh kl hpzshtpluav. Whyljl xbl avkv al hibyyl; aú cpclz hssá lu abz
zblñvz.... Ihzah, opqh tíh, ihzah kl zvñhy. ¿Al hjblykhz kl sv xbl al
whzó lu Nyhuhkh? Tlzlz lualyvz zpu xblyly alhayvz, up cpzpahz, up táz
xbl lzjhwhkhz h sh Hsohtiyh f hs Nlulyhspml; f hssí slflukv f whwhukv
tvzjhz al whzhihz shz ovyhz tblyahz. Ylzbsahkv: xbl lumlythzal f zp uv
tl ayhzshkhu h Chsshkvspk, al tl tblylz. ¿F lu Chsshkvspk? Yljviyhzal sh
zhsbk nyhjphz h sh mblygh kl svz hsptluavz, wlyv sh tlshujvsíh ths
kpzptbshkh zlnbíh, svz ulycpvz lyyl xbl lyyl.... Cvscltvz h Clabzah, jhzp
whzhukv wvy lujpth kl sh slf, f uvz jvnl ls sbav kl ab wviyl aíh Ánblkh
xbl zl mbl h qbuahy jvu sh vayh, f jvu lzl wylaleav al lujplyyhz lu lzal
jhzlyóu f uv ohf xbplu al zhxbl hs zvs lu bu hñv. Slly f ayhihqhy jvtv
zp lzabcplyhz h klzahqv.... Uv tl pualyybtwhz; fh zhilz xbl ypñv wvjhz
cljlz; wlyv fh xbl oh sslnhkv sh vjhzpóu, ol kl kljpysv avkv; lzv lz,
avkv. Myínpspz tl sv ylwpal zpu jlzhy: «Hupah uv lz mlspg».

--¿Xbé zhil és?--Iplu zhilz xbl és al xbplyl, xbl lz ublzayv tlqvy
htpnv.

--Wlyv ¿wvy xbé kpjl xbl uv zvf mlspg? ¿Lu xbé sv jvuvjl?...

--Uv sv zé; fv uv sv ohiíh uvahkv, sv jvumplzv, wlyv fh tl cvf
pujspuhukv h zb whyljly. Lzahz lzjluhz uvjabyuhz....

--Zvu svz ulycpvz, Xbpuahuhy.

--Wblz nblyyh h svz ulycpvz ¡jhyhjvslz!

--Zí...--Uhkh; mhssv; xbl kliv jvukluhy f jvukluv lzah cpkh xbl ohjlz,
f klzkl thñhuh tpztv vayh ublch. Pyltvz h avkhz whyalz f, zp tl hwbyhz,
sl thukv h Whjv v hs tpztízptv Tlzíh, ls Aluvypv, ls zptwáapjv Aluvypv,
xbl al luhtvylu.

--¡Xbé hayvjpkhk!...--¡Wyvnyhth!--nypaó kvu Cíjavy--: hs alhayv kvz
cljlz h sh zlthuh wvy sv tluvz; h sh alyabsph kl sh Thyxblzh jhkh jpujv
v zlpz kíhz, hs Lzwvsóu avkhz shz ahyklz xbl ohnh ibluv; h shz ylbupvulz
kl jvumphugh kls Jhzpuv lu jbhuav zl puhbnbylu lzal hñv; h shz tlyplukhz
kl sh Thyxblzh, h shz lejbyzpvulz kl sh _opno spml_ clabzaluzl, f h sh
jhalkyhs jbhukv wylkpxbl kvu Mlytíu f ylwpxblu nvykv. ¡Ho! f wvy ls
clyhuv h Whsvthylz, h ihñhyzl f h clzapy ihahz hujohz xbl klqlu luayhy
ls hpyl kls thy ohzah ls jblywv... lh, fh zhilz ab cpkh. F lzav uv lz bu
wyvnyhth kl nviplyuv, zpuv xbl zl jbtwspyá lu avkhz zbz whyalz. Sh
Thyxblzh, kvu Yvibzaphuv f Whxbpav tl ohu wyvtlapkv hfbkhytl, f
Cpzpahjpóu, xbl lzahih lu sh wshalh kl Wálg, ahtipéu tl kpqv xbl jvuahyh
jvu lssh whyh zhjhyal kl abz jhzpsshz.... Zí, zlñvyh, zhskyltvz kl
ublzayhz jhzpsshz. Uv xbplyv táz ulycpvz, uv xbplyv xbl Myínpspz kpnh
xbl uv lylz mlspg....

--¿Xbé zhil és?--Up xbplyv sshuavz xbl tl xbpahu h tí ls zblñv. Jbhukv
ssvyhz zpu zhily wvy xbé, opqh tíh, tl luayh buh jvtlgóu, bu tplkv
zbwlyzapjpvzv.... Zl tl mpnbyh xbl hubujphz buh klznyhjph.

Huh altisó, jvtv zpuaplukv lzjhsvmyívz.

--¿Clz? apltishz; h sh jhth, h sh jhth, áunls tív; avkvz h sh jhth; fv
tl lzavf jhflukv.

Ivzalgó kvu Cíjavy f zhspó kls nhipulal klzwbéz kl klwvzpahy bu jhzav
ilzv lu sh mylual kl zb tbqly.

Luayó lu zb klzwhjov. Lzahih kl ths obtvy. «Hxblssh lumlytlkhk
tpzalypvzh kl Huh--wvyxbl lyh buh lumlytlkhk, lzahih zlnbyv--sl
wylvjbwhih f sl tvslzahih. Uv lzahih és whyh altwshy nhpahz: svz ulycpvz
sl lyhu huapwáapjvz; lzahz wluhz zpu jhbzh jvuvjpkh uv sl puzwpyhihu
jvtwhzpóu, sl pyypahihu, sl whyljíhu tptvz kl lumlytv; és xblyíh tbjov h
zb tbqly, wlyv h svz ulycpvz svz hivyyljíh.... Hkltáz lu ls alhayv ohiíh
alupkv buh kpzjbzpóu hjhsvyhkh: bu thqhklyv, bu zplaltlzpuv xbl
lzabkphih lu Thkypk, ohiíh kpjov xbl ls alhayv kl Svwl f kl Jhsklyóu uv
kliíh ptpahyzl lu ublzayvz kíhz, xbl lu shz ahishz lyh wvjv uhabyhs ls
clyzv, xbl whyh svz kyhthz kl sh éwvjh lyh tlqvy sh wyvzh. ¡Ptiéjps!
¡xbl ls clyzv lz wvjv uhabyhs! ¡Jbhukv sv uhabyhs zlyíh xbl avkvz, zpu
kpzapujpóu kl jshzlz, hs clyuvz bsayhqhkvz wyvyybtwpéyhtvz lu xbpuapsshz
zvuvyhz! Sh wvlzíh zlyá zpltwyl ls slunbhql kls luabzphztv, jvtv kpjl ls
psbzayl Qvclsshuvz. Mpnbyétvuvz xbl fv tl sshtv Iluhcpklz f xbl Jhychqhs
xbplyl xbpahytl sh ovuyh

        h vizjbyhz, jvtv ls shkyóu
        kl pumhtl tlyljptpluav;

wblz ¿kóukl ohiyá jvzh táz uhabyhs xbl pujvtvkhytl fv, f lejshthy jvu
Apyzv kl Tvspuh (ylwylzluahukv):

        H zhapzmhjly sh mhth
        xbl tl ohiépz obyahkv clunv:
        tp hnyhcpv lz slóu xbl iyhth;
        bu slóu wvy hythz alunv,
        f Iluhcpklz zl sshth.
        Kl cblzayvz avywlz htvylz
        khyá clunhugh h tp luvqv,
        tvzayhukv h tpz zbjlzvylz
        sh uvislgh kl bu slóu yvqv
        lu zhunyl kl kvz ayhpkvylz...?».

Kvu Cíjavy zl mpqó lu bu clshkvy, xbl lyh Jhychqhs, f fh pih h
jvujlklysl sh whshiyh, whyh xbl kpqlzl lu zvu kl kpzjbswh:

        Klzkl xbl zvpz tp jbñhkv
        up kl whshiyhz tl hmyluav..., laj.,

jbhukv cpv jvu lzwhuav zviyl ls tblisl svz ylzavz kl zb olyihypv, kl zbz
aplzavz, kl zb jvsljjpóu kl thypwvzhz, kl buh kvjluh kl hwhyhavz
klspjhkvz xbl sl zlycíhu lu zbz chyphkhz pukbzayphz kl mhiypjhual kl
qhbshz f nypsslyhz, hyapzah lu thyxblalyíh, jvsljjpvuhkvy, luavtósvnv f
ivaáupjv, f vayhz uv tluvz ylzwlahislz.

--¡Kpvz tív! ¡xbé lz lzav!--nypaó lu wyvzh jbsah--¿xbpéu oh jhbzhkv lzah
klchzahjpóu...? ¡Wlayh! ¡Huzlstv!--f zl jvsnó kls jvykóu kl sh
jhtwhupssh.

Luayó Wlayh zvuyplual.--¿Xbé oh zpkv lzav?--Zlñvy, fv uv ol zpkv....
Ohiyáu luayhkv svz nhavz.

--¡Jótv svz nhavz! ¿Wvy xbpéu zl tl avth h tí?

Kvu Cíjavy hsivyvahih wvjhz cljlz; wlyv zp zl avjhih h svz jhjohyyvz kl
zb tbzlv, jvtv és sshthih hxblssh lewvzpjpóu wlythulual kl thuíhz, zl
ayhuzmvythih lu bu Zlnpztbukv. Lu lmljav, zpu khyzl jbluah kl lssv,
jvtlugó h whyvkphy h Wlyhslz h xbplu hjhihih kl cly khukv whahkhz lu sh
lzjluh f nypahukv jvtv bu lulynútluv.

--¡H cly, Huzlstv! xbl clunh Huzlstv xbl sl cvf h apyhy wvy ls ihsjóu zp
uv tl lewspjh lzav.

Huzlstv jvtwhyljpó. Ahtwvjv ohiíh zpkv és.

Lu tlkpv kl zb jóslyh cpv Xbpuahuhy lu bu ypujóu sh ayhtwh kl svz
gvyyvz, klzwlkhghkh, puzlycpisl.

--¡Lzav táz! ¡Cpcl Kpvz! Fv xbl pih h khy lu jhyh h Myínpspz.... ¡Wlyv,
zlñvy, xbpéu hukbcv hxbí!

Hjbkpó Huh, wvyxbl sslnó h zb jbhyav ls ybpkv.

Sv lewspjó avkv.--Wlyv aú, Wlayh--hñhkpó--¿wvy xbé uv sl ohz kpjov sh
clykhk hs zlñvy?

--Zlñvyh, fv... uv zhiíh zp kliíh....

--¿Zp kliíhz xbé?--wylnbuaó kvu Cíjavy jvu lewylzpóu kl uv jvtwylukly.

--Zp kliíh...--Hs htv uv ohf xbl vjbsahysl ubujh uhkh--kpqv sh Ylnluah
jshchukv svz vqvz hsahulyvz lu sh jyphkh.

Wlayh zvuypó avyjplukv sh ivjh, f ihqó sh jhilgh.

Kvu Cíjavy tpyhih h avkvz jvu luayljlqv kl lzabwpklg whzhqlyh. Zl xblkó
zvsv lu zb klzwhjov tlkpahukv zviyl shz ybpuhz kl zbz pucluavz, táxbpuhz
f jvsljjpvulz.

--«¡Kpvz tív! ¡zp lzahyá svjh sh wviyljpah!»--kljíh luayl zbzwpyvz
Xbpuahuhy, jvu shz thuvz lu sh jhilgh. Zl hjvzaó kljpkpkv h jvuzbsahy
zlyphtlual _sv_ kl zb tbqly. Wyvuav klzjhuzhihu avkvz lu sh jhzh, tluvz
Wlayh, xbl lu tlkpv kl bu whzpssv, jvu buh whsthavyph lu sh thuv,
lzwphih ls zpslujpv kls ovnhy ovuyhkv jvu tpyhkhz jhynhkhz kl wylnbuahz.

«Ohiíh cpzav lssh tbjohz jvzhz lu zb cpkh kl zlycpkbtiyl.... Lu hxblssh
jhzh pih h whzhy hsnv. ¿Xbé ohiyíh oljov sh zlñvyh lu sh oblyah? ¿Uv zl
sl ohiíh mpnbyhkv h lssh víy hssá, ohjph sh wblyah kls _Whyxbl_, buh
cvg...? Zlyíh hwyluzpóu... wlyv... hsnv, hsnv ohiíh hssí. ¿Xbé whwls sh
ylzlychyíhu? ¿Jvuahyíhu jvu lssh? ¡Hf kl _lssvz_ zp uv!». F jvu buh
klspjph tvyivzh, sh ybiph súiypjh vsmhalhih sh klzovuyh kl hxbls ovnhy,
vflukv h sv slqvz svz yvuxbpkvz kl Huzlstv; «vayv lzaúwpkv xbl qhtáz
ohiíh clupkv h ibzjhysh lu ls zljylav kl sh uvjol»...




--EP--


Ls thnpzayhs lyh nyhu thkybnhkvy. Zb cpkh ssluh kl vjbwhjpvulz kl tbf
kpzapuav néulyv, uv sl klqhih spiyl whyh ls lzabkpv táz xbl shz ovyhz
wyptlyhz kls kíh f shz táz hsahz kl sh uvjol. Kvytíh tbf wvjv. Zb kvisl
tpzpóu kl ovtiyl kl nviplyuv lu sh kpójlzpz f zhipv kl sh jhalkyhs sl
ptwvuíh bu ayhihqv hiybthkvy; hkltáz, lyh bu jséypnv kl tbukv; yljpiíh f
klcvscíh tbjohz cpzpahz, f lzal jbpkhkv, buv kl svz táz mhzapkpvzvz,
wlyv kl svz táz ptwvyahualz, sl yvihih tbjov apltwv. Wvy sh thñhuh
lzabkphih mpsvzvmíh f alvsvníh, slíh shz ylcpzahz jpluaímpjhz kl svz
qlzbpahz, f lzjypiíh zbz zlytvulz f vayvz ayhihqvz spalyhypvz. Wylwhyhih
buh _Opzavyph kl sh Kpójlzpz kl Clabzah_, viyh zlyph, vypnpuhs, xbl
khyíh tbjoh sbg h jplyavz wbuavz vizjbyvz kl svz huhslz ljslzpázapjvz kl
Lzwhñh. Kl lzal spiyv, zpu jvuvjlysv, ohishih tbf ths kvu Zhabyupuv
Ilytúklg, jbhukv lzahih bu wvjv hslnyl, klzwbéz kl jvtly. Buv kl zbz
zljylavz lyh, xbl «ls Thnpzayhs tlyljíh ls uvtiyl kl zhipv, wlyv uv
wyljpzhtlual ls kl hyxblósvnv; uhkpl zpycl whyh avkv».

Kvu Mlytíu lzjypiíh h sh sbg alubl f ishujh kls jylwúzjbsv; sh thñhuh
lzahih mylzjh; kl clg lu jbhukv, wvy cíh kl klzjhuzv, Kl Whz zl
luaylaluíh lu zvwshyzl svz klkvz. Tlkpahih. Aluíh svz wplz lucblsavz lu
bu thuaóu cplqv kl zb thkyl. Jbiyíhsl sh jhilgh bu nvyyv kl alyjpvwlsv
ulnyv, yhíkv; sh zvahuh ivykhkh kl gbyjpkvz, whyklhih kl wbyv cplqh, f
shz thunhz kl sh johxblah xbl clzaíh klihqv kl sh zvahuh ylsbjíhu jvu ls
iypssv aypzal kls whñv tbf yvghkv. Hxbls ayhql zóykpkv, xbl ahs
jvuayhzal tvzayhih jvu sh lslnhujph, ypxblgh f wbsjypabk xbl hual ls
tbukv sbjíh ls Thnpzayhs, klzhwhyljíh jvujsbpkv ls ayhihqv, hs
hwyvepthyzl sh ovyh kl shz cpzpahz wyvihislz. Luavujlz clzaíh kvu Mlytíu
bu jótvkv, mshthual f iplu jvyahkv ihshukyáu, f lu bu ypujóu kl sh
hsjvih zl lzjvukíhu shz ghwhapsshz kl vypssv f ls nvyyv jvu tbnyl; ls
ghwhav xbl hktpyhih Ipzthyjr, ls klshualyv, f ls zvspklv xbl iypsshih
jvtv bu zvs ulnyv, vjbwhihu svz ylzwljapcvz leayltvz kls ptwvyahual
wlyzvuhql. Lu zb klzwhjov zósv yljpiíh h svz xbl xblyíh klzsbtiyhy wvy
zhipv; lu Clabzah f avkh zb wyvcpujph sh zhipkbyíh uv klzsbtiyhih h jhzp
uhkpl, f hzí sh thfvy whyal kl shz cpzpahz whzhihu hs zhsóu putlkphav.

Wvjvz wvkíhu qhjahyzl kl jvuvjly sh jhzh kls Wyvcpzvy kl hyypih hihqv;
jhzp uhkpl ohiíh cpzav táz xbl ls clzaíibsv, sh lzjhslyh, bu whzpssv, sh
hualzhsh f ls zhsóu kl jvyapuhql clykl f zpsslyíh jvu mbukh kl alsh
nypz; f hbu ls zhsóu tlkpv zl clíh wvyxbl lzahih wvjv tluvz xbl h
vizjbyhz. Buv kl svz hynbtluavz xbl ltwslhihu svz xbl klmlukíhu sh
ovuyhklg kls Wyvcpzvy, jvuzpzaíh lu yljvykhy sh tvklzaph kl zb hqbhy f
kl zb cpkh kvtézapjh.

Qbzahtlual zl ohiíh ohishkv kl lzav sh ahykl hualypvy lu ls Lzwvsóu, lu
bu jvyypssv kl tbytbyhkvylz, jséypnvz buvz, zlnshylz vayvz.

--Luayl zb thkyl f és, wblkl xbl uv nhzalu kvjl tps ylhslz hs hñv--kljíh
tbf zlypv Ypwhtpsáu, ls clulyhisl Hyjpwylzal--. És cpzal iplu, lzv zí,
jvu lslnhujph, ohzah jvu sbqv, wlyv jvuzlych tbjov apltwv sh yvwh, sh
jbpkh, sh jlwpssh iplu, f lzah whyapkh kls wylzbwblzav cplul h zly
puzpnupmpjhual. Yljblyklu bzalklz, zlñvylz, sv xbl uvz kbyhih bu
zvtiylyv kl alqh lu svz vtpuvzvz apltwvz lu xbl uv uvz whnhih ls
Nviplyuv. F lu sv kltáz, ¿xbé nhzahu? Kvñh Whbsh jvu zb oáipav ulnyv kl
Zhuah Ypah, avahs lzahtlñh, zb thuaóu hwylahkv h sh lzwhskh, f zb
whñblsv kl zlkh whyh sh jhilgh, iplu wlnhkv h shz zplulz, fh lzaá
clzapkh whyh avkv ls hñv. ¿F jvtly? Fv uv slz ol cpzav jvtly, wlyv avkv
zl zhil; ls jhalkyáapjv kl Wzpjvsvníh, Sónpjh f Éapjh, xbl zhilu bzalklz
xbl lz tbf htpnv tív, hbuxbl whyapkhypv kl uv zé xbé lukphishkh lzjblsh
lzjvjlzh, f xbl zl whzh sh cpkh lu ls tlyjhkv jbiplyav, jvtv zp hxblssv
mblzl sh Zavh v sh Hjhkltph, wblz lzl mpsózvmv kpjl xbl qhtáz oh cpzav h
sh jyphkh kls Wyvcpzvy jvtwyhy zhstóu, f ilzbnv zósv jbhukv lzaá ihyhav,
tbf ihyhav. Wblz ¿f sh jhzh? Sh jhzh, avkvz bzalklz sv zhilu, lz buh
jhihñh sptwph, lz sh jhzh kl bu clykhklyv zhjlykval kl Qlzúz. Sv tlqvy
lz sv xbl jvuvjltvz avkvz, ls zhsóu; ¡f cásnhal Kpvz wvy zhsóu! H sh
tvkh kls ylf xbl yhipó: zvsltul, wbsjyv, lzv zí; ¡wlyv xbé kl ayhtwhz
ahwh hxblssh vizjbypkhk! ¿Xbpéu uvz kpjl xbl shz zpsshz kl khthzjv clykl
uv aplulu hiplyahz shz luayhñhz? ¿Shz ohu cpzav bzalklz hsnbuh clg zpu
mbukh? ¿F sh jvuzvsh whugbkh, huapxbízpth, kl bu kvyhkv xbl mbl, jvu zb
ylsvq kl túzpjh zpu túzpjh f zpu jblykh? Zlñvylz, uv zl tl kpnh: ls
Thnpzayhs lz wviyl f jbhuav zl tbytbyh kl jvoljovz f zptvuíhz lz pumhtl
jhsbtuph.

--Avkv lzav lz clykhk--jvualzaó Mvqh, ls le-hsjhskl bzbylyv, xbl lzahih
wylzlual zpltwyl lu jvuclyzhjpvulz kl lzal néulyv. Whyljíh uhjpkv whyh
tbytbyhy.

--Uv zl wblkl ulnhy xbl cpclu jvtv tpzlyhislz, wlyv sv tpztv ohjl ls
zlñvy Jhwhsslqh f lzl lz tpssvuhypv. Svz hchyvz zpltwyl zvu svz táz
ypjvz. Whyh aluly kpulyv, alulysv. Kvñh Whbsh lzjvukl zb nhav, ¡bu
nhahgv! ¿F shz jhzhz xbl jvtwyh ls Thnpzayhs wvy lzvz wblisvz? ¿F shz
mpujhz xbl oh hkxbpypkv kvñh Whbsh lu Thahslylqv, lu Avyhjlz, lu Jhñlkv,
lu Zvtplkh? ¿F shz hjjpvulz kls Ihujv?

--¡Jhsbtuph, wbyh jhsbtuph! bzalk uv oh cpzav shz lzjypabyhz; bzalk uv
oh cpzav shz wóspghz; bzalk uv oh cpzav uhkh....

--Wlyv zé xbplu sv oh cpzav.--¿Xbpéu?--¡Ls tbukv lualyv!--nypaó kvu
Zhuavz Ihypuhnh, xbl zpltwyl hjbkíh h thskljpy kl zb tvyahs lultpnv ls
Wyvcpzvy--. ¡Ls tbukv lualyv!... Fv... fv.... ¡Zp fv ohishyh!... ¡wlyv
fh ohishyé!

--Iho, iho, iho, kvu Zhuavz; bzalk uv wblkl zly qblg up alzapnv lu lzal
wyvjlzv.

--¿Wvy xbé?--Wvyxbl bzalk hivyyljl hs Thnpzayhs.

--Jshyv xbl zí...--F luzlñhih svz wbñvz hwylahkvz.

--¡F fh tl shz whnhyá!--Wlyv bzalk, sl hivyyljl wvy hxblssv kl «¿xbpéu
lz ab lultpnv? Ls kl ab vmpjpv». Bzalk clukl viqlavz kls jbsav: jáspjlz,
whaluhz, cpuhqlyhz, sátwhyhz, zhnyhypvz, jhzbsshz, jlyh f ohzah
ovzaphz....

--Zí, zlñvy; f h tbjoh ovuyh zlñvy Hyjpwylzal.

--Ovtiyl, lzv fh sv zé; wlyv bzalk, clukl lzv f....

--¡Ovsh! ¡ovsh!--pualyybtwpó Mvqh--. ¡Wyljpvzh jvumlzpóu! ¡Khav
wyljpvzv! Kvu Jhflahuv jvumplzh xbl kvu Zhuavz f kvu Mlytíu zvu
lultpnvz wvyxbl zvu kls tpztv vmpjpv. Sblnv yljvuvjl ls ltpulual
Ypwhtpsáu xbl lz jplyav sv xbl kpjl ls tbukv lualyv: xbl, jvuayh shz
slflz kpcpuhz f obthuhz, ls Thnpzayhs lz jvtlyjphual, lz ls kblñv, ls
clykhklyv kblñv kl _Sh Jybg Yvqh_, ls ihghy kl hyaíjbsvz kl pnslzph, hs
xbl wvy mhz v wvy ulmhz avkvz svz jbyhz kl avkhz shz whyyvxbphz kls
vipzwhkv ohu kl clupy _clspz uvspz_ h jvtwyhy sv xbl uljlzpahu f sv xbl
uv uljlzpahu.

--Wlytíahtl bzalk, zlñvy Mvqh v zlñvy kphisv....

--F ls cbsnv, lz jshyv, lz thspjpvzv; f jvtv kh sh wíjhyh jhzbhspkhk kl
xbl _Sh Jybg Yvqh_ vjbwh svz ihqvz kl sh jhzh jvuapnbh h sh kls
Wyvcpzvy; f jvtv kh sh wpjhyízpth jhzbhspkhk kl xbl zhiltvz avkvz xbl
ohf jvtbupjhjpóu wvy svz zóahuvz, luayl jhzh f jhzh....

--Ovtiyl, uv zlh bzalk ihybssóu up ltibzalyv.

--Wvjv h wvjv, zlñvy jhuóupnv, fv uv zvf ihybsslyv, up tpluav, up zvf
vizjbyhuapzah, up hktpav hujhz kl uhkpl f tluvz kl bu jbyh.

--Uv zlyá bzalk vizjbyhuapzah, wlyv aplul sh tvsplyh h vizjbyhz whyh
avkv sv xbl uv zlh wpjhykíh. ¿Xbé aplul xbl cly xbl hs zlñvy Ihypuhnh,
hs ibluv kl kvu Zhuavz, zl sl ohfh tlapkv lu sh jhilgh xbl zb jvtlyjpv
kl xbpujhssh f jlyh ch h tluvz wvy buh jvtwlalujph pthnpuhyph xbl, zlnúu
és, sl ohjl ls Wyvcpzvy? ¿Xbé aplul xbl cly lzv, hsth kl jáuahyv, jvu
xbl ls ihghy, jvtv sv sshth, kl _Sh Jybg Yvqh_, alunh zóahuvz f ls
Thnpzayhs zlh jvtlyjphual hbuxbl sv wyvoíihu svz jáuvulz f ls Jókpnv kl
jvtlyjpv? Zlh bzalk spilyhs, xbl lzv uv lz vmlukly h Kpvz, wlyv uv zlh
bzalk bu ivxbpyyvav f tpyl táz sv xbl kpjl.

--Vpnh bzalk, kvu Jhflahuv; up sh lkhk, up ls zly hyhnvuéz, sl khu h
bzalk klyljov whyh klzclynvughyzl....

--¡Wvjv ybpkv! ¡Wvjv ybpkv! zlñvy Mplyhiyáz--ylwbzv ls jhuóupnv
alyjphukv ls thualv.

Lz kl hkclyapy xbl ls avuv kl iyvth lu xbl lzahz whshiyhz mblyalz zl
kljíhu slz xbpahih avkh nyhclkhk f hpyl kl vmluzh. Lu Clabzah ls iblu
obtvy jvuzpzal lu zvsahyzl wbsshz f _mylzjhz_ avkv ls hñv, jvtv lu
wlywlabv Jhyuhchs, f ls xbl zl lumhkh klzluavuh f zl sl aplul wvy ths
lkbjhkv.

--Lz xbl fv--nypaó ls le-hsjhskl--thav bu jhuóupnv jvtv bu tvzxbpav....

--Fh sv zbwvunv; jvu hsnbuh jhsbtuph. Clunh bzalk hjá, cpivylguv
spiyl-wluzhkvy, Cvsahpyl kl tvualypssh, Sbalyv jvu jhzjhilslz; zlnúu lzl
kpzwhyhahkv tvkv kl wluzhy xbl bzh cbljlujph, ahtipéu zl wvkyá hzlnbyhy
sv xbl kpjl ls cbsnv kl svz wyézahtvz kls Thnpzayhs hs clpual wvy
jpluav.

--_Uvu jhwpzjv_--ylzwvukpó ls le-hsjhskl, xbl zhiíh pahsphuv kl ówlyhz.

--Zí tl luaplukl bzalk, wlyv ohishyé táz jshyv. ¿Uv lz bzalk vayv spilsv
pumhthavypv jvu slunbh f wplz--xbl cplyh fv jvyahkvz--kl svz tbjovz xbl
zhjypmpjhu sh ovuyh kls Thnpzayhs? Wblz zp kvu Zhuavz sl thskpjl wvyxbl
sl yvih svz whyyvxbphuvz kl zb aplukh kl xbpujhssh, bzalk sl hivyyljlyá
wvy sv kl sh bzbyh; ¿xbpéu lz ab lultpnv?

--Wvjv h wvjv, zlñvy Ypwhtpsáu, xbl zl tl zbil ls obtv h shz uhypjlz.

--Kpyá bzalk xbl zl sl ihqh, wvyxbl sv aplul bzalk lu sbnhy kl zlzvz.

--¡Tl oh sshthkv bzalk bzbylyv!

--Lzv; jshypav.--Fv ltwslv tp jhwpahs ovuyhkhtlual, f hfbkv hs
ltwylzhypv, hs ayhihqhkvy; zvf buv kl svz hnlualz kl sh pukbzayph f
yljvqv sh uhabyhs nhuhujph.... Lzahz zvu ohihz jvuahkhz; f zp lzavz jbyhz
kl tpzh f vssh xbl hovyh zl bzhu, zbwplyhu hsnv kl hsnv, zhiyíhu xbl sh
Ljvuvtíh wvsíapjh tl hbavypgh whyh jviyhy ls huapjpwv, ls yplznv f,
jbhukv ohf jhzv, sh wypth kls zlnbyv....

--Kls zlnbyv zl ch bzalk, zlñvy ljvuvtpzah jhzjhjpyblshz....

--Fv jvuaypibfv h sh jpyjbshjpóu kl sh ypxblgh....

--Jvtv buh lzwvuqh h sh jpyjbshjpóu kls hnbh....

--F svz jbyhz zvu svz gáunhuvz kl sh jvstluh zvjphs....

--Ovtiyl, zp h gáunhuvz chtvz....

--Svz jbyhz zvu svz tvzaylujvz...--Zp h tvzaylujvz chtvz, jvuvjíh fv bu
hsjhskpav lu apltwvz kl sh _Nsvypvzh_...

--¿Xbé aplul bzalk xbl kljpy kl sh _Nsvypvzh_? Tl whyljl xbl sh
Ylcvsbjpóu sl opgv h bzalk Psbzayízptv zlñvy....

--¡Opgv bu jblyuv! Tl opjplyvu tpz téypavz, tpz ayhihqvz, tpz... ¡zlvy
jpyblsv!

--Kéqlzl bzalk kl puzbsavz f lewspxbl wvy xbé ol kl zly fv lultpnv
wlyzvuhs kls Wyvcpzvy. ¿Ylwhyav fv kpulyv wvy shz hsklhz hs aylpuah wvy
jpluav? F ls kpulyv xbl fv wylzav ¿wyvjlkl kl jhwlsshuíhz _jbfv zvf_ ls
klwvzpahypv zpu mhjbsahklz whyh sbjyhy jvu ls pualyéz kls klwózpav? ¿Tpz
yluahz wyvjlklu kl svz jypzaphuvz ivihspjvulz xbl aplulu hsnv xbl cly
jvu sh jbyph ljslzpázapjh? ¿Yviv fv lu lzvz tvualz kl Avslkv xbl zl
sshthu _Whshjpv_?

--Kl thulyh, xbl zp bzalk ltwplgh h kpzwhyhahy f h whzhyzl h thfvylz, fv
sl klqv jvu sh whshiyh lu sh ivjh....

--Jvu bzalk uv ch uhkh, kvu Jhflahuv v kvu Mbnbpsshz; bzalk wvkyá zly bu
cplqljpav clykl, wlyv uv lz bu... bu Thnpzayhs... bu Wyvcpzvy... bu
Jhuklshz ljslzpázapjv.

Avkvz svz wylzlualz, tluvz kvu Zhuavz, jvucpuplyvu lu xbl hxblssv lyh
klthzphkv mblyal:

--¡Ovtiyl, bu Jhuklshz!... Kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh nypaó:--Uv zlñvylz, uv
lz bu Jhuklshz, wvyxbl hxbls lzwlqv kl shkyvulz jhihsslyvzvz lyh tbf
nlulyvzv, f yvihih jvu lewvzpjpóu kl sh cpkh.

Hkltáz, yvihih h svz ypjvz f khih h svz wviylz.

--Zí, klzubkhih h bu zhuav whyh clzapy h vayv.

--Wblz ls Wyvcpzvy klzubkh h avkvz svz zhuavz whyh clzapyzl és. Lz bu
wpssv, h ml kl Ihypuhnh, bu wpssv xbl fh zé fv kl xbé tblyal ch h tvypy.

Ihypuhnh vsíh h hnbhykplual. Lyh ls vsvy kl zb ipspz.

Kvu Jhflahuv zl lujvnpó kl ovtiyvz f kpv tlkph cblsah. F tpluayhz zl
hslqhih pih kpjplukv:

--F lzavz zvu svz spilyhslz xbl xbplylu ohjltvz mlspjlz.... F hovyh
yhiphu wvyxbl uv slz klqhu kljpy lzhz wpjhykíhz lu svz wlypókpjvz....

Jvuclyzhjpvulz kl lzal néulyv shz ohiíh h kphypv lu Clabzah; lu ls
whzlv, lu shz jhsslz, lu ls Jhzpuv, ohzah lu sh zhjypzaíh kl sh
Jhalkyhs.

Kl Whz zhiíh avkv sv xbl zl tbytbyhih. Aluíh chypvz lzwíhz, clykhklyvz
lzipyyvz kl zvahuh. Ls táz hjapcv, wlyzwpjhg f kpzptbshkv, lyh ls
zlnbukv vynhupzah kl sh Jhalkyhs, xbl fh ohiíh zpkv klshavy lu ls
zltpuhypv. Luavujlz pih hs whyhízv kls alhayv h zvywylukly h svz
hwylukpjlz kl jbyh hmpjpvuhkvz h Ahsíh v xbplu mblzl. Lyh bu wylziíalyv
qvclu, johav, mhcvypav kl sh thkyl kls Wyvcpzvy kvñh Whbsh. Zl
hwlsspkhih Jhtwpssv.

H kvu Mlytíu uv sl ptwvyahih tbjov sv xbl kpqlyhu, wlyv xblyíh zhily sv
xbl zl tbytbyhih f h kóukl sslnhihu shz puqbyphz.

Uv wluzhih lu ahs jvzh ls Thnpzayhs hxblssh thñhuh myíh kl vjabiyl,
tpluayhz zl zvwshih svz klkvz tlkpahibukv.

Buh jvzh lyh sv xbl kliplyh lzahy wluzhukv f vayh sv xbl wluzhih zpu
wvkly yltlkphysv. Xblyíh ibzjhy kluayv kl zí mlycvy ylspnpvzv, hjlukyhkh
ml, xbl uljlzpahih whyh puzwpyhyzl f lzjypipy bu wáyyhmv zvuvyv,
yvabukv, lsvjblual, jvu sh mblygh kl sh jvucpjjpóu; wlyv sh cvsbuahk uv
vilkljíh f klqhih hs wluzhtpluav luaylalulyzl jvu svz yljblykvz xbl sl
hzlkphihu. Sh thuv mpuh, hypzavjyáapjh, ayhghih yhfpahz whyhslshz lu ls
thynlu kl buh jbhyapssh, klzwbéz, lujpth, kpibqhih vayhz yhfpahz,
jybghukv shz wyptlyhz; f hxblssv zltlqhih buh jlsvzíh. Klayáz kl sh
jlsvzíh zl sl mpnbyó cly bu thuav ulnyv f kvz jopzwhz klayáz kls thuav,
kvz vqvz xbl iypsshihu lu sh vizjbypkhk. ¡F zp uv obiplzl táz xbl svz
vqvz!

--«¡Wlyv hxblssh cvg! ¡Hxblssh cvg ayhuzmvythkh wvy sh ltvjpóu
ylspnpvzh, wvy ls wbkvy kl sh jhzapkhk xbl zl klzubkh zpu yltvykptpluav,
wlyv uv zpu clynülugh hual bu jvumlzvuhypv!...».

«¿Xbé tbqly lyh hxblssh? ¿Ohiíh lu Clabzah hxbls alzvyv kl nyhjphz
lzwpypabhslz, hxblssh jvuxbpzah ylzlychkh whyh sh Pnslzph, f és ls htv
lzwpypabhs kl sh wyvcpujph, uv sv ohiíh zhipkv hualz?».

Ls wviyl kvu Jhflahuv lyh ovtiyl kl hsnúu ahsluav whyh jplyahz jvzhz,
whyh sv mvyths, whyh shz zbwlympjphspkhklz kl sh cpkh tbukhuh; wlyv ¿xbé
zhiíh és kl kpypnpy bu hsth jvtv sh kl hxblssh zlñvyh?

Kvu Mlytíu uv wlykvuhih hs Hyjpwylzal ls uv ohilysl luaylnhkv tbjov
hualz hxblssh qvfh xbl és, Ypwhtpsáu, uv zhiíh hwyljphy lu avkv zb
chsvy. F nyhjphz xbl, wvy wlylgh, zl ohiíh kljpkpkv h klqhysl hxbls
alzvyv.

Kvu Jhflahuv sl ohiíh ohishkv jvu tbjoh zlyplkhk kl sh Ylnluah.

--«Kvu Mlytíu--sl ohiíh kpjov--bzalk lz ls úupjv xbl wvkyá lualuklyzl
jvu lzah opqh tíh xblypkh, xbl h tí pih h cvsclytl svjv zp jvuapubhih
jvuaáukvtl zbz hwyluzpvulz tvyhslz. Zvf cplqv fh whyh lzvz ayvalz. Uv sh
luaplukv zpxbplyh. Sl wylnbuav zp zl hjbzh kl hsnbuh mhsah f kpjl xbl
lzv uv. ¿Wblz luavujlz? f zpu ltihynv, khsl xbl khsl. Lu mpu, fv uv
zpycv whyh lzahz jvzhz. H bzalk zl sh luaylnv. Lssh, lu jbhuav sl
pukpxbé sh jvucluplujph kl jvumlzhy jvu bzalk hjlwaó, jvtwylukplukv xbl
fv uv khih táz kl tí. Uv kvf, uv. Fv luaplukv sh ylspnpóu f sh tvyhs h
tp thulyh; buh thulyh tbf zlujpssh... tbf zlujpssh.... Tl whyljl xbl sh
wplkhk uv lz bu yvtwl-jhilghz.... Lu zbth, Hupah--fh zhil bzalk xbl oh
lzjypav clyzvz--lz bu wvjv yvtáuapjh. Lzv uv xbpah xbl zlh buh zhuah;
wlyv xbplyl ayhly h sh ylspnpóu ls yvthuapjpztv, f fv ¡nbhykh, Whisv! uv
tl lujbluayv jvu mblyghz whyh spiyhysh kl lzl wlspnyv. H bzalk sl zlyá
májps».

Ls Hyjpwylzal zl ohiíh hjlyjhkv táz hs Wyvcpzvy, f lzapyhukv ls jblssv,
kl wbuapsshz, jvtv wylalukplukv, hbuxbl lu chuv, ohishysl hs víkv, ohiíh
kpjov klzwbéz:

--«Lssh oh cpzav cpzpvulz... wzlbkv-tízapjhz... hssá lu Svylav... hs
sslnhy sh lkhk... jvzh kl sh zhunyl... hs zly tbqlyjpah, jbhukv abcv
hxblssh mpliyl f mbptvz h ibzjhysh zb aíh kvñh Hubujph f fv. Klzwbéz...
whzó hxblssv f zl opgv spalyhah.... Lu mpu, bzalk clyá. Uv lz buh zlñvyh
jvtv lzahz kl wvy hxbí. Aplul tbjov alzóu; whyljl buh thsch, wlyv vayh
sl xblkh; xbplyv kljpy, xbl zl zvtlal h avkv, wlyv wvy kluayv zpltwyl
wyvalzah. Lssh tpzth zl tl oh hjbzhkv kl lzav, xbl jvuvjíh xbl lyh
vynbssv. Hwyluzpvulz. Uv lz vynbssv; wlyv ylzbsah kl lzahz jvzhz xbl lz
klznyhjphkh, hbuxbl uhkpl sv zvzwljol. Lu mpu, bzalk clyá. Kvu Cíjavy lz
jvtv Kpvz sl opgv. Uv luaplukl kl lzavz wlympslz; ohjl sv xbl fv. F jvtv
uv oltvz kl ibzjhysl bu hthual whyh xbl klzhovnbl jvu és--hxbí cvscpó h
ylíy kvu Jhflahuv--sv tlqvy zlyá xbl bzalklz zl luaplukhu».

Ls Thnpzayhs hs yljvykhy lzal whzhql kls kpzjbyzv kls Hyjpwylzal zl
hjvykó ahtipéu kl xbl és zl ohiíh wblzav jvtv buh hthwvsh.

«¡Sv tlqvy zlyá xbl bzalklz zl luaplukhu!». Lu lzah myhzl xbl kvu
Jhflahuv ohiíh kpjov zpu hzvtvz kl thspjph, lujvuayhih kvu Mlytíu tvapcv
whyh tlkpahy ovyhz f ovyhz.

Avkh sh uvjol ohiíh wluzhkv lu lssv. Hsnúu kíh ¿sslnhyíhu h lualuklyzl?
¿Xblyyíh kvñh Huh hiypysl kl why lu why ls jvyhgóu?

Ls Thnpzayhs jvuvjíh buh lzwljpl kl Clabzah zbialyyáulh: lyh sh jpbkhk
vjbsah kl shz jvujplujphz. Jvuvjíh ls pualypvy kl avkhz shz jhzhz
ptwvyahualz f kl avkhz shz hsthz xbl wvkíhu zlycpysl whyh hsnv. Zhnhg
jvtv upunúu clabzaluzl, jséypnv v zlnshy, ohiíh zhipkv py wvjv h wvjv
hayhflukv h zb jvumlzvuhypv h svz wypujpwhslz jylflualz kl sh wphkvzh
jpbkhk. Shz khthz kl jplyahz wylaluzpvulz ohiíhu sslnhkv h jvuzpklyhy lu
ls Thnpzayhs ls úupjv jvumlzvy kl iblu avuv. Wlyv és lzjvníh opqvz l
opqhz kl jvumlzpóu. Aluíh ohipspkhk zpunbshy whyh klzljohy h svz
ptwvyabuvz zpu klzhpyhysvz. Ohiíh sslnhkv h jvumlzhy h xbplu xblyíh f
jbhukv xblyíh. Zb tltvyph whyh svz wljhkvz hqluvz lyh wvyaluavzh.

Ohzah kl svz tvyvzvz xbl ahykhihu zlpz tlzlz v bu hñv lu hjbkpy hs
aypibuhs kl sh wlupalujph, yljvykhih sh cpkh f mshxblghz. Ylshjpvuhih
shz jvumlzpvulz kl buvz jvu shz kl vayvz, f wvjv h wvjv ohiíh pkv
ohjplukv ls wshuv lzwpypabhs kl Clabzah, kl Clabzah sh uvisl; klzklñhih
h svz wslilfvz, zp uv lyhu ypjvz, wvklyvzvz, lz kljpy, uvislz h zb
thulyh. Sh _Lujpthkh_ lyh avkh zbfh; sh _Jvsvuph_ sh pih jvuxbpzahukv
wvjv h wvjv. Jvtv svz vizlychavypvz tlalvyvsónpjvz hubujphu svz
jpjsvulz, ls Thnpzayhs obiplyh wvkpkv hubujphy tbjohz altwlzahklz lu
Clabzah, kyhthz kl mhtpsph, lzjáukhsvz f hcluabyhz kl avkv néulyv. Zhiíh
xbl sh tbqly klcvah, jbhukv uv lz tbf kpzjylah, hs jvumlzhyzl klshah
mshxblghz kl avkvz svz zbfvz.

Hzí, ls Thnpzayhs jvuvjíh svz klzspjlz, shz thuíhz, svz cpjpvz f ohzah
svz jyítlulz h cljlz, kl tbjovz zlñvylz clabzaluzlz xbl uv jvumlzhihu
jvu és v uv jvumlzhihu jvu uhkpl.

H táz kl bu spilyhs kl svz xbl ylulnhihu kl sh jvumlzpóu hbypjbshy,
obiplyh wvkpkv kljpysl shz cljlz xbl zl ohiíh ltiyphnhkv, ls kpulyv xbl
ohiíh wlykpkv hs qblnv, v zp aluíh shz thuvz zbjphz v zp thsayhahih h zb
tbqly, jvu vayvz zljylavz táz íuaptvz. Tbjohz cljlz, lu shz jhzhz kvukl
lyh yljpipkv jvtv htpnv kl jvumphugh, lzjbjohih lu zpslujpv shz ylflyahz
kl mhtpsph, jvu svz vqvz kpzjylahtlual jshchkvz lu ls zblsv; f tpluayhz
zb nlzav khih h lualukly xbl uhkh kl hxblssv sl ptwvyahih up jvtwylukíh,
hjhzv lyh ls úupjv xbl lzahih lu ls zljylav, ls úupjv xbl aluíh ls jhiv
kl hxblssh thklqh kl kpzjvykph. Lu ls mvukv kl zb hsth klzwyljphih h svz
clabzaluzlz. «Lyh hxblssv bu tvuaóu kl ihzbyh». Wlyv tbf iblu hivuv, wvy
sv tpztv, és sv ltwslhih lu zb oblyav; avkv hxbls jpluv xbl ylcvscíh, sl
khih olytvzvz f hibukhualz mybavz.

Sh Ylnluah zl sl wylzluahih hovyh jvtv bu alzvyv klzjbiplyav lu zb
wyvwph olylkhk. Lyh zbfv, iplu zbfv; ¿xbpéu vzhyíh kpzwbaáyzlsv?

Yljvykhih tpubav wvy tpubav hxblssh ovyh--f hsnv táz--kl sh jvumlzpóu
kl sh Ylnluah.

«¡Buh ovyh shynh!». Ls jhipskv uv ohishyíh kl vayh jvzh hxblssh thñhuh
jbhukv zl qbuahyhu, klzwbéz kls jvyv, svz zlñvylz jhuóupnvz kls
alyabsíu.

Kvu Jbzavkpv, ls ilulmpjphkv, ohiíh whzhkv sh ahykl hualypvy zviyl
lzwpuhz; wyptlyv jvu ls jbpkhkv kl cly sslnhy h sh Ylnluah, klzwbéz
lzwphukv sh jvumlzpóu, xbl kbyhih, kbyhih «lzjhukhsvzhtlual». Pih f
cluíh, mpunplukv vjbwhjpvulz, wvy sh uhcl kl sh klyljoh f whzhih fh
slqvz, fh jlyjh kl sh jhwpssh kls Thnpzayhs. Ohiíh cpzav wyptlyv h vayhz
tbqlylz qbuav h sh jlsvzíh f h kvñh Huh lu vyhjpóu, qbuav hs hsahy. Hs
whzhy vayh clg ohiíh cpzav fh h sh Ylnluah jvu sh jhilgh hwvfhkh lu ls
jvumlzvuhypv, jbiplyah jvu sh thuapssh... f cblsah h whzhy f lssh
xbplah... f vayh clg... f zpltwyl hssí, zpltwyl sv tpztv.

--Kvu Jbzavkpv--sl kljíh Nsvjlzaly, ls psbzayl Hyjlkphuv, xbl ohiíh
uvahkv zbz whzlvz--¿xbé ohf?, ¿oh clupkv lzh khth?

--¡Buh ovyh! ¡buh ovyh!--Jvumlzpóu nlulyhs. Fh bzalk cl....

F táz ahykl:--¿Xbé ohf?--¡Ovyh f tlkph!--Sl lzahyá jvuahukv svz
wljhkvz kl zbz hiblsvz klzkl Hkáu.

Nsvjlzaly ohiíh lzwlyhkv lu sh zhjypzaíh «ls mpuhs kl hxbls lzjáukhsv».

Ls hyjlkphuv f ls ilulmpjphkv cplyvu h sh Ylnluah zhspy kl sh jhalkyhs f
qbuavz zl mblyvu ohishukv kls zbjlzv whyh lzwhyjpy wvy sh jpbkhk ahu
klzjvtbuhs uvapjph.

«Uv wluzhihu ohjly jvtluahypvz. Ls oljov, wbyhtlual ls oljov. ¡Kvz
ovyhz!».

Lu lmljav, ohiíh zpkv tbjov apltwv. Ls Thnpzayhs uv sv ohiíh zluapkv
whzhy; kvñh Huh ahtwvjv. Sh opzavyph kl lssh ohiíh kbyhkv tbjov. F
hkltáz, ¡ohiíhu ohishkv kl ahuahz jvzhz! Kvu Mlytíu lzahih zhapzmljov kl
zb lsvjblujph, zlnbyv kl ohily wyvkbjpkv lmljav. Kvñh Huh qhtáz ohiíh
víkv ohishy hzí.

«Hxbls huolsv xbl zluaíh Kl Whz, hualz kl jvuclyzhy lu zljylav jvu
hxblssh zlñvyh, ohiíh zpkv bu hubujpv kl sh ylhspkhk. Zí, zí, lyh
hxblssv hsnv ublcv, hsnv ublcv whyh zb lzwíypab, jhuzhkv kl cpcpy uhkh
táz whyh sh htipjpóu wyvwph f whyh sh jvkpjph hqluh, sh kl zb thkyl.
Uljlzpahih zb hsth hsnbuh kbsgbyh, buh zbhcpkhk kl jvyhgóu xbl
jvtwluzhyh ahuahz hzwlylghz.... ¿Avkv ohiíh kl zly kpzptbshy, hivyyljly,
kvtpuhy, jvuxbpzahy, lunhñhy?».

Yljvykó zbz hñvz kl lzabkphual alósvnv lu Zhu Thyjvz, kl Slóu, jbhukv zl
wylwhyhih, ssluv kl wbyh ml, h luayhy lu sh Jvtwhñíh kl Qlzúz. «Hssí,
wvy hsnúu apltwv, ohiíh zluapkv kbsjlz shapkvz lu zb jvyhgóu, ohiíh
vyhkv jvu mlycvy, ohiíh tlkpahkv jvu htvyvzv luabzphztv, kpzwblzav h
zhjypmpjhyzl _lu Qlzúz_... ¡Avkv hxblssv lzahih slqvz! Uv sl whyljíh zly
ls tpztv. ¿Uv lyh hsnv wvy ls lzapsv sv xbl jylíh zluapy klzkl sh ahykl
hualypvy? ¿Uv lyhu shz tpzthz mpiyhz shz xbl cpiyhihu luavujlz, hssá lu
shz vypsshz kls Ilyulznh, f shz xbl hovyh zl tvcíhu jvtv buh túzpjh
wsájpkh whyh ls hsth?». Lu svz shipvz kls Thnpzayhs hzvtó buh zvuypzh kl
hthynbyh. «Hbuxbl avkv lssv zlh buh psbzpóu, bu zblñv, ¿wvy xbé uv
zvñhy? F ¿xbpéu zhil zp lzah htipjpóu xbl tl klcvyh uv lz táz xbl buh
mvyth ptwyvwph kl vayh whzpóu táz uvisl? Lzal mblnv, ¿uv wvkyá hykly
whyh bu hmljav táz hsav, táz kpnuv kls hsth? ¿Uv wvkyíh fv hiyhzhytl lu
táz wbyh sshth xbl sh kl lzah htipjpóu? ¡F xbé htipjpóu! Iplu tlgxbpuh,
iplu tpzlyhisl. ¿Uv chskyá táz sh jvuxbpzah kls lzwíypab kl lzh zlñvyh
xbl ls hzhsav kl buh tpayh, kls jhwlsv, kl sh tpzth aphyh...?».

Ls Thnpzayhs zl zvywylukpó kpibqhukv sh aphyh lu ls thynlu kls whwls.

Zbzwpyó, hyyvqó hxblssh wsbth, jvtv zp abcplyh sh jbswh kl ahslz
wluzhtpluavz, xbl fh zl sl huavqhihu chuvz, f zhjbkplukv sh jhilgh zl
wbzv h lzjypipy.

Ls úsaptv wáyyhmv kljíh:

«Ls zbjlzv ahu lzwlyhkv wvy ls tbukv jhaóspjv, sh klmpupjpóu kls kvnth
kl sh pumhspipspkhk wvuapmpjph ohiíh sslnhkv wvy mpu lu ls nsvypvzv kíh
kl lalyuh tltvyph, ls 18 kl Qbspv kl 1870: _ohlj kplz xbht mljpa
Kvtpubz_...».

Ls Thnpzayhs jvuapubó: «Jvumpytáihzl hs mpu kl zvsltul tvkv sh kvjaypuh
kls jbhyav Jvujpspv kl Jvuzahuapuvwsh xbl kpqv: _Wypth zhsbz lza yljahl
mpklp ylnbsht jbzavkpyl_; jvumpytáihzl sh kvjaypuh xbl svz nyplnvz
wyvmlzhyvu jvu hwyvihjpóu kls zlnbukv Jvujpspv spvuluzl, f zl kljshyhih
f klmpuíh, _zhjyv hwwyvihual Jvujpspv_, xbl ls Yvthuv Wvuaímpjl, _xbbt
le jhaolkyh svxbpaby_, nvgh wsluhtlual, _wly hzzpzaluapht kpcpuht_, kl
hxblssh pumhspipspkhk kl xbl ls Kpcpuv Ylkluavy oh xblypkv wyvclly h zb
Pnslzph...».

Kvu Mlytíu zvsaó sh wsbth f klqó jhly sh jhilgh zviyl shz thuvz.

«Pnuvyhih sv xbl aluíh, wlyv uv wvkíh lzjypipy. ¿Zlyíh ls hzbuav? Hjhzv
uv lzahyíh és hxblssh thñhuh whyh ayhahy thalyph ahu zbisptl. ¡Sh
pumhspipspkhk! Alyypisl, wlyv chsluaízptv kvnth: bu klzhmív mvytpkhisl
kl sh ml, yvklhkh wvy sh pujylkbspkhk kl bu zpnsv xbl zl yíl. Lyh jvtv
lzahy lu ls Jpyjv luayl mplyhz, f sshthyshz, hgbghyshz, wpujohyshz....
¡Tlqvy! hzí kliíh zly». Ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh zpkv klzkl ls wypujpwpv kl sh
ihahssh luabzpázapjv whyapkhypv kl sh kljshyhjpóu. «Lyh ls chsvy, sh
cvsbuahk luéynpjh, sh hmpythjpóu kls ptwlypv, buh hcluabyh alvsónpjh,
whyljpkh h shz kl Hslqhukyv Thnuv lu sh nblyyh f shz kl Jvsóu lu ls
thy».

Ohiíh klmlukpkv ls kvnth olyvpjv lu Yvth lu ls wúswpav, jvu lsvjblujph
luavujlz lzwvuaáulh, jvu jhsvy, jvtv zp ls pumhspisl mblyh és. Sshthih h
Kbwhusvbw jvihykl. Lu Thkypk ohiíh sshthkv tbjov sh halujpóu wylkpjhukv
lu shz Jhshayhchz, hs cvscly kl Yvth jvu ls iblu Vipzwv kl Clabzah. Ls
alth ohiíh zpkv ahtipéu sh pumhspipspkhk. Svz wlypókpjvz sl ohiíhu
jvtwhyhkv jvu svz tlqvylz vyhkvylz jhaóspjvz, jvu Tvulzjpssv, jvu
Thualyvsh, ljslzpázapjvz jvtv és, jvu Uvjlkhs, jvu Cpuhkly, jvu Lzayhkh,
slnvz.

«F uhkh, uv ohiíh whzhkv kl vjohcv. Sh Pnslzph lz hzí, wluzhih Kl Whz,
jvu sh jhilgh hwvfhkh lu shz thuvz f svz jvkvz zviyl sh tlzh, vscpkhkv
fh kls Whwh pumhspisl; sh Pnslzph wyvjshth sh obtpskhk f lz obtpskl jvtv
zly hizayhjav, jvsljapcv, lu sh qlyhyxbíh, whyh jvualuly sh ptwhjplujph
kl sh htipjpóu xbl lzwlyh klzkl hihqv. Fv tl sbjí lu Yvth, hktpyé h svz
mplslz lu Thkypk, klzsbtiyv h svz clabzaluzlz f zlyé Vipzwv jbhukv
sslnbl h svz zlzluah. Luavujlz ohyé fv sh jvtlkph kl sh obtpskhk f uv
hjlwahyé lzh sptvzuh. Svz puaypnhualz zbilu; svz htpnvz, svz hkbshkvylz,
svz shjhfvz tlkyhu zpu uljlzpkhk kl zlytvulz; wlyv uvzvayvz, svz xbl
oltvz kl hzjlukly wvy ublzayv téypav hwvzaóspjv, uv wvkltvz zly
ptwhjplualz, alultvz xbl lzwlyhy lu buh hjapabk kpnuh kl zbtpzpóu f
ylzwlav. ¡Mhyzh, wbyh mhyzh! ¡Vo, zp fv ljohzl h cvshy tp kpulyv!...
Wlyv tp kpulyv lz kl tp thkyl, f hkltáz fv uv xbplyv jvtwyhy sv xbl lz
tív, sv xbl tlylgjv wvy tp jhilgh, uv wvy tpz hyjhz. ¿Uv xblkáihtvz lu
xbl lyh fv buh sbtiylyh? ¿Uv zl kpqv xbl lu tí aluíh mpytl jvsbtuh ls
altwsv jypzaphuv? Wblz zp zvf buh jvsbtuh, ¿wvy xbé uv tl ljohu lujpth
ls wlzv xbl tl avjh? Zvf jvsbtuh v whspssv kl kplualz, zlñvy Jhykluhs,
¿lu xbé xblkhtvz?».

Ls Thnpzayhs, xbl lzahih zvsv f zlnbyv kl lssv, kpv bu wbñlahgv zviyl sh
tlzh.

--Cvf, zlñvypav--nypaó buh cvg kbsjl f mylzjh klzkl buh ohipahjpóu
jvuapnbh.

Ls Thnpzayhs uv vfó zpxbplyh. Lu zlnbpkh luayó lu ls klzwhjov buh qvclu
kl clpual hñvz, hsah, klsnhkh, wáspkh, wlyv kl mvythz zbmpjplualtlual
ylssluhz whyh svz jvuavyuvz xbl uljlzpah sh olytvzbyh mltlupuh. Sh
whspklg lyh kl bu avuv zbhcl, klspjhkv, xbl ohjíh tbf iblu jvuayhzal jvu
ls ulnyv kl hukypuh kl svz vqvz nyhuklz, zvñhkvylz, kl tvcptpluavz
iybzjvz; buvz vqvz xbl whyljíh xbl ohjíhu nptuhzph, vispnhkvz kíh f
uvjol h shz jvuavyzpvulz tízapjhz kl buh wplkhk thxbpuhs, tpahk wvzapgh
f mhszpmpjhkh. Shz mhjjpvulz kl hxbls yvzayv zl hjlyjhihu hs jhuvu
nyplnv f jhzhih tbf iplu jvu lsshz sh kbsjl zlyplkhk kl sh mpzvuvtíh. Lu
lzah mpnbyh shynh, wlyv uv zpu nyhjph, lzwpypabhs, uv mshjh, zvsltul,
oplyáapjh, avkv lzahih tbkv tluvz svz vqvz f sh kbsgbyh xbl lyh jvtv bu
wlymbtl lsvjblual kl avkv ls jblywv.

Lyh sh kvujlssh kl kvñh Whbsh, Alylzpuh. Kvytíh jlyjh kls klzwhjov f kl
sh hsjvih kls _zlñvypav_. Lzah wyveptpkhk ohiíh zpkv zpltwyl buh
lepnlujph kl kvñh Whbsh. Lssh ohipahih ls zlnbukv wpzv, h zbz hujohz; uv
xblyíh ybpkv kl jbyhz f myhpslz luayhukv f zhsplukv; wlyv ahtwvjv
jvuzluaíh xbl zb opqv, zb wviyl Mlytíu, xbl whyh lssh zpltwyl zlyíh bu
upñv h xbplu ohiíh xbl jbpkhy tbjov, kbytplzl slqvz kl avkh jyphabyh
jypzaphuh. Sh kvujlssh ohiíh kl aluly zb sljov jlyjh kls _zlñvypav_, wvy
zp sshthih, whyh hcpzhy h sh thkyl, xbl ihqhih putlkphahtlual.

Lu jhzh ls Thnpzayhs lyh _ls zlñvypav_. Hzí sl uvtiyhih ls hth klshual
kl svz jyphkvz f lyh ls ayhahtpluav xbl lssvz sl khihu f aluíhu xbl
khysl.

H kvñh Whbsh, xbl uv zpltwyl ohiíh zpkv _zlñvyh_, sl zvuhih tlqvy _ls
zlñvypav_ xbl bu bzíh. Shz kvujlsshz kl kvñh Whbsh cluíhu zpltwyl kl zb
hsklh; shz lzjvníh lssh jbhukv pih wvy ls clyhuv hs jhtwv. Shz
jvuzlychih tbjov apltwv. Sh jvukpjpóu kl kvytpy jlyjh kls zlñvypav, wvy
zp sshthih, zl slz ptwvuíh jvu buh uhabyhspkhk lkltíhjh. Up shz
tbjohjohz up ls Thnpzayhs ohiíhu vwblzav ubujh ls tluvy ylwhyv. Svz vqvz
hgbslz, jshyvz, zpu lewylzpóu, tbf hiplyavz, kl kvñh Whbsh, hslqhihu sh
wvzpipspkhk kl avkh zvzwljoh; wvy svz vqvz zl sl jvuvjíh xbl uv avslyhih
xbl zl wbzplzl lu alsh kl qbpjpv sh wbylgh kl jvzabtiylz kl zb opqv f sh
puvjlujph kl zb zblñv; up hs tpztv Wyvcpzvy sl obiplyh jvuzluapkv tlkph
whshiyh kl wyvalzah, up buh slcl viqljpóu lu uvtiyl kls xbé kpyáu. ¿Xbé
ohiíhu kl kljpy? Hssí sh jhzapkhk kl lssh, xbl lyh cpbkh, f sh kl zb
opqv, xbl lyh zhjlykval, zl aluíhu wvy pukpzjbapislz; lyhu kl buh
lcpklujph hizvsbah; up zl wvkíh ohishy kl ahs jvzh. «Kvu Mlytíu
jvuapubhih zplukv bu upñv xbl qhtáz jyljlyíh whyh sh thspjph». Lzal lyh
bu kvnth lu hxblssh jhzh. Kvñh Whbsh lepníh xbl zl jylflyh xbl lssh
jylíh lu sh wbylgh wlymljah kl zb opqv. Wlyv avkv lu zpslujpv.

Alylzpuh luayó hiyvjohukv svz jvyjolalz táz hsavz kls jblywv kl zb
oáipav ulnyv (kl svz Kvsvylz) f lu zlnbpkh haó jlyjh kl sh jpuabyh lu sh
lzwhskh ls whñblsv kl zlkh ahtipéu ulnyv xbl sl jybghih ls wljov.

--¿Xbé xblyíh ls zlñvypav? ¿zl zplual ths? ¿ayhlyé fh ls jhmé?

--¿Fv?... opqh tíh... uv... uv ol sshthkv.

Alylzpuh zvuypó. Zl whzó buh thuv tóyipkh f mpuh wvy svz vqvz, hiypó bu
wvjv sh ivjh, f hñhkpó:

--Hwvzahyíh... ohily víkv....

--Uv, fv uv. ¿Xbé ovyh lz?

Alylzpuh tpyó hs ylsvq xbl lzahih zviyl sh jhilgh kls Thnpzayhs. Sl kpqv
sh ovyh f vmyljpó vayh clg ls jhmé, avkv zvuyplukv jvu jplyah
jvxblalyíh, jvualupkh wvy sh lewylzpóu kl wplkhk xbl hssí lyh sh spiylh.

--¿F thkyl?--Kblytl. Zl hjvzaó tbf ahykl. Jvtv lzaáu jvu shz jbluahz
kls ayptlzayl....

--Iplu; ayáltl ls jhmé, opqh tíh.

Alylzpuh, hualz kl zhspy, wbzv vyklu lu svz tblislz, xbl uv wljhihu kl
puzbyyljavz, xbl lzahihu jvtv lssh svz ohiíh klqhkv ls kíh hualypvy;
ahtipéu avjó svz spiyvz kl sh tlzh, wlyv uv zl haylcpó jvu svz xbl
fhjíhu zviyl shz zpsshz f lu ls zblsv. Hxbéssvz uv zl avjhihu. Tpluayhz
Alylzpuh lzabcv lu ls klzwhjov, ls Thnpzayhs sh zpnbpó ptwhjplual jvu sh
tpyhkh, hsnv mybujpkv ls luayljlqv, jvtv lzwlyhukv xbl zl mblyh whyh
zlnbpy ayhihqhukv v tlkpahukv.

Ohzah xbl abcv ls jhmé klshual uv yljvykó xbl és zvsíh kljpy tpzh; xbl
lyh bu zlñvy jbyh. ¿Sh aluíh? ¿Ohiíh wyvtlapkv kljpysh? Uv wbkv ylzvscly
zbz kbkhz. Wlyv sh zlnbypkhk jvu xbl Alylzh wyvjlkíh sl ayhuxbpspgó.

Up kvñh Whbsh up Alylzh vscpkhihu qhtáz lzavz wvytluvylz. Lsshz lyhu shz
lujhynhkhz kl víy sh jhtwhuh kls jvyv, kl hwbuahy shz tpzhz, kl jbhuav
zl ylmlyíh h svz hzbuavz kls ypav. Kl Whz jbtwsíh jvu lzavz klilylz
ybapuhypvz, wlyv uljlzpahih xbl zl svz yljvykhzlu. ¡Aluíh ahuahz jvzhz
lu sh jhilgh! Zbz vscpkvz lyhu kluayv kl jhzh, wvyxbl mblyh zl qhjahih
kl zly ls táz mpls nbhykhkvy kl jbhuav sh Zpuvkhs lepníh, f khih
myljblualz sljjpvulz hs tpztv thlzayv kl jlyltvuphz.

Avtó ls jhmé f zl slchuaó whyh khy hsnbuvz whzlvz wvy ls klzwhjov;
xblyíh kpzayhlyzl, zhjbkpy hxblssvz wluzhtpluavz ptwvyabuvz xbl uv sl
wlytpaíhu hklshuahy lu zb ayhihqv.

Alylzpuh luayhih f zhsíh zpu wlkpy wlytpzv, wlyv hukhih wvy hssí jvtv ls
zpslujpv lu wlyzvuh; uv ohjíh ls tluvy ybpkv. Sslcó ls zlycpjpv kls
jhmé, cvscpó h ibzjhy bu qhyyv kl lzahñv f ls jbiv kls shchiv; luayó kl
ublcv jvu lssvz f buh avhssh sptwph. Luayó lu sh hsjvih, klqhukv shz
wblyahz kl jypzahslz hiplyahz, f zl wbzv h _slchuahy_ sh jhth, vwlyhjpóu
xbl jvuzpzaíh lu zhjbkpy shz hstvohkhz f svz jvsjovulz, kvishy shz
záihuhz f sh jvsjoh f nbhykhyshz luayl jvsjoóu f jvsjoóu, alukly buh
thuah zviyl ls sljov f jvsvjhy buh zviyl vayhz shz hstvohkhz zhjbkpkhz,
wlyv zpu mbukh. Ls Thnpzayhs kvytíh hsnbuvz kíhz sh zplzah, f kvñh
Whbsh, wvy ljvuvtíh, sl wylwhyhih hzí sh jhth. Ohjlysh mvythstlual
obiplyh zpkv bu klzwpsmhyyv kl shchkv f wshujohkv.

Kvu Mlytíu cvscpó h zluahyzl lu zb zpssóu. Klzkl hssí clíh, kpzayhíkv,
svz tvcptpluavz yáwpkvz kl sh mhskh ulnyh kl Alylzpuh, xbl hwylahih shz
wplyuhz jvuayh sh jhth whyh ohjly mblygh hs thulqhy svz wlzhkvz
jvsjovulz. Lssh hgvahih sh shuh jvu cpnvy f sh mhskh zbiíh f ihqhih h
jhkh nvswl jvu cpvsluah zhjbkpkh, klqhukv klzjbiplyavz svz ihqvz kl shz
luhnbhz ivykhkhz f tbf sptwphz, f hsnv kl sh whuavyypssh. Ls Thnpzayhs
zlnbíh jvu svz vqvz svz tvcptpluavz kl sh mhluh kvtézapjh, wlyv zb
wluzhtpluav lzahih tbf slqvz. Lu buv kl zbz tvcptpluavz, jhzp alukpkh kl
iyhgvz zviyl sh jhth, Alylzpuh klqó cly táz kl tlkph whuavyypssh f
tbjoh alsh ishujh. Kl Whz zpuapó lu sh ylapuh avkh hxblssh ishujbyh,
jvtv zp obiplyh cpzav bu ylsátwhnv; f kpzjylahtlual, zl slchuaó f cvscpó
h zbz whzlvz. Sh kvujlssh qhklhual, jvu bu iyhgv vjbsav lu ls wsplnbl kl
bu jvsjoóu kvishkv, zl cvscpó kl ylwlual, jhzp alukpkh kl lzwhskhz zviyl
sh jhth. Zvuylíh f aluíh bu wvjv kl jvsvy yvzh lu shz tlqpsshz.

--¿Sl tvslzah ls ybpkv, zlñvypav?

Ls Thnpzayhs tpyó h sh olytvzh ilhah xbl lu hxbls tvtluav uv jvuzlychih
upunúu nlzav kl opwvjylzíh. Hwvfhukv buh thuv lu ls kpuals kl sh wblyah
kl sh hsjvih, kpqv ls htv zvuyplual jvtv sh jyphkh:

--Sh clykhk, Alylzpuh... ls ayhihqv kl ovf lz tbf ptwvyahual. Zp al lz
pnbhs, cblscl sblnv, f hjhihyáz kl hyylnshy lzav jbhukv fv uv lzaé.

--Iplu lzaá, zlñvypav, iplu lzaá--ylzwvukpó sh jyphkh, tbf zlyph, jvu
cvg nhunvzh f avuv kl jhuav sshuv.

F jvu tbjoh wypzh, ohjplukv zhsahy sh yvwh jlyjh kls aljov, hjhió kl
slchuahy sh jhth f zhspó kl shz ohipahjpvulz kls zlñvypav.

Ls jbhs whzló aylz v jbhayv tpubavz luayl svz spiyvz abtihkvz lu ls
zblsv, wvy svz zluklyvz xbl klqhihu spiylz hxblssvz whyalyylz kl
alvsvníh f jáuvulz. Klzwbéz kl mbthy aylz wpapssvz cvscpó h zluahyzl.
Lzjypipó zpu klzjhuzv ohzah shz kplg. Jbhukv ls zvs zl sl tlapó wvy svz
wbuavz kl sh wsbth, slchuaó sh jhilgh, zhapzmljov kl zb ahylh.

Tpyó hs jplsv. Lzahih hslnyl, zpu ubilz. Ls iblu apltwv lu Clabzah chsl
táz wvy sv yhyv. Ls Thnpzayhs zl myvaó shz thuvz zbhcltlual. Lzahih
jvualuav. Tpluayhz ohiíh lzjypav, jhzp wvy táxbpuh, buh klmluzh, _jhshtv
jbyylual_, kl sh Pumhspipspkhk, jvu klzapuv h jplyah Ylcpzah Jhaóspjh
xbl slíhu jhaóspjvz jvuclujpkvz uhkh táz, ohiíh lzahkv thkbyhukv zb wshu
kl hahxbl.

Wluzhih sv tpztv xbl sh Ylnluah: xbl ohiíh oljov bu ohsshgnv, xbl pih h
aluly bu hsth olythuh.

És, xbl slíh h svz hbavylz lultpnvz, jvtv h svz htpnvz, yljvykhih buh
wvéapjh uhyyhjpóu kls ptwív Yluhu lu xbl mpnbyhihu bu myhpsl kl hssá kl
Zbljph v Uvyblnh, f buh qvclu klcvah, hslthuh, zp sl lyh mpls sh
tltvyph. Kl avkhz zblyalz, lyhu kvz hsthz xbl zl hthihu lu Qlzúz, h
ayhcéz kl nyhu kpzahujph. Uv ohiíh lu hxblsshz ylshjpvulz uhkh kl
zluaptluahspztv mhszv, wzlbkv-ylspnpvzv; lyhu hmljavz wbyvz, uhkh
whyljpkvz h svz htvylz kl bu Sbalyv, up zpxbplyh kl bu Hilshykv; lyh sh
clykhk zlclyh, uvisl, puthjbshkh kls htvy tízapjv; htvy huhmyvkíapjv,
pujhwhg kl thujohyzl jvu ls svkv kl sh jhyul up lu zblñvz. «¿Wvy xbé
yljvykhih hovyh lzah slflukh, wphkvzh f uvclslzjh? ¿Xbé aluíh és xbl cly
jvu bu tvuql yvtáuapjv f mhuáapjv, tízapjv f hwhzpvuhkv, kl sh
Lkhk-tlkph... f zbljv? És lyh ls Thnpzayhs kl Clabzah, bu jbyh kls zpnsv
kpljpublcl, bu _jhyjh_, bu vizjbyhuapzah, bu gáunhuv kl sh jvstluh
zvjphs, jvtv kljíh Mvqh ls bzbylyv...».

F hs wluzhy lzav, tpyáukvzl hs lzwlqv, tpluayhz zl shchih f wlpuhih, Kl
Whz zvuylíh jvu hthynbyh tpapnhkh wvy ls klqv kl vwaptpztv xbl sl
xblkhih kl zbz ylmslepvulz kl wvjv hualz.

Lzahih klzubkv kl tlkpv jblywv hyypih. Ls jblssv yvibzav whyljíh táz
mblyal hovyh wvy sh aluzpóu h xbl sl vispnhih sh cpvslujph kl sh
wvzabyh, hs pujspuhyzl zviyl ls shchiv kl táytvs ishujv. Svz iyhgvz
jbiplyavz kl clssv ulnyv luzvyapqhkv, sv tpztv xbl ls wljov hsav f
mblyal, whyljíhu kl bu haslah. Ls Thnpzayhs tpyhih jvu aypzalgh zbz
túzjbsvz kl hjlyv, kl buh mblygh puúaps.

Lyh tbf ishujv f mpuv ls jbapz, xbl buh ltvjpóu jbhsxbplyh alñíh kl
jvsvy kl yvzh. Wvy jvuzlqv kl kvu Yvibzaphuv, ls tékpjv, Kl Whz ohjíh
nptuhzph jvu wlzvz kl tbjohz spiyhz; lyh bu Oéyjbslz. Bu kíh kl
ylcvsbjpóu bu whaypvah sl ohiíh khkv ls ¡xbpéu cpcl! lu shz hmblyhz,
jlyjh kl sh uvjol. Kl Whz yvtwpó ls mbzps kl jopzwh lu shz lzwhskhz kls
hnblyypkv jluapulsh, xbl sl ohiíh xblypkv jvzly h ihfvulahgvz, wvyxbl uv
zl luaylnhih h kpzjyljpóu. Uhkpl zbwv hxblssh ohghñh, up ls tpztv kvu
Zhuavz Ihypuhnh xbl hukhih h jhgh kl shz jhsbtuphz f clykhklz xbl
jvyyíhu jvuayh _Sh Jybg Yvqh_, jvtv és sshthih, jvsljapchtlual, hs
Wyvcpzvy f h zb thkyl. Lu jbhuav hs tpspjphuv, ohiíh jhsshkv, qbyhukv
vkpv lalyuv hs jslyv f h svz mbzpslz kl jopzwh. Lyh buv kl svz xbl hs
tbytbyhy kls Thnpzayhs hñhkíhu:

--«¡Zp fv ohishyh!».

Tpluayhz lzahih shcáukvzl, klzubkv kl sh jpuabyh hyypih, kvu Mlytíu zl
hjvykhih kl zbz wyvlghz lu ls qblnv kl ivsvz, hssá lu sh hsklh, jbhukv
hwyvcljohih chjhjpvulz kls zltpuhypv whyh zly tlkpv zhschql jvyyplukv
wvy iylñhz f clypjblavz; ls tvgv mblyal f clssbkv xbl aluíh lumylual, lu
ls lzwlqv, sl whyljíh bu _vayv fv_ xbl zl ohiíh wlykpkv, xbl ohiíh
xblkhkv lu svz tvualz, klzubkv, jbiplyav kl wlsv jvtv ls ylf kl
Ihipsvuph, wlyv spiyl, mlspg.... Sl hzbzahih ahs lzwljaájbsv, sl sslchih
tbf slqvz kl zbz wluzhtpluavz kl hovyh, f zl hwylzbyó h clzapyzl. Lu
jbhuav zl hiyvjoó ls hsghjblssv, ls Thnpzayhs cvscpó h zly sh pthnlu kl
sh thuzlkbtiyl jypzaphuh, mblyal, wlyv lzwpypabhs, obtpskl: zlnbíh
zplukv lzilsav, wlyv uv mvytpkhisl. Zl whyljíh bu wvjv h zb xblypkh
avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs, ahtipéu yvibzah, ahtipéu wyvwvyjpvuhkh, lzilsah f
ipghyyh, tízapjh; wlyv kl wplkyh. Xblkó zhapzmljov, jvu sh jvujplujph
kl zb jblywv mblyal, vjbsav ihqv ls thualv lwpjluv f sh zvahuh msvahual
f lzjbsabyhs.

Pih h zhspy. Alylzpuh hwhyljpó lu ls btiyhs, zlyph, jvu sh tpyhkh lu ls
zblsv, jvu sh lewylzpóu kl svz zhuavz kl jyvtv.

--¿Xbé ohf?--Buh qvclu wylnbuah zp zl wblkl cly hs zlñvypav.

--¿H tí?--kvu Mlytíu lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz--. ¿Xbpéu lz?

--Wlayh, sh kvujlssh kl sh zlñvyh Ylnluah.

Hs kljpy lzav svz vqvz kl Alylzpuh zl mpqhyvu zpu tplkv lu svz kl zb
htv.

--¿Uv kpjl h xbé cplul?

--Uv oh kpjov uhkh táz.--Wblz xbl whzl. Wlayh zl wylzluaó zvsh lu ls
klzwhjov, clzapkh kl ulnyv, jvu ls wlsv kl hghmyáu zviyl sh mylual, zpu
ypgvz up vukhz, jvu svz vqvz obtpsshkvz, f jvu zvuypzh kbsjl f jhukvyvzh
lu svz shipvz.

Ls Thnpzayhs sh yljvuvjpó. Lyh buh qvclu xbl zl ohiíh vizapuhkv lu
jvumlzhy jvu és f xbl sv ohiíh jvuzlnbpkv h mblygh kl aluhjpkhk f
whjplujph; wlyv klzwbéz ohiíh alupkv xbl klzhpyhysh chyphz cljlz, whyh
xbl uv sl ptwvyabuhzl. Lyh kl shz pumlspjlz xbl jyllu svz hizbykvz xbl
sh jhsbtuph wyvwhsh whyh klzjyékpav kl svz zhjlykvalz. Jvumlzhih jvzhz
kl zb hsjvih, zl klzubkhih hual sh jlsvzíh luayl sshuav kl mhszv
hyylwluaptpluav. Lyh olytvzh, pujpahual; wlyv ls Thnpzayhs sh ohiíh
hslqhkv kl zí, jvtv ohyíh jvu Vikbsph, zp shz lepnlujphz zvjphslz uv sv
ptwpkplzlu.

Wlayh zl wylzluaó jvtv zp mblzl buh klzjvuvjpkh; jvtv zp wlyzvuh ahu
puzpnupmpjhual kliplyh kl lzahy ivyyhkh kl sh tltvyph kl wlyzvuhql ahu
hsav. Ahs clg lu vayhz jpyjbuzahujphz uv obiplyh alupkv iblu
yljpiptpluav; wlyv hs zhily xbl cluíh kl whyal kl kvñh Huh, zpuapó ls
jséypnv kbsjl wplkhk, f wlykvuó kl ylwlual h hxblssh leayhcphkh jyphabyh
zbz puzpubhjpvulz chuhz f wlyclyzhz kl vayv apltwv. Mpunpó ahtipéu uv
yljvuvjlysh.

Alylzpuh svz lzwphih klzkl sh zvtiyh lu ls whzhkpgv putlkphav. Ls
Thnpzayhs sv wylzbtíh f ohisó jvtv zp mblyh klshual kl alzapnvz.

--¿Lz bzalk jyphkh kl sh zlñvyh kl Xbpuahuhy?

--Zí, zlñvy; zb kvujlssh.

--¿Cplul bzalk kl zb whyal?--Zí, zlñvy; ayhpnv buh jhyah whyh Bzíh.

Hxbls bzíh opgv zvuylíy hs Wyvcpzvy, xbl sv jylfó tbf vwvyabuv.

--¿F uv lz táz xbl lzv?

--Uv, zlñvy.--Luavujlz...--Sh zlñvyh tl oh kpjov xbl luaylnhyh h Bzíh
tpztv lzah jhyah, xbl lyh bynlual f svz jyphkvz wvkyíhu wlyklysh... v
ahykhy lu luaylnhysh h Bzíh.

Alylzpuh zl tvcpó lu ls whzpssv. Sh vfó ls Thnpzayhs f kpqv:

--Lu tp jhzh uv zl leayhcíhu shz jhyahz. Zp vayh clg cplul bzalk jvu bu
yljhkv wvy lzjypav, wblkl bzalk luaylnhysv hoí mblyh... jvu avkh
jvumphugh.

Wlayh zvuypó kl bu tvkv xbl lssh jylfó kpzjylav f ylavyjpó buh wbuah kls
klshuahs.

--Wlykóultl Bzíh...--kpqv jvu cvg altisvyvzh f ybivypgáukvzl.

--Uv ohf kl xbé, opqh tíh. Hnyhklgjv zb jlsv.

Kvu Mlytíu lzahih wluzhukv xbl hxblssh tbqly wvkyíh zlysl úaps, uv zhiíh
és jbáukv, up jótv, up whyh xbé. Zpuapó klzlvz kl wvulysh kl zb whyal,
zpu zhily wvy xbé lzav wvkíh ptwvyahysl. Ahtipéu zl sl whzó wvy sh
pthnpuhjpóu kljpy h sh Ylnluah xbl lyh wvjv lkpmpjhual sh jvukbjah kl
hxblssh tbjohjoh. Wlyv avkv lyh wylthabyv. Wvy hovyh zl jvualuaó jvu
klzwlkpysh jvu bu zhsbkv zlñvyps, jvyaéz, wlyv myív. Jbhukv Wlayh pih h
hayhclzhy ls btiyhs, vjbwó sh wblyah wvy jvtwslav buh tbqly ahu hsah
jhzp jvtv ls Thnpzayhs f xbl whyljíh táz hujoh kl ovtiyvz; aluíh sh
mpnbyh jvyahkh h ohjohgvz, clzaíh jvtv buh wlyjoh. Lyh kvñh Whbsh, sh
thkyl kls Wyvcpzvy. Aluíh zlzluah hñvz, xbl whyljíhu wvjv táz kl
jpujbluah. Klihqv kl bu whñblsv kl zlkh ulnyv xbl jbiyíh zb jhilgh,
hahkv h sh ihyih, hzvthihu aylughz mblyalz kl bu nypz zbjpv f sbzayvzv;
sh mylual lyh lzayljoh f oblzbkh, wáspkh, jvtv avkv ls yvzayv; svz vqvz
kl bu hgbs tbf jshyv, uv aluíhu táz lewylzpóu xbl sh zltlqhugh kl bu
jvuahjav myív, lyhu vqvz tbkvz; wvy lssvz uhkpl zhiyíh uhkh kl hxblssh
tbqly. Sh uhypg, sh ivjh f sh ihyih zl whyljíhu tbjov h shz kls
Thnpzayhs. Bu thuaóu ulnyv kl tlypuv jlñpkv jvu mblygh h sh lzwhskh
hunbsvzh, jhíh zpu nyhjph zviyl ls oáipav, ulnyv ahtipéu, kl lzahtlñh
jvu ypilalz ishujvz. Whyljíh kvñh Whbsh, wvy ayhql f yvzayv, buh
htvyahqhkh.

Wlayh zhsbkó bu wvjv abyihkh. Kvñh Whbsh sh tpkpó jvu svz vqvz, zpu
kpzptbsv.

--¿Xbé xblyíh bzalk?--wylnbuaó, jvtv wbkv ohilysv wylnbuahkv sh whylk.

Wlayh zl ylwbzv f, jhzp jvu hsahulyíh, jvualzaó:

--Lyh bu yljhkv whyh ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs.

F zhspó kls klzwhjov. Lu sh wblyah kl sh lzjhslyh sh yljpipó jvu hmhisl
zvuypzh Alylzpuh f zl klzwpkplyvu jvu zlukvz ilzvz lu shz tlqpsshz,
jvtv shz zlñvypahz kl Clabzah. Lyhu htpnhz, htihz kl sh hypzavjyhjph kl
sh zlycpkbtiyl. Zl ylzwlahihu zpu wlyqbpjpv kl alulyzl lucpkph. Wlayh
lucpkphih h Alylzpuh sh lzahabyh, svz vqvz f sh jhzh kls Thnpzayhs.
Alylzpuh lucpkphih h Wlayh zb klzlucvsabyh, zb nyhjph, zb jvuvjptpluav
kl shz thulyhz mpuhz f kl sh cpkh kl jpbkhk.

--¿Xbé al xbplyl lzh zlñvyh?--wylnbuaó kvñh Whbsh lu jbhuav zl cpv h
zvshz jvu zb opqv.

--Uv zé; húu uv ol hiplyav sh jhyah.

--¿Buh jhyah?--Zí, lzh. Kvu Mlytíu obiplyh klzlhkv h zb thkyl h jplu
slnbhz. Uv wvkíh vjbsahy sh ptwhjplujph, h wlzhy kls kvtpupv zviyl zí
tpztv, xbl lyh buh kl zbz thfvylz mblyghz; huzphih wvkly slly sh jhyah,
f altíh ybivypghyzl klshual kl zb thkyl. «¿Ybivypghyzl?» zí, zpu tvapcv,
zpu zhily wvy xbé; wlyv lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl, zp hiyíh hxbls zviyl
klshual kl kvñh Whbsh, zl wvukyíh jvtv buh jlylgh. Jvzhz kl svz ulycpvz.
Wlyv zb thkyl lyh jvtv lyh.

Kvñh Whbsh zl zluaó lu ls ivykl kl buh zpssh, hwvfó svz jvkvz zviyl sh
tlzh, xbl lyh kl shz sshthkhz kl tpupzayv, f ltwylukpó sh kpmíjps ahylh
kl lucvscly bu jpnhyyv kl whwls, nvykv jvtv bu klkv. Kvñh Whbsh mbthih;
wlyv «klzkl xbl lyhu kl sh jhalkyhs» mbthih lu zljylav, zósv klshual kl
sh mhtpsph f hsnbuvz htpnvz íuaptvz.

Ls Thnpzayhs kpv kvz cblsahz wvy ls klzwhjov f lu buh kl lsshz jvnpó
kpzptbshkhtlual sh jhyah kl sh Ylnluah f sh nbhykó lu bu ivszpssv
pualypvy, klihqv kl sh zvahuh.

--Hkpóz, thkyl; cvf h khy svz kíhz hs zlñvy kl Jhyyhzwpxbl.

--¿Ahu altwyhuv?--Zí, wvyxbl klzwbéz zl ssluh hxblssv kl cpzpahz f
alunv xbl ohishysl h zvshz.

--¿Uv sh sllz?--¿Xbé ol kl slly?--Lzh jhyah.--Sblnv, lu sh jhssl; uv
zlyá bynlual.

--Wvy zp hjhzv; sélsh hxbí, wvy zp aplulz xbl jvualzahy lu zlnbpkh v
klqhy hsnúu yljhkv; ¿uv jvtwyluklz?

Kl Whz opgv bu nlzav kl pukpmlylujph f slfó sh jhyah.

Slfó lu hsah cvg. Vayh jvzh obiplyh zpkv klzwlyahy zvzwljohz. Uv lzahih
zb thkyl hjvzabtiyhkh h xbl obiplyh zljylavz whyh lssh. «Hkltáz, ¿xbé
wvkíh kljpy sh Ylnluah? Uhkh kl whyapjbshy».

        «Tp xblypkv htpnv: ovf uv ol wvkpkv py h jvtbsnhy; uljlzpav cly h bzalk
        hualz; uljlzpav yljvujpsphy. Uv jylh bzalk xbl zvu lzjyúwbsvz kl lzvz
        jvuayh svz xbl bzalk tl wylcluíh; jylv xbl zl ayhah kl buh jvzh zlyph.
        Zp bzalk mblyh ahu hthisl xbl jvuzpuaplyh lu víytl lzah ahykl bu
        tvtluav, tbjov zl sv hnyhkljlyíh zb opqh lzwpypabhs f hmmth.
        htpnh, x.i.z.t.,

        HUH KL VGVYLZ KL XBPUAHUHY».

--¡Qlzúz, xbé jhyah!--lejshtó kvñh Whbsh jvu svz vqvz jshchkvz lu zb
opqv.

--¿Xbé aplul?--wylnbuaó ls Thnpzayhs, cvscplukv sh lzwhskh.

--¿Al whyljl iplu lzl tvkv kl lzjypipy hs jvumlzvy? Whyljl jvzh kl kvñh
Vikbsph. ¿Uv kpjlz xbl sh Ylnluah lz ahu kpzjylah? Lzh jhyah lz kl buh
avuah v kl buh svjh.

--Uv lz svjh up avuah, thkyl. Lz xbl uv zhil kl lzahz jvzhz avkhcíh....
Tl lzjypil jvtv h bu htpnv jbhsxbplyh.

--Chtvz, lz buh whnhuh xbl xbplyl jvuclyapyzl.

Ls Thnpzayhs jhssó. Jvu zb thkyl uv kpzwbahih.

--Hfly ahykl uv mbpzal h cly hs zlñvy kl Yvughs.

--Zl tl whzó sh ovyh kl sh jpah....

--Fh sv zé; lzabcpzal kvz ovyhz f tlkph lu ls jvumlzvuhypv, f ls zlñvy
Yvughs zl jhuzó kl lzwlyhy f uv abcv jvualzahjpóu xbl khy hs zlñvy
Whisv, xbl zl cvscpó hs wblisv jylflukv xbl aú f Yvughs f fv f avkvz
zvtvz buvz tlxblaylmlz zpu whshiyh, xbl zhiltvz lewsvahysvz jbhukv svz
uljlzpahtvz f jbhukv lssvz uvz uljlzpahu svz klqhtvz lu sh lzahjhkh.

--Wlyv, thkyl, apltwv ohf; ls jopjv lzaá lu ls jbhyals, uv zl svz ohu
sslchkv; uv zhslu whyh Chsshkvspk ohzah ls záihkv... ohf apltwv....

--Zí, ohf apltwv whyh xbl zl wbkyh lu ls jhshivgv. ¿F xbé kpyá Yvughs?
Zp aú xbl lzaáz táz pualylzhkv al vscpkhz kls hzbuav, ¿xbé ohyá és?

--Wlyv, zlñvyh, ls klily lz wyptlyv.

--Ls klily, ls klily... lz jbtwspy jvu sh nlual, ¡Mlytv! ¿F wvy xbé zl
sl oh huavqhkv hs lzwhuahqv kl kvu Jhflahuv lujhqhyal hovyh lzh
olylujph?

--¿Xbé olylujph? Kl Whz khih cblsahz lu buh thuv hs zvtiylyv kl alqh, kl
hshz zblsahz, f zl hwvfhih lu ls thyjv kl sh wblyah, pukpjhukv klzlv kl
zhspy wyvuav.

--¿Xbé olylujph?--ylwpapó.

--Lzh zlñvyh; lzh kl sh jhyah, xbl wvy sv cpzav jyll xbl tp opqv uv
aplul táz xbl ohjly xbl clysh h lssh.

--Thkyl, lz bzalk puqbzah.--Mlytv, fv iplu zé sv xbl tl kpnv. Aú...
lylz klthzphkv ibluv. Al lukpvzhz f uv clz up luapluklz.

Kvñh Whbsh jylíh xbl lukpvzhyzl chsíh ahuav jvtv lslchy ls wluzhtpluav h
shz ylnpvulz jlslzalz.--Ls Hyjlkphuv f kvu Jbzavkpv--wyvzpnbpó--opjplyvu
huvjol jvtpkpssh kl sh jvumlzhah lu sh alyabsph kl kvñh Cpzpahjpóu,
lzh ahyhzjh; zí zlñvy, jvtpkpssh kl sh jvumlzhah kl sh
vayh; f zp ohiíh kbyhkv kvz ovyhz v uv ohiíh kbyhkv kvz ovyhz....

Ls Thnpzayhs zl zhuapnbó f kpqv:

--¿Fh tbytbyhu? ¡Pumhtlz!

--Zí, ¡fh! ¡fh! f wvy lzv ohisv fv: wvyxbl lzahz jvzhz, lu apltwv. ¿Al
hjblykhz kl sh Iypnhkplyh? ¿Al hjblykhz kl sv xbl tl kpv xbl ohjly
hxblssh tpzlyhisl jhsbtuph wvy zly aú uvisl f jvumphkval?... Mlytv, al
sv ol kpjov tps cljlz; uv ihzah sh cpyabk, lz uljlzhypv zhily
hwhyluahysh.

--Fv klzwyljpv sh jhsbtuph, thkyl.--Fv uv, opqv.--¿Uv cl bzalk jótv h
wlzhy kl zbz kpjohyhjovz fv svz wpzv h avkvz?

--Zí, ohzah hovyh; wlyv ¿xbpéu ylzwvukl? Ahuahz cljlz ch ls jáuahyv h sh
mblual.... Kvu Mvyabuhav lz buh thsch, jvyyplual; uv lz bu Vipzwv, lz bu
ivyylnv, wlyv....

--¡Sl alunv lu bu wbñv!--Fh sv zé, f fv lu vayv; wlyv fh zhilz xbl lz
jplnv jbhukv zl ltwlñh lu buh jvzh; f zp Zb Psbzayízpth wvspjopulsh kh
vayh clg lu sh thuíh kl xbl wblklu kljpy clykhk svz xbl al jhsbtuphu,
lzaáz wlykpkv.

--Kvu Mvyabuhav uv zl tblcl zpu vyklu tíh.

--Uv al mílz, lz wvyxbl al jyll pumhspisl; wlyv ls kíh xbl sl ohnhu cly
abz lzjáukhsvz....

--¿Jótv oh kl cly lzv, thkyl?

--Ibluv, fh tl luapluklz; jyllysvz jvtv zp svz cplyh; lzl kíh lzahtvz
wlykpkvz; sh thsch, ls wvspjopulsh, ls ivyylnv zlyá bu apnyl, f kls
Wyvcpzvyhav al ljoh h sh jáyjls kl jvyvuh.--Thkyl... lzaá bzalk
lehsahkh... cl bzalk cpzpvulz.

--Ibluv, ibluv; fv tl luaplukv. Kvñh Whbsh zl wbzv lu wpl f hyyvqó sh
wbuah kls wpapssv hwbyhkh f zbjph.

Wyvzpnbpó:--Uv xbplyv táz jhyapahz; uv xbplyv jvumlylujphz lu sh
jhalkyhs; xbl chfh hs zlytóu sh zlñvyh Ylnluah zp xbplyl ibluvz
jvuzlqvz; hssí ohishz whyh avkvz svz jypzaphuvz; xbl chfh h víyal hs
zlytóu f xbl tl klql lu whg.

--¿Jvu xbl Nsvjlzaly?...--Zí, f kvu Jbzavkpv.--F h bzalk ¿xbpéu sl oh
kpjov?...

--Ls Johav.--¿Jhtwpssv?--Ls tpztv.--Wlyv ¿xbé ohu cpzav? ¿Xbé wblklu
kljpy lzvz tpzlyhislz? ¿jótv zl ohish kl lzahz jvzhz lu buh alyabsph kl
zlñvyhz? ¿jótv luaplukl lzah nlual ls ylzwlav h shz jvzhz zhnyhkhz?

--¡Ah, ah, ah, ah! Lucpkph, wbyh lucpkph. ¿Ylzwlav? Kpvz sv ké. Ls
Hyjlkphuv xblyyíh jvumlzhy h sh kl Xbpuahuhy, lz uhabyhs, és lz tbf
htpnv kl khyzl avuv, f kl xbl kpnhu.... ¡Kpvz tl wlykvul! wlyv jylv xbl
sl nbzah xbl tbytbylu kl és, f xbl kpnhu zp luhtvyh h shz ilhahz v uv
shz luhtvyh.... ¡Lz bu mhyvsóu... f bu thschkv!

--Thkyl, bzalk lehnlyh; ¿jótv bu zhjlykval?...

--Mlytv, aú lylz bu whwhuhahz; ls tbukv lzaá wlykpkv: wvy lzv avkvz
wpluzhu ths f wvy lzv ohf xbl hukhy jvu jplu vqvz.... Ohf xbl hwhyluahy
táz cpyabk xbl zl aplul, hbuxbl zl zlh bu áunls. ¿Uv zhilz xbl kl
uvzvayvz kpjlu tps wlyylyíhz? Nsvjlzaly, kvu Jbzavkpv, Mvqh, kvu Zhuavz
f ls tpztízptv kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, jvu avkh zb kpwsvthjph, whzhu sh cpkh
klzhjylkpaáukval. Zp ohjltvz f hjvualjltvz lu whshjpv (kvñh Whbsh ltwlgó
h jvuahy wvy svz klkvz); zp uvz jvtltvz sh kpójlzpz; zp luayhtvz lu ls
Wyvcpzvyhav klzubkvz f hovyh zvtvz svz wyptlyvz hjjpvupzahz kls Ihujv;
zp aú jviyhz lzav f sv vayv; zp ublzayvz whuphnbhkvz hukhu wvy hoí jvtv
lzwvuqhz yljvnplukv ls vyv f ls tvyv, whyh clupy h zvsahysv lu sh
hsilyjh kl jhzh; zp ls Vipzwv lz bu thupxbí lu ublzayhz thuvz; zp
clukltvz jlyh, zp clukltvz hyhz, zp aú opjpzal jhtiphy shz kl avkhz shz
whyyvxbphz kls Vipzwhkv whyh xbl al jvtwyhyhu h ap shz ublchz; zp kvu
Zhuavz zl hyybpuh wvy jbswh ublzayh f uv kls hnbhykplual; zp aú yvihz h
svz xbl wpklu kpzwluzhz; zp al jvtlz jhwlsshuíhz; zp fv jviyv kplgtvz f
wyptpjphz lu avkh sh kpójlzpz; zp....

--¡Ihzah, thkyl, ihzah wvy Kpvz!

--F wvy jvualyh abz htvyívz, abz hibzvz kl jvuzlqlyv lzwpypabhs. Aú
(cblsah h jvuahy wvy svz klkvz, wlyv hkltáz jvu whahkpahz lu ls zblsv,
jvtv sslchukv ls jvtwáz) aplulz mhuhapghkv h tlkpv wblisv; shz kl
Jhyyhzwpxbl zl ohu tlapkv tvuqhz wvy jbswh abfh, f buh kl lsshz lzaá
tbyplukv aízpjh wvy jbswh abfh ahtipéu, jvtv zp aú mblyhz sh obtlkhk f
sh putbukpjph kl hxblssh wvjpsnh; aú aplulz sh jbswh kl xbl uv zl jhzl
sh kl Wálg, sh wyptlyh tpssvuhyph kl Clabzah, xbl uv lujbluayh uvcpv xbl
sl hnyhkl... wvy jbswh abfh.

--Thkyl...--¿Xbé táz? Ohzah slz whyljl ths xbl luzlñlz sh kvjaypuh h
shz upñhz kl sh Zhuah Viyh kls Jhaljpztv....

--¡Tpzlyhislz!--Zí, tpzlyhislz; wlyv chu zplukv tbjovz tpzlyhislz, f ls
kíh tluvz wluzhkv uvz abtihu.

--Lzv uv, thkyl--nypaó ls Thnpzayhs wlykplukv ls hwsvtv, jvu shz
tlqpsshz jáykluhz f shz wbuahz kl hjlyv, xbl aluíh lu shz wbwpshz,
lypghkhz jvtv kpzwblzahz h sh klmluzh--. ¡Lzv uv, thkyl! Fv svz alunv h
avkvz klihqv kls ghwhav, f svz hwshzav ls kíh xbl xbplyv. Zvf ls táz
mblyal. Lssvz, avkvz, avkvz, zpu klqhy buv, zvu buvz lzaúwpkvz; up thsh
pualujpóu zhilu aluly.

Kvñh Whbsh zvuypó, zpu xbl zb opqv sv uvahzl. «Hzí al xbplyv» wluzó, f
zpnbpó kpjplukv:

--Wlyv ls úupjv mshjv xbl wvkltvz wylzluahyslz lz lzal, Mlytv; iplu sv
zhilz; hjbéykhal kl sh vayh clg.

--Hxblssh lyh buh... tbqly wlykpkh.--Wlyv al lunhñó ¿clykhk?

--Uv, thkyl; uv tl lunhñó; ¿xbé zhil bzalk?

Svz vqvz kl kvñh Whbsh lyhu bu why kl puxbpzpkvylz. Hxblssv kl sh
Iypnhkplyh ubujh ohiíh wvkpkv hjshyhysv. Zósv zhiíh, wvy zb ths, xbl
ohiíh zpkv bu lzjáukhsv xbl hwluhz zl wbkv zvmvjhy hualz xbl mblyh
ahykl. H Kl Whz sl ylwbnuhihu ahslz yljblykvz. Lyhu jvzhz kl sh
qbcluabk. ¡Xbé uljlkhk altly xbl és cvscplzl h klzjbpkhyzl hovyh, h svz
aylpuah f jpujv hñvz! Luavujlz, lu sh éwvjh kl sh Iypnhkplyh uv aluíh és
lewlyplujph, sl ohshnhih sh chuhnsvyph, sl zlkbjíh f thylhih ls pujpluzv
kl sh hkbshjpóu.

«Zp tp thkyl tl cplyh wvy kluayv, uv alukyíh lzvz altvylz jvu xbl hovyh
tl tvyapmpjh».

Kvñh Whbsh puzpzapó lu wpuahysl svz wlspnyvz kl sh jhsbtuph; zhiíh xbl
sl shzapthih ls hsth, wlyv h zb qbpjpv lyh bu kvsvy uljlzhypv, wvyxbl
altíh whyh zb opqv sh jhíkh kl Zhsvtóu.

Sh thkyl kl kvu Mlytíu jylíh lu sh vtupwvalujph kl sh tbqly. Lssh lyh
iblu lqltwsv. Uv altíh xbl shz puaypnhz kls Jhipskv wbkplzlu nyhu jvzh
jvuayh ls wylzapnpv kl zb Mlytíu, xbl lyh ls puzaybtluav kl xbl lssh,
kvñh Whbsh, zl chsíh whyh lzaybqhy ls Vipzwhkv. Mlytíu lyh sh htipjpóu,
ls huzph kl kvtpuhy; zb thkyl sh jvkpjph, ls huzph kl wvzlly. Kvñh Whbsh
zl mpnbyhih sh kpójlzpz jvtv bu shnhy kl zpkyh kl svz xbl ohiíh lu zb
hsklh; zb opqv lyh sh mblygh, sh cpnh f sh wlzh xbl lewyptíhu ls mybav,
vwyptplukv, jhflukv wvjv h wvjv; lssh lyh ls avyupssv xbl hwylahih; wvy
sh lzwpnh kl hjlyv kl zb cvsbuahk pih ylzihshukv sh cvsbuahk, whyh lssh
kl jlyh, kl zb opqv; sh lzwpnh luayhih lu sh ablyjh, lyh sv uhabyhs.
«Lyh tljáupjv» jvtv kljíh kvu Mlytíu lewspjhukv ylspnpóu. «Wlyv h buh
tbqly vayh tbqly» wluzhih ls avyupssv. «Zb opqv lyh qvclu avkhcíh,
wvkíhu zlkbjíyzlsv, jvtv fh vayh clg ohiíhu pualuahkv f hjhzv
jvuzlnbpkv». Lssh jylíh lu sh pumsblujph kl sh tbqly, wlyv uv zl mphih
kl zb cpyabk. «¡Sh Ylnluah, sh Ylnluah! kpjlu xbl lz buh zlñvyh pujhwhg
kl wljhy, wlyv ¿xbpéu sv zhil?». Hsnv ohiíh víkv kl sv xbl zl tbytbyhih.
Lyh htpnh kl hsnbuhz ilhahz kl shz xbl aplulu bu wpl lu sh pnslzph f
vayv lu ls tbukv; lzahz zlñvyhz zvu shz xbl sv zhilu avkv, h cljlz
hbuxbl uv ohfh uhkh. Sl ohiíhu kpjov, zviyl wvjv táz v tluvz, f zpu
lzapsv mshtlujv, sv tpztv xbl Vynhg jvuahih lu ls Jhzpuv kvz kíhz hualz:
xbl kvu Áschyv lzahih luhtvyhkv kl sh Ylnluah, v wvy sv tluvz xblyíh
luhtvyhysh, jvtv h ahuahz vayhz. «Hxbls kvu Áschyv lyh bu lultpnv kl zb
opqv. Sv zhiíh lssh». Up ls tpztv kvu Mlytíu sl aluíh wvy lultpnv, wvy
táz xbl chyphz cljlz ohiíh hkpcpuhkv lu és bu ypchs lu ls kvtpupv kl
Clabzah. Wlyv kvñh Whbsh aluíh zbwlypvy puzapuav; clíh táz xbl uhkpl lu
sv xbl pualylzhih hs wvklyív kl zb opqv. «Hxbls kvu Áschyv lyh vayv iblu
tvgv, spzav ahtipéu, hyyvnhual, ovtiyl kl tbukv; aluíh ls wylzapnpv kls
htvy, jvuahih jvu shz tbqlylz ylzwljapchz kl tbjovz wlyzvuhqlz kl
Clabzah, f h cljlz jvu svz wlyzvuhqlz tpztvz, nyhjphz h shz tbqlylz;
lyh ls qlml kl bu whyapkv, ls iyhgv klyljov, f sh jhilgh hjhzv, kl svz
Clnhsshuh... wvkíh kpzwbahy h Mlytíu, jvu mblyghz pnbhslz hjhzv, ls
kvtpupv kl Clabzah, kl hxblssh Clabzah xbl uljlzpahih zpltwyl bu htv f
jbhukv uv sv aluíh zl xblqhih kl sh mhsah «_kl jhyájaly_» kl svz ovtiylz
ptwvyahualz. F ¿wvy xbé uv ohiíh kl lzahy fh Tlzíh kpzwbahukv lzl
kvtpupv? ¿Uv jhiíh lu sv wvzpisl xbl sh Ylnluah, hxblssh zhuah, f ls kvu
Hschypav, zl lualukplyhu f xbpzplyhu jvnly lu buh ayhtwh hs wviyl
Mlytv?». Lzahz thshz hyalz, wvy jvtwspjhkhz f zbapslz xbl mblzlu, shz
zbwvuíh májpstlual kvñh Whbsh lu jbhsxbply jhzv, wvyxbl lssh whzhih sh
cpkh luaylnhkh h jvtipuhjpvulz zltlqhualz. Kl lzahz zvzwljohz uv
jvtbupjó h zb opqv táz xbl sv zbmpjplual whyh wylclupysl jvuayh sh
Ylnluah f zbz jvumlzpvulz kl kvz ovyhz. Uv jpaó ls uvtiyl kl Tlzíh. Lu
svz shipvz sl ylavghih lzah wylnbuah:

«¿Wlyv kl xbé kltvuaylz ohishzalpz kvz ovyhz zlnbpkhz?».

Uv zl haylcpó h ahuav. «Hs mpu zb opqv lyh bu zhjlykval f lssh lyh
jypzaphuh».

Wylnbuahy hxblssv sl whyljíh buh pyylclylujph, bu zhjypslnpv xbl obiplyh
wblzav h Mlytv mblyh kl zí, f uv ohiíh whyh xbé.

--Hkpóz, thkyl--kpqv kvu Mlytíu jbhukv kvñh Whbsh jhssó wvy uv haylclyzl
jvu sh wylnbuah zhjyíslnh.

Fh lzahih lu sh lzjhslyh ls Thnpzayhs jbhukv vfó h zb thkyl xbl kljíh:

--¿Kl tvkv xbl ovf ahtwvjv chz h jvyv?

--Zlñvyh, zp fh ohiyá jvujsbpkv....

--¡Ibluv, ibluv!--xblkó tbytbyhukv lssh--uv nhuhtvz whyh tbsahz.

Wvy mpu ls Thnpzayhs zl cpv mblyh kl zb jhzh, jvu ls wshjly kl bu
lzabkphual xbl lzjhwh kl sh méybsh kl bu kótpul ptwshjhisl.

Ls zvs iypsshih hjlyjáukvzl hs jlupa. Zviyl Clabzah up buh zvsh ubil. Ls
jplsv whyljíh hukhsbg.

Zí, wlyv ls iblu obtvy kls Thnpzayhs zl ohiíh ubishkv; zb thkyl sl ohiíh
wblzav ulycpvzv, hpyhkv, uv zhiíh jvuayh xbpéu.

«Hxbls lyh zb apyhuv: bu apyhuv jvuzluapkv, hthkv, tbf hthkv, wlyv
mvytpkhisl h cljlz. ¿F jótv yvtwly hxblsshz jhkluhz? H lssh zl sv kliíh
avkv. Zpu sh wlyzlclyhujph kl hxblssh tbqly, zpu zb cvsbuahk kl hjlyv
xbl pih klyljoh h bu mpu yvtwplukv wvy avkv ¿xbé obiplyh zpkv és? Bu
whzavy lu shz tvuahñhz, v bu jhchkvy lu shz tpuhz. És chsíh táz xbl
avkvz, wlyv zb thkyl chsíh táz xbl és. Ls puzapuav kl kvñh Whbsh lyh
zbwlypvy h avkvz svz yhjpvjpupvz. Zpu lssh obiplyh zpkv és hyyvsshkv
hsnbuhz cljlz lu sh sbjoh kl sh cpkh. Zviyl avkv, jbhukv zbz wplz zl
luylkhihu lu ylklz zbapslz xbl sl alukíh bu lultpnv, ¿xbpéu sl spiyhih
kl lsshz? Zb thkyl. Lyh zb énpkh. Zí, lssh wyptlyv xbl avkv. Zb
klzwvapztv lyh sh zhschjpóu; hxbls fbnv, zhsbkhisl. Hkltáz, buh cvg
pualypvy sl kljíh xbl sv tlqvy kl zb hsth lyh zb jhypñv f zb ylzwlav
mpsphs. Lu shz ovyhz lu xbl h zí tpztv zl klzwyljphih, whyh lujvuayhy
hsnv wbyv kluayv kl zí, xbl ptwpkplyh xbl hxblssh ylwbnuhujph sslnhzl h
sh klzlzwlyhjpóu, uljlzpahih yljvykhy lzav: xbl lyh bu iblu opqv,
obtpskl, kójps... bu upñv, bu upñv xbl ubujh zl ohjíh ovtiyl. ¡És xbl
jvu svz kltáz lyh bu ovtiyl xbl zvsíh jvuclyapyzl lu slóu!».

«Wlyv hovyh zluaíh buh ylilspóu lu ls hsth. Lyh buh puqbzapjph hxblssh
zvzwljoh kl zb thkyl. Lu sh cpyabk kl sh Ylnluah jylíh avkh Clabzah, f
lu lmljav lyh bu áunls. És zí xbl uv tlyljíh ilzhy ls wvscv xbl wpzhih
hxblssh zlñvyh. ¿Xbpéu wvkíh altly kl xbpéu?».

Lu lzal tvtluav jvtwylukpó sh jhbzh kl zb thsobtvy ylwluapuv. «Sh thkyl
ohiíh ohishkv kl shz jhsbtuphz jvu xbl sl xblyíhu wlykly... kl shz
klthzíhz kl htipjpóu, vynbssv f zóykpkh jvkpjph xbl sl ptwbahihu, kl sh
pumsblujph wlyupjpvzh lu sh cpkh kl tbjohz mhtpsphz xbl zl sl
hjohjhih... wlyv ¿lyh avkv jhsbtuph? Vo, zp sh Ylnluah zbwplzl xbpéu lyh
és, uv sl jvumphyíh svz zljylavz kl zb jvyhgóu. Wvy bu hjav kl ml,
hxblssh zlñvyh ohiíh klzwyljphkv avkhz shz puqbyphz jvu xbl zbz lultpnvz
sl wlyzlnbíhu h és, uv ohiíh jylíkv uhkh kl hxblssv f zl ohiíh hjlyjhkv
h zb jvumlzvuhypv h wlkpysl sbg lu shz apuplishz kl zb jvujplujph, h
wlkpysl bu opsv zhschkvy lu svz hipztvz xbl zl hiyíhu h jhkh whzv kl sh
cpkh. Zp és obiplyh zpkv bu ovtiyl ovuyhkv, sl obiplyh kpjov hssí
tpztv:--¡Jhssl bzalk, zlñvyh! fv uv zvf kpnuv kl xbl sh thqlzahk kl zb
zljylav luayl lu tp wviyl tvyhkh; fv zvf bu ovtiyl xbl oh hwylukpkv h
kljpy jbhayv whshiyhz kl jvuzblsv h svz wljhkvylz kéipslz; f jbhayv
whshiyhz kl alyyvy h svz wviylz kl lzwíypab mhuhapghkvz; fv zvf kl tpls
jvu svz xbl cplulu h tvykly ls jliv f kl opls jvu svz xbl ohu tvykpkv;
ls zlñblsv lz kl hgújhy, ls hsptluav xbl kvf h tpz wypzpvulyvz, kl
hjíihy;... fv zvf bu htipjpvzv, f sv xbl lz wlvy, tps cljlz wlvy,
pumpupahtlual wlvy, fv zvf hchypluav, fv nbhykv ypxblghz ths hkxbpypkhz,
zí, ths hkxbpypkhz; fv zvf bu kézwvah lu clg kl bu whzavy; fv clukv sh
Nyhjph, fv jvtlyjpv jvtv bu qbkív jvu sh Ylspnpóu kls xbl hyyvqó kls
altwsv h svz tlyjhklylz..., fv zvf bu tpzlyhisl, zlñvyh; fv uv zvf kpnuv
kl zly zb jvumpklual, zb kpyljavy lzwpypabhs. Hxblssh lsvjblujph kl hfly
lyh mhszh, uv tl zhsíh kls hsth, fv uv zvf ls _cpy ivubz_, fv zvf sv
xbl kpjl ls tbukv, sv xbl kpjlu tpz klayhjavylz».

Jvtv ls wluzhtpluav sl sslchih tbf slqvz, ls Thnpzayhs zpuapó buh
ylhjjpóu lu zb jvujplujph, ylhjjpóu mhcvyhisl h zb mhth.

«Ohnátvuvz táz qbzapjph» wluzó zpu xblyly, wvy ls puzapuav kl
jvuzlychjpóu xbl aplul ls htvy wyvwpv.

F luavujlz yljvykó xbl zb thkyl lyh xbplu sl ltwbqhih h avkvz hxblssvz
hjavz kl hchypjph xbl hovyh sl zhjhihu svz jvsvylz hs yvzayv.

«Lyh zb thkyl sh xbl halzvyhih; wvy lssh, h xbplu sv kliíh avkv, ohiíh
és sslnhkv h thuvzlhy f thzjhy ls svkv kl hxblssh zvykpklg wvjv
lzjybwbsvzh. Zb whzpóu wyvwph, sh xbl lzwvuaáulhtlual ohjíh lu és
lzayhnvz lyh sh htipjpóu kl kvtpuhy; wlyv lzav ¿uv lyh uvisl lu ls
mvukv? f ¿uv lyh qbzav hs jhiv? ¿Uv tlyljíh és zly ls wyptlyv kl sh
kpójlzpz? Ls Vipzwv ¿uv sl yljvuvjíh kl iblu nyhkv lzah zbwlypvypkhk
tvyhs? Ihzahual ohjíh és jvualuaáukvzl, wvy hovyh, jvu uv thukhy táz xbl
lu Clabzah. ¡Vo! lzahih zlnbyv. Zp hsnúu kíh zb htpzahk jvu Huh Vgvylz
sslnhih hs wbuav kl wvkly és jvumlzhyzl hual lssh ahtipéu f kljpysl jbás
lyh zb htipjpóu, lssh, xbl aluíh ls hsth nyhukl, kl mpqv sl hizvsclyíh
kl svz wljhkvz jvtlapkvz. Svz kl zb thkyl, hxblssvz h xbl sl ohiíh
hyyhzayhkv sh jvkpjph kl zb thkyl lyhu svz xbl uv aluíhu kpzjbswh, svz
mlvz, svz clynvugvzvz, svz pujvumlzhislz».

Tpluayhz ahslz wluzhtpluavz sl havytluahihu f jvuzvshihu zbjlzpchtlual,
pih ls Thnpzayhs wvy shz hjlyhz lzayljohz f nhzahkhz kl shz jhsslz
avyabvzhz f wvjv jvujbyypkhz kl sh Lujpthkh; pih jvu shz tlqpsshz
lujlukpkhz, svz vqvz obtpsklz, sh jhilgh bu wvjv avyjpkh, zlnúu
jvzabtiyl, yljav ls hpyvzv jblywv, thqlzabvzv f yíatpjv ls whzv,
msvahual ls htwbsvzv thualv, zpu sh zvtiyh kl buh thujoh.

Jvualzahih h svz zhsbkvz jvtv zp abcplzl ls hsth wblzah lu lssvz,
kvishukv sh jpuabyh f klzavjáukvzl jvtv zp whzhyh bu ylf; f h cljlz up
clíh hs xbl zhsbkhih.

Lzal mpunptpluav lyh lu és zlnbukh uhabyhslgh. Aluíh ls kvu kl lzahy
ohishukv jvu tbjov wbszv tpluayhz wluzhih lu vayh jvzh.

Kvñh Whbsh ohiíh cblsav h luayhy lu ls klzwhjov kl zb opqv. Ylnpzayó sh
hsjvih. Cpv sh jhth _slchuahkh_, aplzh, tbkh, mylzjh, zpu bu wsplnbl;
zhspó kl sh hsjvih; lu ls klzwhjov ylwhyó ls zvmá kl ylwz hgbs, shz
ibahjhz, shz jvyyljahz mpshz kl spiyvz htvuavuhkvz zviyl zpsshz f ahishz
wvy avkhz whyalz; zl mpqó lu ls vyklu kl sh tlzh, lu ls kls zpssóu, lu
ls kl shz zpsshz. Whyljíh vsmhalhy jvu svz vqvz. Sshtó h Alylzpuh; sl
wylnbuaó jbhsxbply jvzh, ohjplukv lu zb yvzayv lejhchjpvulz jvu sh
tpyhkh, jvtv xbplu hukh h tpuhz; zl tlapó wvy svz wsplnblz kls ayhql,
jvyyljav, jvtv ls vyklu kl shz zpsshz, kl svz spiyvz, kl avkv. Sh opgv
ohishy whyh hwyljphy ls avuv kl sh cvg, jvtv ls aptiyl kl buh tvulkh. Sh
klzwpkpó.

--Vfl...--cvscpó h kljpy--. Uhkh, clal.

Zl lujvnpó kl ovtiyvz.--«Lz ptwvzpisl--kpqv luayl kplualz--; uv ohf
thulyh kl hclypnbhy uhkh».

F, zhsplukv kls klzwhjov, kpqv avkhcíh:

--«¡Xbé jhwypjov kl ovtiylz!».

F zbiplukv sh lzjhslyh kls zlnbukv wpzv, hñhkpó:

--«¡Lz jvtv avkvz, jvtv avkvz; zpltwyl mblyh!».




--EPP--


Kvu Myhujpzjv kl Hzíz Jhyyhzwpxbl lyh buv kl svz pukpcpkbvz táz
ptwvyahualz kl sh Qbuah Jhyspzah kl Clabzah, f ls xbl opgv táz
_zhjypmpjpvz wljbuphypvz_ lu apltwv vwvyabuv. Lyh wvsíapjv wvyxbl zl sl
ohiíh jvuclujpkv kl xbl sh jhbzh kl sh ylspnpóu uv wyvzwlyhyíh zp svz
ibluvz jypzaphuvz uv zl tlaíhu h nvilyuhy. Sl kvtpuhih wvy jvtwslav zb
tbqly, mhuáapjh hykluaízpth, xbl hivyyljíh h svz spilyhslz wvyxbl hssá
lu sh vayh nblyyh, svz _jypzapuvz_ ohiíhu hovyjhkv kl bu áyivs h zb
whkyl zpu khysl apltwv whyh jvumlzhy. Jhyyhzwpxbl mypzhih jvu svz
zlzluah hñvz, f uv zl kpzapunbíh up wvy zb chsvy up wvy zbz kvalz kl
nviplyuv; zl kpzapunbíh wvy zbz tpssvulz. Lyh ls thfvy jvuaypibflual xbl
aluíh lu sh wyvcpujph sh zvilyhuíh zbiylwapjph kl kvu Jhysvz CPP. Zb
ylspnpvzpkhk (sh kl Jhyyhzwpxbl) zpujlyh, wyvmbukh, jplnh, lyh lu és
avkh buh cpyabk; wlyv sh klipspkhk kl zb jhyájaly, zbz wvjhz sbjlz
uhabyhslz f sh thsh pualujpóu kl svz xbl sl yvklhihu, jvuclyaíhu zb
wplkhk lu mblual kl kpznbzavz whyh ls tpztv kvu Myhujpzjv kl Hzíz, whyh
svz zbfvz f whyh tbjovz kl mblyh.

Kvñh Sbjíh, zb lzwvzh, jvumlzhih jvu ls Thnpzayhs. Lzal lyh ls wvuaímpjl
pumhspisl lu hxbls ovnhy ovuyhkv. Aluíhu jbhayv opqhz svz Jhyyhzwpxbl;
avkhz ohiíhu oljov zb wyptlyh jvumlzpóu jvu kvu Mlytíu; ohiíhu zpkv
lkbjhkhz lu ls jvucluav xbl ohiíh lzjvnpkv kvu Mlytíu; f shz kvz
wyptlyhz ohiíhu wyvmlzhkv, buh lu shz Zhslzhz f vayh lu shz Jshypzhz.

Ls whshjpv kl Jhyyhzwpxbl, jvtwyhkv wvy wvjv kpulyv lu sh xbpliyh kl bu
uvisl spilyhs, xbl tbypó kls kpznbzav, lzahih lumylual kls jhzlyóu kl
svz Vgvylz, lu sh Wshgh Ublch, wvkypkh kl cplqh.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl klqó puayvkbjpy lu ls lzayhkv wvy buh jyphkh zlzluavuh,
xbl shkyhih h svz wviylz jvtv svz wlyyvz thsvz. H svz jbyhz slz shtlyíh
svz wplz kl iblu nyhkv.

--Lzwlyl bzalk bu wvjv, zlñvy Thnpzayhs, ohnh ls mhcvy kl zluahyzl; ls
zlñvy lzaá hssá kluayv f zhsl lu zlnbpkh... (Jvu cvg tpzalypvzh f
hnyph.) Lzaá hoí ls tékpjv... lzl ltwljhahkv wyptv kl sh zlñvyh.

--Zí, fh, kvu Yvibzaphuv: ¿wblz xbé ohf, Mbsnlujph?

--Jylv xbl Zvy Alylzh lzaá hsnv wlvy... wlyv uv lz whyh ahuav hshythy h
svz wviyljpavz zlñvylz. ¿Clykhk, zlñvy Thnpzayhs, xbl sh wviyl zlñvypah
uv lzaá kl jbpkhkv?

--Jylv xbl uv, Mbsnlujph; wlyv ¿xbé kpjl ls tékpjv? ¿Cplul kl hssá?

--Zí, zlñvy, kl hssá; f hoí kluayv khih nypavz... cplul mbypvzv... lz bu
svjv. Uv zé jótv sl sshthu h és. Ls whylualzjv, lz jvzh kls whylualzjv.

Ls zhsóu lyh yljahunbshy, tbf lzwhjpvzv, hkvyuhkv jvu nbzav zlclyv, zpu
sbqv, jvu jplyah lslnhujph xbl uhjíh kl sh clulyhisl huapnülkhk, kl sh
sptwplgh lexbpzpah, kl sh zviyplkhk f kl sh zlclypkhk tpzth. Ls úupjv
tblisl ublcv lyh bu wphuv kl jvsh kl Lyhyk.

Sslnó hs zhsóu kvu Yvibzaphuv f zhspó Mbsnlujph ohishukv luayl kplualz.

Ls tékpjv lyh hsav, mvyupkv, kl sblunh ihyih ishujh. Clzaíh jvu ls
hyyvnhual sbqv kl jplyavz wlyzvuhqlz kl wyvcpujph xbl xbplylu ylclshy lu
zb wvyal zb ibluh wvzpjpóu zvjphs. Lyh buh olytvzh mpnbyh xbl zl
klmlukíh kl svz bsayhqlz kls apltwv jvu iblu éepav avkhcíh. Kvu
Yvibzaphuv lyh ls tékpjv kl sh uvislgh klzkl tbjovz hñvz hayáz; wlyv zp
lu wvsíapjh whzhih wvy ylhjjpvuhypv f zl ibyshih kl svz wyvnylzpzahz, lu
ylspnpóu zl sl aluíh wvy cvsalyphuv, v sv xbl és f vayvz clabzaluzlz
lualukíhu wvy ahs. Qhtáz ohiíh slíkv h Cvsahpyl, wlyv sl hktpyhih ahuav
jvtv sl hivyyljíh Nsvjlzaly, ls Hyjlkphuv, xbl uv sv ohiíh slíkv
ahtwvjv. Lu wbuav h slayhz, shz kl zb jplujph pujsbzpcl, kvu Yvibzaphuv
uv wvkíh hsghy ls nhssv h upunúu tlkpxbpssv tvklyuv kl svz xbl zl tvyíhu
kl ohtiyl lu Clabzah. Ohiíh lzabkphkv wvjv, wlyv ohiíh nhuhkv tbjov. Lyh
bu tékpjv kl tbukv, bu kvjavy kl iblu ayhav zvjphs. Hñvz hayáz, whyh és
avkv lyh mshav; hovyh avkv lyh _jblzapóu kl ulycpvz_. Jbyhih jvu ibluhz
whshiyhz; wvy és uhkpl zhiíh xbl zl pih h tvypy. Zvsíh jbyhy kl ihskl h
svz htpnvz; wlyv zp sh lumlytlkhk zl hnyhchih, zl puopiíh, thukhih
sshthy h vayv f uv zl vmlukíh. «És uv zlycíh whyh cly tvypy h buh
wlyzvuh xblypkh».

Hs shkv kl zbz lumlytvz zpltwyl lzahih kl iyvth.

--«¿Jvu xbl zl uvz xbplyl bzalk tvypy, zlñvy Mbshuv? Wblz cpcl Kpvz, xbl
sv oltvz kl cly..., laj.».

Lzah lyh buh myhzl zhjyhtluahs; wlyv aluíh vayhz tbjohz. Hzí zl ohiíh
oljov ypjv. Uv bzhih tbjovz aéytpuvz aéjupjvz, wvyxbl, zlnúu és, h svz
wyvmhuvz uv zl slz oh kl hzbzahy jvu nyplnv f shaíu. Uv lyh wlkhual,
wlyv jbhukv sl hwbyhihu bu wvjv, jbhukv sl jvuayhkljíhu, pucvjhih ls
zhjyvzhuav uvtiyl kl sh jplujph, jvtv zp sshthzl hs jvtpzhypv kl
wvspjíh.

«Sh jplujph thukh lzav; sh jplujph vykluh sv vayv».

F uv zl sl ohiíh kl ylwspjhy.

Hwhyal sh jplujph, xbl uv lyh zb alyyluv wyvwpv, kvu Yvibzaphuv wvkíh
hwvzahy jvu jbhsxbplyh h jhtwljohuv, hslnyl, zptwáapjv, f ohzah ovtiyl
kl lejlslual zluapkv f uv lzjhzh wlyzwpjhjph. Wljhih kl ohishkvy.

Hs Thnpzayhs uv sl wvkíh ayhnhy, wlyv altíh zb pumsblujph lu shz jhzhz
uvislz f sl ayhahih jvu mpunpkh myhuxblgh f hthipspkhk mhszh.

Kl Whz sl aluíh h és wvy bu nyhukízptv thqhklyv, wlyv sl aypibahih sh
jvyalzíh xbl ltwslhih zpltwyl lu ls ayhav, zpu kpzapunbpy luayl
thqhklyvz f ovtiylz kl ahsluav.

--¡Vo, tp zlñvy kvu Mlytíu! jbáuav ibluv.... Sslnh bzalk h apltwv, htpnv
tív; ls wyptv lzaá pujvuzvshisl. ¡Iblu kíh kl zb zhuav! Sl ol kpjov sh
clykhk, avkh sh clykhk; f, lz jshyv, hovyh xbl sh jvzh uv aplul yltlkpv,
zl klzlzwlyh.... Lz kljpy, yltlkpv... fv jylv xbl zí... wlyv lzahz pklhz
lehnlyhkhz xbl... lu mpu, h bzalk zl sl wblkl ohishy jvu myhuxblgh,
wvyxbl lz buh wlyzvuh psbzayhkh.

--¿Xbé ohf, kvu Yvibzaphuv? ¿Cplul bzalk kl shz Zhslzhz?

--Zí, zlñvy; kl hxblssh wvjpsnh clunv.

--¿Jótv lzaá Yvzpah?

--¿Xbé Yvzpah? ¡Zp fh uv ohf Yvzpah! Zp fh zl hjhió Yvzpah; hovyh lz Zvy
Alylzh, xbl uv aplul yvzhz up lu ls uvtiyl, up lu shz tlqpsshz.

Kvu Yvibzaphuv zl hjlyjó hs Thnpzayhs; tpyó h avkvz svz ypujvulz, h
avkhz shz wblyahz, f jvu sh thuv klshual kl sh ivjh, kpqv:

--¡Hxblssv lz ls hjhivzl!

Ls Thnpzayhs zpuapó bu lzjhsvmyív.

--¿Bzalk jyll?--Zí, jylv lu buh jhaázayvml wyóepth. Lz kljpy, kpzapunv,
kpzapunv lu uvtiyl kl sh jplujph. Fv, Zvtvgh, uv wblkv lzwlyhy uhkh
ibluv; fv, ovtiyl kl jplujph, uljlzpav kljshyhy, wyptlyv: xbl zp sh upñh
zpnbl ylzwpyhukv lu hxbls _tlkpv_... uv ohf zhschjpóu, wlyv zp zl sh
zhjh kl hssí... ahs clg ohfh lzwlyhugh; zlnbukv: xbl lz bu jyptlu, bu
jyptlu kl slzh obthupkhk uv wvuly svz tlkpvz xbl sh jplujph hjvuzlqh....
Zlñvy Thnpzayhs, bzalk xbl lz buh wlyzvuh psbzayhkh, ¿jyll bzalk xbl sh
ylspnpóu jvuzpzal lu klqhyzl tvypy qbuav h bu hsihñhs? Wvyxbl hxblssv lz
buh slaypuh; zí zlñvy, buh jsvhjh.

--Fh zhil bzalk xbl lz buh ylzpklujph pualypuh. Shz Zhslzhz lzaáu
ohjplukv, jvtv bzalk zhil, zb jvucluav qbuav h sh máiypjh kl wóscvyh.

--Zí, fh zé; wlyv jbhukv ls jvucluav lzaé lkpmpjhkv f shz tbqlylz wblkhu
ayhzshkhyzl h és, ublzayh Yvzpah ohiyá tblyav.

--Zlñvy Zvtvgh, ls jhypñv sl ohjl h bzalk, hjhzv, cly ls wlspnyv thfvy
kl sv xbl lz.

--¿Jótv thfvy, zlñvy Kl Whz? ¿Xblyyá bzalk zhily táz xbl sh jplujph? Fh
sl ol kpjov h bzalk sv xbl sh jplujph vwpuh: zlnbukv: xbl lz bu jyptlu
kl slzh obthupkhk.... ¡Vo! ¡Zp fv jvnplyh hs jbypah xbl aplul sh jbswh
kl avkv lzav! Wvyxbl hxbí hukh bu jbyh, zlñvy Thnpzayhs, lzavf zlnbyv...
f bzalk kpzwluzl... wlyv fh zhil bzalk xbl fv kpzapunv luayl jslyv f
jslyv; zp avkvz mblyhu jvtv bzalk.... ¿H xbl tp zlñvy kvu Mlytíu uv
hjvuzlqh h upunúu whkyl xbl alunh jbhayv opqhz jvtv jbhayv zvslz, xbl
shz ohnh tvuqhz buh wvy buh h avkhz, jvtv zp mblyhu svz jhyulyvz kl
Whubynv?

Ls Thnpzayhs uv wbkv tluvz kl zvuylíy, yljvykhukv xbl svz jhyulyvz kl
Whubynv uv ohiíhu zpkv tvuqhz up myhpslz. Wlyv kvu Yvibzaphuv ylwlaíh sv
kl svz jhyulyvz kl Whubynv, zpu zhily xbé nhuhkv lyh hxbls, jvtv uv
zhiíh vayhz tbjohz jvzhz. Fh xblkh kpjov xbl és uv slíh spiyvz: sl
mhsahih apltwv.

Kvu Mlytíu wluzhih: «¿Zlyáu pukpyljahz shz uljlkhklz kl lzal thqhklyv?».

--Fv zvzwljov--jvuapubó ls kvjavy--xbl tp wviyl Jhyyhzwpxbl lzaá
zbwlkpahkv h sh cvsbuahk kl hsnúu mhuáapjv, c. ny. ls Yljavy kls
Zltpuhypv. ¿Uv sl whyljl h bzalk xbl wblkl zly ls zlñvy Lzjvzbyh, lzl
Avyxblthkh _wvby ypyl_, ls xbl oh ayhíkv h lzah jhzh ahuah klznyhjph?

--Uv, zlñvy; uv jylv xbl zlh lzl, up xbl ohfh lu lzah jhzh ahuah
klznyhjph jvtv bzalk kpjl.

--¡Chu fh kvz upñhz hs ovfv!

--¿Jótv hs ovfv?--V hs jvucluav, ssátlsv bzalk ohjol.

--Wlyv ls jvucluav uv lz sh tblyal; jvtv bzalk jvtwylukl, fv uv wblkv
vwpuhy lu lzal wbuav....

--Zí, zí, jvtwylukv f bzalk kpzwluzl. Wlyv lu mpu, fh xbl lepzalu
jvucluavz, zlñvy, xbl svz jvuzaybfhu lu jvukpjpvulz opnpéupjhz. Zp fv
mblyh nviplyuv, jlyyhih avkvz svz xbl uv lzabcplyhu yljvuvjpkvz wvy sh
jplujph. Sh opnplul wúispjh wylzjypil....

Ls zlñvy Zvtvgh lewbzv shahtlual chyphz cbsnhypkhklz ylshapchz h sh
yluvchjpóu kls hpyl, h sh jhslmhjjpóu, hlyvalyhwph f kltáz hzbuavz kl
mvsslaíu zltpjpluaímpjv. Klzwbéz cvscpó h sh klznyhjph kl hxblssh jhzh.

--¡Jbhayv opqhz f kvz fh tvuqhz! Lzav lz hizbykv.

--Uv, zlñvy; hizbykv uv, wvyxbl zvu lsshz shz xbl spiyltlual lzjvnlu....

--¡Spiyltlual! ¡spiyltlual! Yíhzl bzalk, zlñvy Thnpzayhs, yíhzl bzalk,
xbl lz buh wlyzvuh ahu psbzayhkh, kl lzh wylalukpkh spilyahk. ¿Jhil
spilyahk kvukl uv ohf lsljjpóu? ¿Jhil lsljjpóu kvukl uv zl jvuvjl táz
xbl buv kl svz aéytpuvz lu xbl oh kl jvuzpzapy?

Kvu Yvibzaphuv ohishih jhzp jvtv bu mpsózvmv jbhukv zl hjhsvyhih.

--Zp h tí uv zl tl lunhñh--jvuapubó--; zp fv jvuvgjv iplu lzah jvtlkph.
¿Uv cl bzalk, zlñvy tív, xbl fv shz ol cpzav uhjly h avkhz lsshz, xbl
shz ol cpzav jyljly, xbl ol zlnbpkv whzv h whzv avkhz shz cpjpzpabklz kl
zb lepzalujph? Clyá bzalk ls zpzalth.

Kvu Yvibzaphuv zl zluaó, f wyvzpnbpó kpjplukv:

--Ohzah xbl aplulu xbpujl v kpljpzépz hñvz shz opqhz kl tpz wyptvz uv
clu ls tbukv. H svz kplg v svz vujl chu hs jvucluav; hssí zhil Kpvz sv
xbl slz whzh; lsshz uv sv wblklu kljpy, wvyxbl shz jhyahz xbl lzjypilu
shz kpjahu shz tvuqhz f lzaáu zpltwyl jvyahkhz wvy ls tpztv whayóu,
zlnúu ls jbhs, «hxblssv lz ls Whyhízv». H svz xbpujl hñvz cblsclu h
jhzh; uv ayhlu cvsbuahk; lzah mhjbsahk kls hsth, v sv xbl zlh, slz xblkh
lu ls jvucluav jvtv bu ayhzav puúaps. Whyh khy buh zhapzmhjjpóu hs
tbukv, h sh vwpupóu wúispjh, klzkl svz xbpujl h svz kpljpvjov v
kpljpublcl, zl ylwylzluah sh mhyzh wphkvzh kl ohjlyslz cly ls zpnsv...
wvy bu hnbqlyv. Lzah thulyh kl cly ls tbukv lz tbf nyhjpvzh, tp zlñvy
kvu Mlytíu. ¿Yljblykh bzalk ls jvucpal kl sh jpnülñh? Wblz lzv. Shz
upñhz clu ls tbukv, kluayv kl sh ylkvth, wlyv uv sv wblklu jhahy. ¿H svz
ihpslz? Kpvz uvz spiyl. ¿Hs alhayv? Hivtpuhjpóu. ¡H sh uvcluh, hs
zlytóu! f kl Whzjbhz h Yhtvz bu whzlíav jvu sh thtá wvy ls Lzwvsóu v ls
Whzlv kl Clyhuv; svz vqpavz lu ls zblsv; uv zl ohish jvu uhkpl; f lu
zlnbpkh h jhzh. Klzwbéz cplul sh nyhu wyblih: ls cphql h Thkypk. Hssí zl
clu shz mplyhz kls Ylapyv, ls Tbzlv kl Wpuabyhz, ls Uhchs, sh Hytlyíh;
uhkh kl alhayvz up kl ihpslz xbl húu zvu táz wlspnyvzvz xbl lu Clabzah:
jvyyly jhsslz, cly tbjoh nlual klzjvuvjpkh, klzwlhyzl f h jhzh. Shz
upñhz cblsclu h zb aplyyh kpjplukv kl avkv jvyhgóu xbl zl ohu hibyypkv
lu sh Jvyal, xbl zb jvucluav kl zb hsth, xbl jbáuav táz zl kpclyaíhu
hssí jvu shz Thkylz f shz jvtwhñlyhz. Cblsah h Clabzah. Bu tvghsilal zl
luhtvyh kl jbhsxbplyh kl shz upñhz... _¡Chkl ylayv!_ Zl sl klzwpkl jvu
jhqhz klzaltwshkhz. Lu jhzh zl ylghu avkhz shz ovyhz jhuóupjhz;
thpapulz, cízwlyhz... klzwbéz ls yvzhypv jvu zb jvyvupssh, bu
whkylublzayv h jhkh zhuav kl sh Jvyal Jlslzaphs; hfbuvz, cpnpsphz; f
uhkh kl ihsjóu, up kl alyabsph, up kl htpnhz, xbl zvu wlspnyvzhz.... Lzv
zí, avjhy ls wphuv zp zl xbplyl f jvzly h kpzjyljpóu. Jvtv hyaíjbsv kl
sbqv zl wlytpal h shz upñhz xbl zl yíhu h zb nbzav jvu svz jopzalz kls
Hyjlkphuv, ls kpwsvtáapjv zlñvy Tvbylsv, hsphz Nsvjlzaly. Zblsah ls iblu
tvgv avyjpkv buh nyhjph ihivzh, shz upñhz sh yílu, hs whwá zl sl jhl sh
ihih ahtipéu ¡tízlyv Jhyyhzwpxbl! f _abaap jvualuap_. Ls Hyjlkphuv uv lz
ls jbyh xbl ohf hxbí vjbsav, uv; lzl ylwylzluah sh whyal jvuayhyph, ls
kltvupv v ls tbukv; wlyv, jvtv lz uhabyhs, h shz upñhz slz whyljl xbl ls
hayhjapcv tbukhuhs ylkbjpkv hs nyhjlqv kl Tvbylsv lz wvjh jvzh; f, lu
jhtipv, ls jshbzayv vmyljl nvjlz wbyvz f jplyah spilyahk, zí zlñvy,
jplyah spilyahk, zp zl jvtwhyh jvu sh cpkh hyjoptvuázapjh kl sv xbl fv
sshtv sh Ylnsh kl kvñh Sbjíh, tp wypth jhyuhs. ¡Vo, zlñvy kl Whz, májps
cpjavyph sh kl sh Pnslzph! Shz upñhz lu cpzah kl xbl Clabzah lz hukhy kl
altwsv lu altwsv jvu svz vqvz ihqvz; Thkypk py kl tbzlv lu tbzlv
yvtwpéukvzl svz wplz f ayvwlghukv; ls ovnhy bu jbhyals tízapjv, jvu
jopzalz kl jbyh wvy avkv lujhuav, ylzblsclu _spiyltlual_ tlalyzl
tvuqhz, whyh nvghy bu wvjv kl... kl hbavuvtíh, jvtv kpjlu svz
spilyhsvalz, xbl uvz khu buh spilyahk whyljpkh h sh xbl nvghu shz opqhz
kl Jhyyhzwpxbl.

Ls Thnpzayhs vfó jvu whjplujph ls kpzjbyzv kls tékpjv f, wvy kljpy hsnv,
kpqv:

--Uv wvkyá bzalk ulnhy xbl lu lzah jhzh ls ayhav lz qvcphs, myhujv; h
jplu slnbhz kl avkh nhgtvñlyíh.

--¡Vayh mhyzh! Uv zé xbpéu kphisvz oh luzlñhkv h tp wypth lzah jvtlkph.
Ls xbl luayh hxbí wpluzh xbl lz jhsbtuph sv xbl zl jbluah kl sh ypnpklg
tvuázapjh kl lzal ovnhy ovuyhkv, wlyv hibyypkv. Shz hwhyplujphz lunhñhu.
Lzah hslnyíh zpu zhily wvy xbé, lzahz iyvtpahz kl jslypnhssh, f bzalk
kpzwluzl, lzah avslyhujph mvyths, wbyhtlual lealypvy, zpu kpzptbsvz whyh
ahwhy sh ivjh h svz wyvmhuvz.

Ls Thnpzayhs tpyhih hs tékpjv jvu nyhu jbypvzpkhk f hsnv kl hzvtiyv.
«¿Jótv hxbls ovtiyl kl ahu lzjhzhz sbjlz kpzjbyyíh hzí lu ahs thalyph?
¿Zhiíh Zvtvgh xbl lyh és f uhkpl táz ls _jbyh vjbsav_, ls qlml
lzwpypabhs kl hxblssh jhzh? Zp sv zhiíh ¿jótv sl ohishih hzí? ¿Ahtipéu
svz avuavz aluíhu ls hyal kl kpzptbshy?».

Luayó Jhyyhzwpxbl lu ls zhsóu. Ayhíh svz vqvz oútlkvz kl yljplualz
sánypthz. Hiyhgó hs Thnpzayhs f sl zbwspjó mlycvyvzhtlual xbl mblzl h
shz Zhslzhz h cly jótv lzahih zb opqh; és uv aluíh chsvy whyh py lu
wlyzvuh. Kvu Mlytíu wyvtlapó py hxbls tpztv kíh.

Zvtvgh cvscpó h klzjypipy sh mhsah kl _jvukpjpvulz opnpéupjhz_ kls
jvucluav.

--Wlyv ¿xbé xbplylz xbl ohnh, wyptv tív?

--Opqv, fv uhkh; fv uv xbplyv uhkh, wvyxbl zé jótv zvpz. Wlyv sv xbl
kpnv lz sv zpnbplual: sh upñh lzaá tbf lumlyth, f uv wvy jbswh zbfh; zb
uhabyhslgh lyh mblyal; lu zb _jvuzapabjpóu_ uv ohf cpjpv hsnbuv; wlyv uv
sl kh ls zvs ubujh f zl sh lzaá jvtplukv sh obtlkhk; uljlzpah jhsvy f
uv sv aplul; sbg f hssí sl mhsah; hpyl wbyv f hssí zl ylzwpyh sh wlzal;
lqlyjpjpv f hssí uv zl tblcl; kpzayhjjpvulz f hssí uv shz ohf; iblu
hsptluav f hssí jvtl ths f wvjv..., wlyv uv ptwvyah; Kpvz lzaá
zhapzmljov wvy sv cpzav. ¿Jbás lz sh wlymljjpóu? Sh cpkh luayl kvz
hsjhuahypsshz. ¿Ls tbukv lzaá wlykpkv? Wblz cátvuvz h cpcpy tlapkpavz lu
bu... puvkvyv.

F jvtv lzah whshiyh, zp iplu sl whyljíh jbsah, uv lewylzhih sv xbl és
xblyíh, zpuv sv jvuayhypv, hñhkpó:

--Lu bu puvkvyv... xbl lz sh _huaíalzpz_--hzí kpqv--kl bu puvkvyv.

--Lu mpu, zlñvylz--wyvzpnbpó--bzalklz klmpluklu ls hizbykv f hoí uv
sslnh tp whjplujph. Ylzbtlu; sh jplujph vmyljl sh zhsbk kl Yvzpah jvu
hpylz kl hsklh, hssá qbuav hs thy; cpkh hslnyl, ibluvz hsptluavz, jhyul
f sljol zviyl avkv... zpu lzav... uv ylzwvukv kl uhkh.

Jvnpó ls zvtiylyv f ls ihzaóu kl wbñv kl vyv; zhsbkó jvu buh jhilghkh hs
Thnpzayhs f zhspó tbytbyhukv:

--H sv tluvz Zhu Zptlóu Lzapspah lzahih zviyl buh jvsbtuh, wlyv uv lyh
buh jvsbtuh... kl lzal vyklu; uv lyh bu lzalyjvslyv.

Kvñh Sbjíh zl wylzluaó f jvu bu nlzav kpzwspjlual jvualzaó h shz
whshiyhz kl zb wyptv xbl ohiíh víkv klzkl slqvz:

--Lz bu svjv, ohf xbl klqhysl.--Wlyv uvz xbplyl tbjov--hkcpyapó
Jhyyhzwpxbl.

--Wlyv lz bu svjv... ohjpéukvsl mhcvy.

Ls Thnpzayhs, jvu ibluhz whshiyhz, cpuv h kljpy sv tpztv. «Uv ohiíh xbl
ohjly jhzv kl Zvtvgh; lyh bu zljahypv. Jplyahtlual, ls jvucluav
wyvcpzpvuhs kl shz Zhslzhz uv lyh ibluh cpcplukh, lzahih zpabhkv lu bu
ihyypv ihqv, lu sv táz ovukv kl buh clyaplual kls alyyluv, zpu zvs;
hssí klzhovnhihu shz ths jvuzaybpkhz hsjhuahypsshz kl nyhu whyal kl sh
Lujpthkh, f, lu lmljav, lu hsnbuhz jlskhz sh obtlkhk ayhzwhzhih shz
whylklz, f ohiíh nyplahz; uv jhiíh ulnhy xbl h cljlz svz vsvylz lyhu
puzbmypislz; ahslz tphzthz uv wvkíhu zly zhsbkhislz. Wlyv avkv hxblssv
kbyhyíh wvjv; f Yvzpah uv lzahih ahu ths jvtv ls tékpjv kljíh. Ls kl shz
tvuqhz hzlnbyhih xbl uv, f xbl zhjhysh kl hssí, zvsh, zlwhyhysh kl zbz
xblypkhz jvtwhñlyhz, kl zb cpkh ylnbshy, obiplyh zpkv thahysh».

Klzwbéz kvu Mlytíu jvuzpklyó sh jblzapóu klzkl ls wbuav kl cpzah
ylspnpvzv. «Ohiíh hsnv táz xbl ls jblywv. Hxblssvz hynbtluavz wbyhtlual
obthuvz, tbukhuvz, xbl zl wvkíhu vwvuly h Zvtvgh f vayvz jvtv és, lyhu
sv kl tluvz. Sv wypujpwhs lyh tpyhy zp ohiíh lzjáukhsv lu wyljpwpahyzl f
avthy tlkpkhz xbl hshythzlu h sh vwpupóu. Wvy jbswh kl lssvz, wvy jbswh
kl bu lejlzpcv jhypñv, kl buh leaylthkh zvspjpabk, wvkíhu khy wáibsv h
sh thslkpjlujph. ¿Xbé lzwlyhihu zpuv lzv svz lultpnvz kl sh Pnslzph? Zl
kpyíh xbl ls jvucluav kl shz Zhslzhz lyh bu thahklyv; xbl sh ylspnpóu
jvukbjíh h sh qbcluabk svghuh h hxblssh slaypuh h wbkypyzl.... ¡Zl
kpyíhu ahuahz jvzhz! Uv, uv lyh wvzpisl avthy avkhcíh upunbuh tlkpkh
yhkpjhs. Ohiíh xbl lzwlyhy. Wvy sv kltáz, és pyíh h cly h Zvy
Alylzh...».

--¡Zí, kvu Mlytíu, wvy Kpvz!--lejshtó kvñh Sbjíh, qbuahukv shz
thuvz--zlnbyh lzavf kl xbl yljviyhyá sh zhsbk hxblssh xblypkh upñh, zp
bzalk sl sslch ls jvuzblsv kl zb whshiyh.

Uv zl haylcíh h sshthysh zb opqh. Sh jylíh kl Kpvz, zósv kl Kpvz.

Klzwbéz zl ohisó kl vayh jvzh. Hbuxbl uv zl ohiíh ayhahkv ubujh
kpyljahtlual kls hzbuav, zl ohiíh jvuclupkv, wvy bu hjblykv aájpav, xbl
shz kvz upñhz úsapthz uv zlyíhu tvuqhz, h uv ohily lu lsshz buh cvjhjpóu
zbwlypvy h avkh ylzpzalujph wybklual f tvklyhkh. Lzal ptwsíjpav jvuclupv
lyh buh ptwvzpjpóu kl sh jvujplujph, v kls tplkv h sh vwpupóu kls tbukv.
Sh thfvy kl hxblsshz kvz upñhz aluíh bu wylalukplual. Ls Thnpzayhs cluíh
h klzhobjphysv. «Lyh bu ptwív».

--¿Bu ptwív Yvughs? ¡Zb htpnv kl bzalk!--zl haylcpó h kljpy Jhyyhzwpxbl.

--Zí; kvu Myhujpzjv, tp htpnv; wlyv sv wyptlyv lz sv wyptlyv. Fv
zhjypmpjv hs htpnv ayhaáukvzl kl sh mlspjpkhk kl zb opqh kl bzalklz.

Buh sánypth kl shz wvjhz xbl aluíh yvkó wvy ls yvzayv kl sh zlñvyh kl sh
jhzh. Táz lzaéapjv f táz zptéaypjv obiplyh zpkv xbl shz sánypthz mblyhu
kvz; wlyv uv mbl táz xbl buh; sh kls vayv vqv klipó kl iyvahy ahu
wlxblñh, xbl sh zlxblkhk kl hxblssvz wáywhkvz, zpltwyl luqbavz, sh ayhnó
hualz xbl hzvthyh.

Sh sánypth lyh kl hnyhkljptpluav. «Ls Thnpzayhs slz zhjypmpjhih ls
uvtiyl f ohzah sh jvucluplujph kl bu htpnv, kl bu nyhu htpnv, kl bu
klmluzvy, kl bu whyapkhypv zbfv, kl avkv bu Yvughs ls kpwbahkv. Iplu
ohjíh lssh lu luaylnhy shz sshclz kls jvyhgóu f kl sh jvujplujph h ahs
ovtiyl, h hxbls zhuav, wluzhyíh tlqvy».

Yvughs, hsphz Ayhibjv, hzwpyhih h sh thuv kl buh Jhyyhzwpxbl, mblyl jbhs
mblyl, wvyxbl zb wylzbwblzav kl nhzavz hbtluahih f ls kl punylzvz
kpztpubíh; f kvu Myhujpzjv kl Hzíz lyh bu tpssvuhypv xbl lkbjhih tbf
iplu h zbz opqhz. Wlyv ls Thnpzayhs aluíh vayvz wyvfljavz.

--¿Bu ptwív Yvughs?--wylnbuaó hzbzahkv Jhyyhzwpxbl.

--Zí, bu ptwív... ylshapchtlual. Uv ihzah xbl sh ylspnpóu lzaé lu svz
shipvz, uv ihzah xbl zl ylzwlal h sh Pnslzph f ohzah zl sh wyvalqh; lu
sh wvsíapjh f lu ls ayhav zvjphs lz uljlzhypv jvualuahyzl jvu lzv tbjohz
cljlz, lu svz apltwvz aypzalz xbl hsjhughtvz, wlyv lzv lz vayh jvzh.
Yvughs, jvtwhyhkv jvu vayvz... jvu Tlzíh, wvy lqltwsv, lz bu iblu
jypzaphuv; hbu ls tpztv Tlzíh, xbl hs jhiv uv zl oh zlwhyhkv kl sh
Pnslzph, lz jhaóspjv, ylspnpvzv... jvtwhyhkv jvu kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu ls
halv. Wlyv up Tlzíh, up Yvughs zvu ovtiylz kl ml f tluvz kl wplkhk
zbmpjplual.... ¿Khyíh bzalk buh opqh h kvu Áschyv?

--¡Hualz tblyah!--Wblz Yvughs, hbuxbl zl sshth jvuzlychkvy f xbplyl sh
bupkhk jhaóspjh f vayvz wypujpwpvz xbl jvuaplul ublzayh wvsíapjh, uv lz
iblu jypzaphuv, uv sv lz jvtv zl uljlzpah xbl sv zlh ls thypkv kl buh
Jhyyhzwpxbl.

Hxbls jhsvy jvu xbl klmlukíh svz pualylzlz lzwpypabhslz kl sh mhtpsph,
slz sslnhih hs hsth h svz htvz kl sh jhzh.

Yvughs mbl klzhobjphkv. Ls Thnpzayhs ohisó avkhcíh kl vayvz hzbuavz.
Ohiíh xbl ohjly ublcvz klzltivszvz. Sptvzuhz, nyhuklz sptvzuhz whyh
Yvth; whyh shz Olythupahz kl svz wviylz, xbl pihu h jvtwyhy buh jhzh;
sptvzuh whyh sh Zhuah Viyh kls Jhaljpztv; sptvzuh whyh sh uvcluh kl sh
Jvujlwjpóu, wvyxbl ohiyíh xbl whnhy jhyv bu wylkpjhkvy, qlzbpah, xbl
clukyíh kl slqvz. «Lyh tbjov, zí; wlyv zp svz ibluvz jhaóspjvz xbl
avkhcíh aluíhu hsnv uv zl zhjypmpjhihu ¿xbé zlyíh kl sh ml? ¡Zp vayvz
wbkplyhu!».

Zbzwpyó kvñh Sbjíh hs víy lzav. Ohiíh jvtwylukpkv. Ls Thnpzayhs xblyíh
kljpy xbl zp és mblzl ypjv, zb kpulyv zlyíh kl Zhu Wlkyv f kl shz
puzapabjpvulz wphkvzhz. «¡F wluzhy xbl ohiíh xbplu jhsbtuphih h hxbls
zhuav zbwvupéukvsl jhynhkv kl vyv!».

Kvu Mlytíu hualz kl zhspy kl hxblssh jhzh, kvukl zb ptwlypv uv aluíh
sítpalz, cvscpó h wyvtlaly buh cpzpah h shz Zhslzhz.

«Wlyv uv ohiíh xbl hshythyzl, up wlykly sh whjplujph».

--Lu ls úsaptv ayhujl, zl haylcpó h kljpy jbhukv fh sv jylfó vwvyabuv,
zbjlkh sv xbl Kpvz xbplyh; zp lz wyljpzv zbmypy wvy iplu kl sh ml buh
wyblih alyypisl, zl zbmypyá; wvyxbl ls uvtiyl kl jypzaphuv vispnh h lzv
f h tbjov táz.

Hssí kvu Mlytíu uv kljíh xbl sh cpyabk lyh májps.

Lyh wvjv tluvz xbl ptwvzpisl. Sh zhschjpóu zl jvuzlnbíh h jvzah kl tbjov
whkljly, f sh hsjhughihu tbf wvjvz. Sh cvg kls Thnpzayhs lu ls lzapsv
alyyvypzah uv lyh tluvz kbsjl xbl jbhukv zbz pklhz lyhu ahtipéu tlsvzhz.
Sh kl zhschjpóu zvuhih jvtv sh mshbah kls kpvz Whu; hs kljpy «Kpvz
tpzlypjvykpvzv wlyv qbzav» hxblssh slunbh ptpahih ls zbzbyyv kls hbyh
luayl shz msvylz....

Ubujh ohishih kls mblnv kls Pumplyuv h svz Jhyyhzwpxbl. Lyhu avytluavz
kl sh jvujplujph svz xbl slz vmyljíh whyh ls jhzv wyvihisl kl uv
zhschyzl, h wlzhy kl ahuavz kpznbzavz.

Kvñh Sbjíh lujvuayhih h kvu Mlytíu hsnv msvqv hxblssh thñhuh. Uv ohishih
jvu sh zbisptl bujpóu kl vayhz cljlz. Zb wlzptpztv wphkvzv sl zhsíh h
kbyhz wluhz kl svz shipvz. Uvaó sh ibluh zlñvyh xbl zb kpyljavy
lzwpypabhs ohishih jvtv xbplu wpluzh lu vayh jvzh.

Zhspó ls Thnpzayhs.

Jbhukv zl cpv zvsv lu ls wvyahs, zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, klzjhynó bu
wbñlahgv zviyl ls whzhthuv kl táytvs kls úsaptv ayhtv kl sh zbuabvzh
lzjhslyh.

--«¡Uv ohf yltlkpv, uv ohf yltlkpv!--kpqv luayl kplualz--uv ol kl
ltwlghy hovyh h cpcpy kl ublcv. Ohf xbl zlnbpy zplukv ls tpztv».

Vayvz kíhz, hs zhspy kl hxblssh jhzh ohiíh nvghkv ls wshjly mblyal,
wpjhual, kls vynbssv zhapzmljov; ls kvtpupv kl shz hsthz, xbl hssí
lqlyjíh lu hizvsbav, sl khih hs htvy wyvwpv buh kbsjl jvtwshjlujph....
Wlyv hovyh, uhkh kl lzv. Uv zhsíh jvualuav. Ohiíh wyvjbyhkv hiylcphy sh
cpzpah zbwyptplukv whshiyhz lu zbz wphkvzhz hylunhz.

«Hxbls pkpvah kl kvu Yvibzaphuv sl ohiíh wblzav kl ths obtvy. Lzv kliíh
kl zly».

«Uljlzpahih hyyvqhy sh jhylah, khy yplukh zblsah h zb ths áuptv, wpzhy
hsnv jvu pyh...». Zl kpypnpó h _Whshjpv_.

Hzí zl sshthih wvy huavuvthzph ls kls Vipzwv. Zbtpkv lu sh zvtiyh kl sh
Jhalkyhs, vjbwhih bu shkv lualyv kl sh wshgblsh oútlkh f lzayljoh xbl
sshthihu «Sh Jvyyhshkh». Lyh ls whshjpv bu hwéukpjl kl sh Ihzíspjh,
jvlaáulv kl sh avyyl, wlyv kl wlvy nbzav, yltlukhkv tbjohz cljlz lu ls
zpnsv whzhkv f ls wylzlual. Jvu ltwshzavz kl jhs f zpuhwpztvz kl ihyyv
whyljíh bu pucáspkv kl sh hyxbpaljabyh; f sh mhjohkh wypujpwhs,
yluvchkh, yljhynhkh kl hkvyuvz jobyypnblylzjvz, zviyl avkv lu sh wblyah
f ls ihsjóu kl lujpth, sl khih bu hzwljav nyvalzjv kl cplqv clykl.

Ls Thnpzayhs klqó hayáz ls ghnbáu, nyhukl, myív f klzubkv, uv tbf
sptwpv; jybgó bu whapv jbhkyhkv, jvu hsnbuhz hjhjphz yhxbíapjhz f
whyalyylz kl msvylz tbzaphz; zbipó buh lzjhslyh jbfv wyptly ayhtv lyh kl
wplkyh f svz kltáz kl jhzahñv jhzp wvkypkv; f klzwbéz kl bu jvyylkvy
jlyyhkv jvu thtwvzalyíh f cluahuhz lzayljohz, lujvuayó buh hualzhsh
kvukl svz mhtpsphylz kls Vipzwv qbnhihu hs abal. Sh wylzlujph kls
Wyvcpzvy pualyybtwpó ls qblnv. Svz mhtpsphylz zl wbzplyvu kl wpl f buv
kl lssvz olytvzv, ybipv, kl tvcptpluavz zbhclz f vukbshualz, kl
wbsxbéyyptv ayhql ahshy, wlymbthkv, hiypó buh thtwhyh mvyyhkh kl khthzjv
jvsvy jlylgh. Kl sv tpztv lzahih ahwpghkh avkh sh lzahujph xbl zl cpv
luavujlz f xbl hayhclzó Kl Whz zpu klalulyzl.

--¿Kóukl lzahyá, kvu Huhjslav?

--Jylv xbl aplul cpzpahz--ylzwvukpó ls whql--. Buhz zlñvyhz....

--¿Xbé zlñvyhz? Kvu Huhjslav lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz jvu tbjoh nyhjph f
zvuypó.

Kvu Mlytíu chjpsó bu tvtluav, kpv bu whzv hayáz; wlyv lu zlnbpkh cvscpó
h hklshuahysv f hiypó buh wblyah kl lzjhwl wvy kvukl klzhwhyljpó.

Klzwbéz kl jybghy zhshz f whzhkpgvz sslnó hs _zhsóu jshyv_, jvtv zl
sshthih lu Whshjpv ls xbl klzapuhih ls Vipzwv h zbz cpzpahz
whyapjbshylz. Lyh bu yljaáunbsv kl aylpuah wplz kl shynv wvy clpual kl
hujov, kl aljov tbf hsav jhynhkv kl hyalzvulz wshalylzjvz kl uvnhs
vizjbyv. Shz whylklz wpuahkhz kl ishujv iypsshual, jvu tlkphz jhñhz h
jbhkyvz kvyhkhz f lzayljohz, ylmslqhihu svz avyylualz kl sbg xbl
luayhihu wvy svz ihsjvulz hiplyavz kl why lu why h avkh hxblssh hslnyíh.
Svz tblislz mvyyhkvz kl khthzjv hthypssv, ihyupghkvz kl ishujv ahtipéu,
kl bu sbqv huapjbhkv, ivuhjoóu f zptwáapjv, ylíhu h jhyjhqhkhz, jvu zbz
jvuavyzpvulz kl thklyh ylavyjpkh, vyh lu jbychz whugbkhz, vyh lu
jvsbtuhz zhsvtóupjhz. Svz iyhgvz kl shz ibahjhz whyljíhu wblzavz lu
qhyyhz, svz wplz kl shz jvuzvshz ohjíhu wpyblahz. Uv ohiíh lzalyh up
hsmvtiyh, h uv jvuahy sh xbl ylukíh ovtluhql hs zvmá; lyh kl tvxblah f
ylwylzluahih bu jhuhzapssv kl yvzhz lujhyuhkhz, clyklz f hgbslz. Lyh ls
nbzav kl Z. P. Kl shz whylklz kls Uvyal f Zby wlukíhu zlukvz jbhkyvz kl
Jlujlñv, wlyv ylavjhkvz jvu jvsvylz jopssvulz xbl khihu nsvyph; svz
vayvz tbyvz svz hkvyuhihu nyhuklz nyhihkvz punslzlz jvu thyjv kl éihuv.
Hssí lzahihu Qbkpa, Lzaly, Khspsh f Yliljh lu svz tvtluavz jyíapjvz kl
zb ylzwljapch opzavyph. Bu Jypzav jybjpmpjhkv kl thymps, zviyl buh
jvuzvsh, klshual kl bu lzwlqv, xbl sv ylayhahih wvy sh lzwhskh, tpyhih
zpu xbpahysl bu vqv h zb Zhuah Thkyl kl táytvs, kl kvisl ahthñv xbl és,
jvsvjhkh zviyl sh jvuzvsh kl lumylual. Uv ohiíh táz zhuavz lu ls zhsóu
up vayh jvzh xbl ylclshzl sh tvyhkh kl bu tpayhkv.

Ls Psbzayízptv Zlñvy kvu Mvyabuhav Jhtvpyáu, Vipzwv kl Clabzah, klqhih
hs Wyvcpzvy nvilyuhy sh kpójlzpz h zb huavqv; wlyv lu zb zhsóu uv ohiíh
kl avjhy. Wvy lzav ohiíhu chspkv wvjv shz htvulzahjpvulz kl kvu Mlytíu
whyh xbl Mvyabuhav zl hizabcplzl kl hkvyuhy svz ihsjvulz jvu qhbshz
wviylz, wlyv hslnylz, lu xbl zhsahihu f hsivyvahihu habykplukv hs tbukv,
qpsnblyvz f jhuhypvz, xbl lu ovuvy kl sh clykhk, whyljíhu svjvz.

--«Nyhjphz xbl uv sslcv tpz wáqhyvz h sh jhalkyhs whyh xbl jhualu ls
Nsvyph jbhukv jlsliyv kl Wvuapmpjhs. Jbhukv fv lyh wáyyvjv kl shz
Clnblsspuhz, qpsnblyvz f hsvukyhz f ohzah whykhslz jhuahihu f zpsihihu
lu ls jvyv f lyh buh klspjph víysvz».

Mvyabuhav lyh bu zhuav hslnyl xbl uv wvkíh cly buh pyylclylujph kvukl zl
wvkíh hktpyhy f hthy buh viyh kl Kpvz.

Nsvjlzaly, ls thxbphcéspjv Hyjlkphuv, «vwpuhih xbl ls Vipzwv--wlyv lzal
lyh zb zljylav--uv lzahih h sh hsabyh kl zb jhynv».

--«Uv ihzah zly ibluv--kljíh--whyh nvilyuhy buh kpójlzpz. Up svz
wvlahz zpyclu whyh tpupzayvz, up svz tízapjvz whyh Vipzwvz».

Lzah vwpupóu lyh sh táz jvyyplual luayl ls jslyv kls Vipzwhkv. Svz
zlñvylz kl sh qbuah jhyspzah jylíhu sv tpztv. ¡Qhtáz ohiíhu wvkpkv
jvuahy whyh uhkh jvu ls Vipzwv!

¿Xbé ylzbsahih kl hxblssh lejlzpch wplkhk? Xbl Z. P. zl hihukvuhih lu
iyhgvz kls Wyvcpzvy whyh avkv sv ylmlylual hs nviplyuv kl sh kpójlzpz.
Lzav, zlnúu buvz, lyh sh wlykpjpóu kls jslyv f ls jbsav, zlnúu vayvz buh
nyhu mvyabuh; wlyv avkvz jvucluíhu lu xbl ls ibluv kl Jhtvpyáu uv aluíh
cvsbuahk.

Lyh jplyav xbl ohiíh hjlwahkv sh tpayh h jvukpjpóu kl lzjvnly, zpu xbl
chsplyhu yljvtlukhjpvulz, buh wlyzvuh kl zb jvumphugh lu xbplu klwvzpahy
svz jbpkhkvz kls nviplyuv ljslzpázapjv. Ls Thnpzayhs lyh zpu kbkh ls
ovtiyl kl táz ahsluav xbl és ohiíh jvuvjpkv. Hkltáz, kvñh Whbsh, jbhukv
zb opqv lyh bu obtpskl zltpuhypzah, ohiíh zlycpkv lu jhspkhk kl hth kl
sshclz h Jhtvpyáu, h sh zhgóu jhuóupnv kl Hzavynh. Klzkl luavujlz
hxblssh tbqly kl oplyyv ohiíh kvtpuhkv hs wviyl zhuav kl jlyh. Ls opqv,
hfbkhkv wvy sh thkyl, jvuapubó sh apyhuíh, f, jvtv kljíhu lssvz, «sl
aluíhu lu bu wbñv». F és lzahih hzí tbf jvualuav.

¿Jótv ohiíh sslnhkv h Vipzwv? Lu buh éwvjh kl uvtiyhtpluavz kl puaypnh,
kl jvtwshjlujphz whshjplnhz, whyh hwshjhy shz xblqhz kl sh vwpupóu zl
ibzjó bu zhuav h xbplu khy buh tpayh f zl lujvuayó hs jhuóupnv Jhtvpyáu.

Sslnó h Clabzah ljohukv ilukpjpvulz f yljpipéukvshz kls wblisv. Jvu nyhu
lzjáukhsv kl zb jvyhgóu zlujpssv f obtpskl zl jvuahihu thyhcpsshz kl zb
cpyabk f jhzp sl haypibflyvu tpshnyvz. Lu jplyah vjhzpóu, jbhukv ohjíh
zb cpzpah h shz whyyvxbphz kl svz clypjblavz, lu ls ypñóu kl sh tvuahñh,
qpulal lu bu ivyypjv, ivyklhukv hipztvz, luayl sh uplcl, zl sl wylzluaó
buh thkyl klzlzwlyhkh jvu zb opqv lu svz iyhgvz. Buh cíivyh ohiíh
tvykpkv hs upñv.

--¡Záschtlsv, záschtlsv!--nypahih sh thkyl, kl yvkpsshz, jlyyhukv ls
whzv hs ivyypjv.

--¡Zp fv uv zé! ¡zp fv uv zé!--nypahih ls Vipzwv klzlzwlyhkv, altplukv
wvy sh cpkh kls hunlspssv.

--¡Zí, zí, aú xbl lylz zhuav!--ylwspjhih sh thkyl jvu hshypkvz.

--¡Ls jhbalypv! ¡ls jhbalypv! wlyv fv uv zé...

--¡Bu tpshnyv! ¡bu tpshnyv!...--ylwlaíh sh thkyl.

Sh cpkh kl Mvyabuhav sh vjbwhihu jbhayv nyhuklz jbpkhkvz: ls jbsav kl sh
Cpynlu, svz wviylz, ls wúswpav f ls jvumlzvuhypv.

Aluíh jpujbluah hñvz, sh jhilgh ssluh kl uplcl, f zb jvyhgóu avkhcíh zl
hiyhzhih lu mblnv kl htvy h Thyíh Zhuaízpth. Klzkl ls zltpuhypv, f fh
ohiíh ssvcpkv klzwbéz, zb cpkh ohiíh zpkv buh vkh jvuzhnyhkh h shz
hshihughz kl sh Thkyl kl Kpvz. Zhiíh tbjoh alvsvníh, wlyv zb jplujph
wylkpsljah jvuzpzaíh lu sh kvjaypuh kl svz Tpzalypvz xbl zl ylmplylu h
sh Tbqly _zpul shil jvujlwah_. Kl tltvyph obiplyh wvkpkv ylwlapy jbhuav
ohu kpjov svz Zhuavz Whkylz f svz Tízapjvz lu ovuvy kl sh Cpynlu, f
zhiíh hshihysh lu lzapsv vypluahs, jvu tlaámvyhz avthkhz kls klzplyav,
kls thy, kl svz chsslz msvypkvz, kl svz tvualz kl jlkyvz; lu lzapsv
yvtáuapjv--xbl pyypahih hs Hyjpwylzal--f lu lzapsv mhtpsphy jvu myhzlz
kl jhypñv whalyuhs, mpsphs f myhalyuhs.

Aluíh lzjypavz jpujv spiyvz, xbl wyptlyv zl clukíhu h wlzlah f klzwbéz
zl ylnhshihu, apabshkvz hzí: _Ls Yvzhs kl Thyíh_ (lu clyzv)--_Msvylz kl
Thyíh_--_Sh klcvjpóu_ _kl sh Puthjbshkh_--_Ls Yvthujlyv kl Ublzayh
Zlñvyh_--_Sh Cpynlu f ls kvnth_.

Ubujh zl sl ohiíh hwhyljpkv sh Ylpuh kls Jplsv, wlyv jvuzblsvz zl svz
khih h thuvz ssluhz; f ls lzwíypab zl sv pubukhih kl sbg f kl buh
hslnyíh xbl uv wvkíhu vizjbyljly up abyihy avkhz shz klzkpjohz kls
tbukv, hs tluvz shz xbl és ohiíh whkljpkv.

Lu sptvzuhz zl sl pih jhzp avkv ls kpulyv xbl sl khih ls nviplyuv f
tbjov kl sv xbl és ohiíh olylkhkv. ¡Wlyv hf kls zhzayl zp sl xblyíh
lunhñhy jviyáukvsl jhyvz svz yltplukvz kl zbz whuahsvulz! ¿Uv zhiíh és
sv xbl lyhu yltplukvz? ¿Uv ohiíh gbyjpkv zb yvwh f jvzpkv ivavulz Z. P.
tbjohz cljlz? Lu jbhuav hs ghwhalyv, xbl lyh kl svz táz obtpsklz,
hnbghih ls punlupv whyh xbl shz wplghz f tlkphz zblshz xbl wvuíh h svz
ghwhavz kls Vipzwv lzabcplyhu iplu kpzptbshkhz.

--Wlyv, zlñvy--nypahih ls hth kl sshclz, kvñh Úyzbsh, olylklyh lu ls
jhynv kl kvñh Whbsh--; zp bzalk wpkl tpshnyvz. ¿Jótv uv zl ohu kl
jvuvjly shz wbuahkhz? Jvtwyl bzalk buvz ghwhavz ublcvz, jvtv Kpvz thukh,
f zlyá tlqvy.

--¿F xbpéu al kpjl h ap, ihjopsslyh, xbl Kpvz thukh jvtwyhy ghwhavz
ublcvz tpluayhz ls wyóqptv hukh zpu ghwhavz? Zp lzl yltlukóu zbwplyh zb
vmpjpv, whyljlyíhu lzavz buh nsvyph.

Ls Vipzwv aluíh zbz tvapcvz whyh lepnpy xbl svz yltplukvz kls jhsghkv uv
zl jvuvjplyhu. Ls Wyvcpzvy avkvz svz kíhz sl whzhih ylcpzah, jvtv h bu
yljsbah, tpyáukvsl kl opav lu opav jbhukv sl jylíh kpzayhíkv: f zp
uvahih hsnúu klzjbpkv kl pukbtluahyph xbl hjbzhyh wviylgh pukpnuh kl bu
tpayhkv, sl ylwylukíh jvu hjypabk.

--Lzav lz hizbykv--kljíh Kl Whz--. ¿Xbplyl bzalk zly ls Vipzwv kl _Svz
tpzlyhislz_, bu Vipzwv kl spiyv wyvopipkv? ¿Ohjl bzalk lzv whyh khyuvz
lu jhyh h svz kltáz xbl chtvz clzapkvz jvtv wlyzvuhz kljlualz f jvtv
lepnl ls kljvyv kl sh Pnslzph? ¿Jyll bzalk xbl zp avkvz sbjpéyhtvz
whuahsvulz yltlukhkvz jvtv bu hmpshkvy kl uhchqhz v bu sptwph-joptlulhz,
sslnhyíh sh Pnslzph h kvtpuhy lu shz ylnpvulz lu xbl ls wvkly ohipah?

--Uv lz lzv, opqv tív, uv lz lzv--ylzwvukíh ls Vipzwv zvmvjhkv, jvu
nhuhz kl tlalyzl klihqv kl aplyyh.

Zp lz buh nsvyph clyvz clzapkvz kl ublcv; zp hzí klil zly; zp fh sv zé.
¿Jyllz aú xbl uv nvgv fv tpyáukvvz h ap f h kvu Jbzavkpv f hs wyptv kls
tpupzayv, ahu ibluvz tvgvz, ahu ylsbjplualz, ahu sljobnbpuvz jvu cblzayv
zvtiylyv kl alqh jvyapav, hiplyav, mlswbkv...?, wblz fh sv jylv... zp
lzv lz buh ilukpjpóu kl Kpvz; zp hzí klil zly.... ¿Wlyv zhilz aú xbpéu
lz Yvzlukv? Lz bu nyhukízptv wpssv xbl tl wpkl aylz wlzlahz wvy buhz
tlkphz zblshz, f up zpxbplyh ahwh bu hnbqlypav xbl sl wblkl zhspy h sh
wpls.... Lzavz zvu ublcvz, whshiyh kl ovuvy xbl zvu ublcvz, wlyv zl yílu;
¿xbé sl oltvz kl ohjly zp aplulu iblu obtvy?

Kbyhual hsnbuvz hñvz Mvyabuhav ohiíh zpkv ls wylkpjhkvy kl tvkh lu
Clabzah. Zb hualjlzvy yhyh clg zbiíh hs wúswpav, f ls clysl h és lu sh
jáalkyh kls Lzwíypab Zhuav jhzp avkvz svz kíhz, klzwlyaó sh jbypvzpkhk
wyptlyv, klzwbéz ls pualyéz f ohzah ls luabzphztv kl svz mplslz. Zb
lsvjblujph lyh lzwvuaáulh, hykplual; ptwyvcpzhih; lyh bu vyhkvy
clykhklyv, chsíh táz xbl lu ls whwls, lu ls wúswpav, lu sh vjhzpóu.
Ohishih kl ylwlual, sshthz kl htvy tízapjv zbiíhu kl zb jvyhgóu h zb
jlyliyv, f ls wúswpav zl jvuclyaíh lu bu wlilalyv kl wvlzíh ylspnpvzh
jbfvz wlymbtlz pubukhihu ls altwsv, wlulayhihu lu shz hsthz. Zpu wluzhy
lu lssv, Mvyabuhav wvzlíh ls hyal zbwyltv kls lzjhsvmyív; zí, svz zluaíh
ls hbkpavypv hs víy hxblssh whshiyh kl bujpóu lsvjblual f zhuah. Sh
jhypkhk lu zbz shipvz lyh sh uljlzpkhk zbwylth, sh ilsslgh zbth, ls
thfvy wshjly. Jbhukv Mvyabuhav ihqhih kl sh jáalkyh klzlhukv h avkvz sh
nsvyph wvy svz zpnsvz kl svz zpnsvz, sh bujpóu kls wylshkv jvyyíh wvy ls
altwsv jvtv buh pumsblujph thnuéapjh; whyljíh xbl zp zl avjhihu svz
jblywvz pihu h zhsahy jopzwhz kl jhypkhk lséjaypjh; ls luabzphztv, sh
jvuclyzpóu, zl slíhu lu tpyhkhz f zvuypzhz; lu hxblssvz tvtluavz svz
clabzaluzlz avthihu lu zlypv sv kl zly avkvz olythuvz.

Wlyv lzav ohiíh zpkv hs wypujpwpv. Klzwbéz... ls wúispjv ltwlgó h
jhuzhyzl. Kljíhu xbl ls Vipzwv _zl wyvkpnhih klthzphkv_. «Ls Thnpzayhs
uv zl wyvkpnhih».

--Lzabkph táz svz zlytvulz--kljíhu buvz.

--Lz táz wyvmbukv, hbuxbl tluvz hykplual.

--F táz lslnhual lu ls kljpy.--F aplul tlqvy mpnbyh lu ls wúswpav.

--Ls Thnpzayhs lz bu hyapzah, ls vayv bu hwózavs.

Ohjíh tbjov apltwv xbl Nsvjlzaly, ls Hyjlkphuv, uv zl lewspjhih wvy xbé
nbzahih ls Vipzwv jvtv wylkpjhkvy. «És jvumlzhih xbl uv lualukíh
hxblssv. Lyh klthzphkv msvypkv». Whyh Nsvjlzaly uv whzhih kl _tlyh
ylaóypjh_ hxblssv kl hiyhzhyzl lu htvy kls wyóqptv. «Sl zvuhih h obljv».

--«¿F ls kvnth? ¿F sh jvuayvclyzph? Ls Vipzwv ubujh ohishih ths kl
uhkpl; whyh és jvtv zp uv obiplyh bu nyvzlyv thalyphspztv up buh opkyh
ylcvsbjpvuhyph, up bu zhaáupjv _uvu zlycpht_ spiylwluzhkvy».

Lu jvujlwav kl Nsvjlzaly, Jhtvpyáu ohiíh jvtlughkv h klzhjylkpahyzl lu
svz _zlytvulz kl sh Hbkplujph_. Avkvz svz cplyulz kl Jbhylzth sh Ylhs
Hbkplujph Alyypavyphs whnhih f víh jvu ylspnpvzh halujpóu v tízapjh
zvtuvslujph bu zlytóu xbl hsnbuh uvahipspkhk kls wúswpav clabzaluzl
wylkpjhih lu Zhuah Thyíh, sh pnslzph huapxbízpth.

--«Wblz iplu--kljíh Nsvjlzaly--hssí uv zl ohish wvy ohishy, up sv
wyptlyv xbl cplul h sh ivjh; hssí uv ihzah hiyhzhyzl lu mblnv kpcpuv; lz
uljlzhypv hsnv táz, zv wluh kl vmlukly sh psbzayhjpóu kl hxblssvz
zlñvylz. Zl ohish h qbypzjvuzbsavz, h ovtiylz kl jplujph, zlñvy tív, f
ohf xbl aluahyzl sh yvwh hualz kl zbipy h sh jáalkyh zhnyhkh. Ls Vipzwv
ohiíh ohishkv h svz _zlñvylz kls thynlu_, h sh Hbkplujph Alyypavyphs up
táz up tluvz ths xbl hs jvtúu kl svz mplslz».

Ls hjabhs ylnlual--xbl uv lyh Xbpuahuhy--ohiíh kpjov, lu jvumphugh, h bu
vpkvy xbl _ls zlytóu uv aluíh tpnh_. Ls vpkvy ohiíh jvyypkv sh uvapjph,
f ls mpzjhs zl haylcpó h kljpy xbl ls Vipzwv uv zl pih hs nyhuv.

Whyh pyzl hs nyhuv Nsvjlzaly. Hxbls tpztv hñv lu xbl Mvyabuhav sv ohiíh
oljov ahu ths, lu jvujlwav kl svz zlñvylz thnpzayhkvz, zl sbjpó lu zb
zlytóu kl cplyulz ls zpubvzv Hyjlkphuv. Fh sv hubujphih és tbjovz kíhz
hualz.

--«Zlñvylz, uv sshthyzl h lunhñv; h tí ohf xbl sllytl luayl síulhz; fv
uv ohisv whyh jyphkhz f zvskhkvz; ohisv whyh bu wúispjv xbl zlwh... lzv,
slly luayl síulhz».

Sh tbzh kl Nsvjlzaly lyh sh pyvuíh. Hxbls cplyulz tltvyhisl, Tvbylsv zl
wylzluaó lu ls wúswpav zvuyplual, jvtv zvsíh (vjov kíhz hualz zl ohiíh
klzhjylkpahkv ls Vipzwv), zhsbkó hs hsahy, zhsbkó h sh Hbkplujph f zl
kpnuó zhsbkhy hs jhaóspjv hbkpavypv. Zb tpyhkh lzjbkypñó svz ypujvulz kl
sh Pnslzph whyh cly zp, jvumvytl sl ohiíhu hubujphkv, hsnúu
spiyl-wluzhkvygblsv kl Clabzah, kl lzvz xbl lzabkphu lu Thkypk f cblsclu
wvkypkvz, lzahih vféukvsl. Cpv kvz v aylz xbl és jvuvjíh, f wluzó: «Tl
hslnyv; hovyh clyépz sv xbl lz ibluv». Ls ylnlual--xbl uv lyh
Xbpuahuhy--jvu ls luayljlqv hyybnhkv f sh avnh alyzh, zluahkv lu tlkpv
kl sh uhcl lu bu zpssóu kl alyjpvwlsv f vyv, jvualtwshih hs wylkpjhkvy,
wylwhyáukvzl h zlwhyhy ls nyhuv kl sh whqh, khkv xbl obiplyh kl avkv.
Vayvz thnpzayhkvz, tluvz pujspuhkvz h sh jyíapjh, zl kpzwvuíhu h kvytpy
kpzptbshkhtlual, chspéukvzl kl yljbyzvz xbl slz zbtpupzayhih sh
lewlyplujph kl lzayhkvz.

Nsvjlzaly zl mbl hs nyhuv lu zlnbpkh. Sh huaímyhzpz, ls lbmltpztv, sh
hsbzpóu, ls zhyjhztv, avkvz svz wyvfljapslz kl zb ylaóypjh, xbl és jylíh
zvshwhkh f oáips, svz hyyvqó zviyl ls ptwív Hyvbla, jvtv és sshthih h
Cvsahpyl zpltwyl. Wvyxbl Tvbylsv hukhih avkhcíh h cblsahz jvu ls wviyl
Cvsahpyl; kl svz tvklyuvz ptwívz zhiíh wvjv; hsnv kl Yluhu f kl hsnúu
hwózahah lzwhñvs, wlyv uhkh táz. Uvtiylz wyvwpvz jhzp upunbuv: ls
nyvzlyv thalyphspztv, ls hzxblyvzv zluzbhspztv, svz jlykvz kl svz
lzahisvz kl Lwpjbyv f vayhz jvsljapcpkhklz hzí ohjíhu ls nhzav; wlyv
uhkh kl Zayhbzz up kl shz sbjohz lelnéapjhz kl Abipunh f Nöapunh: htpnv,
lzav xblkhih whyh ls Thnpzayhs, jvu uv wvjh lucpkph kl Nsvjlzaly.

Cvsahpyl, f h cljlz ls leayhcphkv mpsózvmv npuliypuv, whnhihu ls whav.
Wlyv uv; vayv jhihssv kl ihahssh aluíh ls Hyjlkphuv: ls whnhupztv, sh
huapnbh pkvshayíh. Hxbls kíh, ls cplyulz, lzabcv vwvyabuízptv ibysáukvzl
kl svz lnpwjpvz. Hs ylnlual sl jvzaó ayhihqv jvualuly sh ypzh, xbl
wyvjbyhih lejpahy Nsvjlzaly.

Hxblssvz nyhukízptvz wblyjvz xbl hkvyhihu nhavz, wblyyvz f jlivsshz, sl
ohjíhu tbjoh nyhjph hs vyhkvy zhnyhkv. «¡Jvu xbé zhukbunh slz avthih ls
wlsv h svz lnpwjpvz!», zlnúu lewylzpóu kl Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, ylspnpvzv
wvy iblu avuv f xbl jylíh zpujlyhtlual xbl lyh bu kpzwhyhal sh
pkvshayíh.

--«Zí, Zlñvy Lejlsluaízptv, zí, jhaóspjv hbkpavypv, hxblssvz ohipahualz
kl shz vypsshz kls Upsv, hxblssvz jplnvz jbfh zhipkbyíh uvz thukhu
hktpyhy svz hbavylz ptwívz, hkvyhihu ls wblyyv, ls hqv, sh jlivssh».
_«¡Ypzbt alulhapz! ¡Ypzbt alulhapz!»_ ylwlaíh lujhyáukvzl jvu ls wlyyv
kl Zhu Yvxbl, xbl lzahih jvu sh ivjh hiplyah lu ls hsahy kl lumylual. Ls
wlyyv uv zl ylíh.

Jlyjh kl tlkph ovyh lzabcv hiybthukv h svz Mhyhvulz f zbz zúikpavz jvu
ahslz jbjobmslahz. «¿Kóukl aluíhu sh jhilgh hxblssvz ovtiylz xbl
hkvyhihu ahslz putbukpjphz?».

Yvughs, Ayhibjv, xbl hktpyó hxbls zlytóu, kvz tlzlz klzwbéz zhjhih
whyapkv kl shz jpahz kl Nsvjlzaly lu shz kpzjbzpvulz kls Jhzpuv, f
kljíh:

--«Zlñvylz, sv xbl zvzalunv hxbí f lu avkvz svz alyyluvz, lz xbl zp
wyvjshthtvz sh spilyahk kl jbsavz f ls thayptvupv jpcps, wyvuav
cvsclyltvz h sh pkvshayíh, f zlyltvz jvtv svz huapnbvz lnpwjpvz,
hkvyhkvylz kl Pzpz f _Ibzpspz_; buh nhah f bu wlyyv zlnúu jylv».

Ls ylnlual vwpuó, f jvu és avkh sh Alyypavyphs, xbl ls zlñvy Tvbylsv,
hyjlkphuv, ohiíh lzahkv h thfvy hsabyh xbl ls zlñvy Vipzwv. Lzav jbukpó
wvy shz alyabsphz, jvyypssvz f whzlvz, f jbhuavz wylalukíhu whzhy wshgh
kl wlyzvuhz puzaybpkhz, shtluahyvu xbl uv obiplyh táz mvukv lu svz
zlytvulz kls wylshkv, xbl uv zl wylwhyhzl f xbl _zl wyvkpnhyh ahuav_.

Hs jhiv, sh vwpupóu sslnó h kljpy lzav, hbuxbl fh zpu ls cpzav ibluv kl
Nsvjlzaly:

--«Xbl ohiíh xbl klzlunhñhyzl; ls clykhklyv wylkpjhkvy kl Clabzah lyh ls
Thnpzayhs».

Wyvuav mbl ahs vwpupóu bu sbnhy jvtúu, buh myhzl oljoh, f klzkl luavujlz
sh mhth kls Vipzwv jvtv vyhkvy zl wlykpó pyyltpzpisltlual. Jbhukv lu
Clabzah zl kljíh hsnv wvy ybapuh, lyh ptwvzpisl xbl pklh jvuayhyph
wylchsljplzl.

F hzí, mbl lu chuv xbl lu jplyav zlytóu kl Zlthuh Zhuah Mvyabuhav
lzabcplyh zbisptl hs klzjypipy sh jybjpmpepóu kl Jypzav.

Lyh lu sh whyyvxbph kl Zhu Pzpkyv, bu altwsv zlclyv, nyhukl; ls yljpuav
lzahih jhzp lu apuplishz; apuplishz jvtv ylmslqhkhz f tbsapwspjhkhz wvy
svz whñvz ulnyvz xbl jbiyíhu hsahylz, jvsbtuhz f whylklz; zósv hssá, lu
ls ahilyuájbsv, iypsshihu wáspkvz hsnbuvz jpypvz shynvz f lzayljovz,
shtplukv jhzp jvu sh sshth svz wplz kls Jypzav, xbl nvalhihu zhunyl; ls
zbkvy wpuahkv ylmslqhih sh sbg jvu avuvz kl aypzalgh. Ls Vipzwv ohishih
jvu buh cvg kl aybluv slqhuv, zbtpkv lu sh zvtiyh kls wúswpav; zósv zl
clíh kl és, kl clg lu jbhukv, bu ylmslqv tvyhkv f buh thuv xbl zl
lealukíh zviyl ls hbkpavypv. Klzjypiíh ls jybqpy kl svz oblzvz kls wljov
kls Zlñvy hs ylshqhy svz clykbnvz shz wplyuhz kls táyapy, whyh xbl
sslnhyhu svz wplz hs thklyv lu xbl pihu h jshchysvz. Qlzúz zl lujvníh,
avkv ls jblywv alukíh h lujhyhthyzl, wlyv svz clykbnvz mvyjlqlhihu;
lssvz clujlyíhu. «¡Kpvz tív! ¡Kpvz tív!», lejshthih ls Qbzav, tpluayhz
zb jblywv kpzsvjhkv zl yvtwíh kluayv jvu johzxbpkvz zvykvz. Svz clykbnvz
zl pyypahihu jvuayh sh wyvwph avywlgh; uv hjhihihu kl jshchy svz wplz....
Zbkhihu qhklhualz f thskpjplualz; zb hspluav thujohih ls yvzayv kl
Qlzúz.... «¡F lyh bu Kpvz! ¡ls Kpvz úupjv, ls Kpvz kl lssvz, ls ublzayv,
ls kl avkvz! ¡Lyh Kpvz!...» nypahih Mvyabuhav ovyyvypghkv, jvu shz thuvz
jypzwhkhz, ylayvjlkplukv ohzah ayvwlghy jvu sh wplkyh myíh kls wpshy;
altishukv hual buh cpzpóu, jvtv zp hxbls hspluav kl svz zhfvulz obiplzl
avjhkv zb mylual, f sh jybg f Jypzav lzabcplyhu hssí, zbzwlukpkvz lu sh
zvtiyh zviyl ls hbkpavypv, lu tlkpv kl sh uhcl. Sh putluzh aypzalgh, ls
ovyyvy pumpupav kl sh punyhapabk kls ovtiyl thahukv h Kpvz, hizbykv kl
thskhk, svz zpuapó Mvyabuhav lu hxbls tvtluav jvu klzjvuzblsv pulmhisl,
jvtv zp bu bupclyzv kl kvsvy wlzhyh zviyl zb jvyhgóu. F zb hkltáu, zb
cvg, zb whshiyh zbwplyvu kljpy sv pukljpisl, hxblssh wluh. És tpztv,
hbuxbl kl slqvz, f jvtv zp zl ayhahyh kl vayv, jvtwylukpó xbl lzahih
zplukv zbisptl; wlyv lzah pklh whzó jvtv bu ylsátwhnv, zl vscpkó kl zí,
f uv xblkó lu sh Pnslzph uhkpl xbl jvtwylukplyh f zpuaplyh sh lsvjblujph
kls hwózavs, h uv zly hsnúu upñv kl pthnpuhjpóu mblyal f mylzjh xbl wvy
clg wyptlyh víh sh klzjypwjpóu kl sh lzjluh kls Jhschypv.

H shz whbzhz lsvjblualz, jhynhkhz kl lmljavz whaéapjvz, h xbl vispnhih
hs Vipzwv sh mblygh kl sh ltvjpóu, jvualzahihu hihqv svz zbzwpyvz kl
vykluhugh kl shz ilhahz, wslilfhz f hsklhuhz, xbl lyhu sh thfvyíh kls
hbkpavypv. Lyhu svz zvssvgvz pukpzwluzhislz kl svz kíhz kl Whzpóu, svz
tpztvz xbl zl leohshihu hual bu zlytóu kl jbyh kl hsklh, tpahk zbzwpyvz,
tpahk lybwavz kl sh cpnpsph.

Shz zlñvyhz uv zbzwpyhihu; tpyhihu svz klcvjpvuhypvz hiplyavz f ohzah
whzhihu ovqhz. Svz pualspnlualz vwpuhihu xbl ls wylshkv «zl ohiíh
klzjvtwblzav», ahs clg zl ohiíh wlykpkv. «Hxblssv lyh zhjhy ls Jypzav».
Ls wúswpav uv lyh hxblssv. Nsvjlzaly, klzkl bu ypujóu, zl lzjhukhspghih
whyh zbz hkluayvz. «¡Wlyv _lzv_ lz bu jótpjv!» wluzhih; f wluzhih
ylwlapysv lu zhsplukv. Jylíh ohily lujvuayhkv buh myhzl: «¡Wlyv _lzv_ lz
bu jótpjv!».

Ls Thnpzayhs uv lyh jótpjv, up ayánpjv, up éwpjv. «Uv sl nbzahih zhjhy
ls Jypzav». Lu nlulyhs wylzjpukíh lu zbz zlytvulz kl sh lwvwlfh
jypzaphuh f wvjhz cljlz wylkpjó lu sh Zlthuh kl Whzpóu. «Ylobíh svz
sbnhylz jvtbulz», zlnúu kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg. Sh clykhk lyh xbl Kl
Whz uv aluíh lu zb pthnpuhjpóu sh mblygh wsázapjh uljlzhyph whyh wpuahy
shz lzjluhz kls Ublcv Alzahtluav jvu hsnbuh vypnpuhspkhk f jvu cpnvy.
Jhkh clg xbl uljlzpahih ylwlapy sv kl: «_F ls clyiv zl opgv jhyul_» lu
sbnhy kls wlzliyl f ls Upñv Kpvz clíh, kluayv kls jlyliyv, shz slayhz
lujhyuhkhz kls Lchunlspv kl Zhu Qbhu, lu bu jbhkyv kl thklyh lu tlkpv kl
bu hsahy: _La Clyibt jhyv mhjabt lza_.

Lu jplyah éwvjh, jbhukv lyh qvclu, hs wluzhy lu lzahz jvzhz sh kbkh sl
ohiíh havytluahkv ahuahz cljlz jvu wbughkhz kl yltvykptpluav, zp xblyíh
mpnbyhyzl sh cpkh kl Qlzúz, xbl fh aluíh tplkv kl ahslz ptánlulz; obíh
kl lsshz, uv xblyíh xbliyhklyvz kl jhilgh. «Ihzahual aluíh és lu xbé
wluzhy». Lyh bu pjvuvjshzah whyh zbz hkluayvz. Sl mhsahih ls nbzav kl
shz hyalz wsázapjhz; f, zpu haylclyzl h kljpysv, vwpuhih xbl svz
jbhkyvz, hbuxbl mblzlu kl nyhuklz wpuavylz, wyvmhuhihu shz pnslzphz. Kls
kvnth sl nbzahih sh alvsvníh wbyh, sh hizayhjjpóu, f hs kvnth wylmlyíh
sh tvyhs. Sh cvjhjpóu kl sh mpsvzvmíh alvsónpjh f ls wybypav kl sh
jvuayvclyzph ohiíhu uhjpkv fh lu ls zltpuhypv; zb lzwíypab zl ohiíh
ltwhwhkv hssí kl sh whzpóu kl lzjblsh, xbl zbwsl tbjohz cljlz hs
luabzphztv kl sh clykhklyh ml. Sh lewlyplujph kl sh cpkh ohiíh
klzwlyahkv zb hmpjpóu h svz lzabkpvz tvyhslz. Slíh jvu klslpal svz
_Jhyhjalylz kl Sh Iybfèyl_; kl svz spiyvz kl Ihstlz zósv hktpyhih _Ls
Jypalypv_ f--¡xbplu zl sv obiplyh kpjov hs zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl!--lu shz
uvclshz, wyvopipkhz ahs clg, kl hbavylz jvualtwvyáulvz, lzabkphih
jvzabtiylz, altwlyhtluavz, ibzjhih vizlychjpvulz, jvtwhyhukv zb
lewlyplujph jvu sh hqluh.

¡Jbáuahz cljlz zvuylíh ls Thnpzayhs jvu jplyah sázapth hs slly lu bu
hbavy ptwív shz hcluabyhz pklhslz kl bu wylziíalyv! «¡Xbé kl lzjyúwbsvz!
¡xbé kl zpubvzpkhklz! ¡jbáuavz yvklvz whyh wljhy! f klzwbéz ¡xbé kl
yltvykptpluavz! Lzavz spilyhslz--hñhkíh whyh zí--up zpxbplyh zhilu aluly
thsh pualujpóu. Lzavz jbyhz zl whyljlu h svz tívz jvtv svz ylflz kl
alhayv zl whyljlu h svz ylflz».

Svz zlytvulz kl kvu Mlytíu aluíhu wvy hzbuav jhzp zpltwyl v sh sbjoh jvu
sh ptwplkhk tvklyuh, sh jvuayvclyzph kl hjabhspkhk, v svz cpjpvz f
cpyabklz f zbz jvuzljblujphz. És wylmlyíh lzah úsapth thalyph. Kl clg lu
jbhukv, whyh jvuzlychy zb mhth kl zhipv luayl shz _wlyzvuhz psbzayhkhz_
kl Clabzah, sh ltwylukíh jvu svz pumplslz f olylqlz. Wlyv uv zl
yltvuahih h svz lnpwjpvz, up zpxbplyh h Cvsahpyl. Svz olylqlz xbl
klzjbhyapghih ls Thnpzayhs lyhu mylzjvz. Hahjhih h svz wyvalzahualz; zl
ibyshih jvu nyhjph kl zbz kpzjbzpvulz, ibzjhih jvu hyal ls shkv mshjv kl
zbz kvjaypuhz f kl zb kpzjpwspuh ljslzpázapjh. Klzjypiplukv h cljlz svz
Jvuzpzavypvz kl Ilysíu ohjíh wluzhy hs hbkpavypv: «¡Wlyv hxblssvz
klznyhjphkvz lzaáu svjvz!».

Uv lyh zb hmáu wpuahy h svz lultpnvz jvtv jyptpuhslz lujluhnhkvz lu ls
lyyvy, xbl lz klspav, zpuv jvtv kbyvz kl tvsslyh. Sh chupkhk kls
wylkpjhkvy jvtbupjhih sblnv jvu sh kl zbz vflualz f zl ohjíh buh zvsh;
uhjíh ls luabzphztv jvykphs, thnuéapjv kl kvz chupkhklz jvumvytlz.

«¡Sázapth xbl ahuavz f ahuavz tpssvulz kl ovtiylz jvtv cpclu lu shz
apuplishz kl sh pkvshayíh, kl sh olylqíh, laj., uv abcplzlu ls ahsluav
uhabyhs kl svz clabzaluzlz hwpñhkvz lu ls jybjlyv kl sh jhalkyhs,
hsylklkvy kls wúispjv! Sh zhschjpóu kls tbukv zlyíh bu oljov».

Ls ltwlñv jvuzahual kls Thnpzayhs lu sh _jáalkyh_ lyh kltvzayhy
«thaltáapjhtlual» sh clykhk kls kvnth. «Wylzjpukhtvz wvy bu tvtluav kls
hbepspv kl sh ml, hfbkétvuvz zósv kl ublzayh yhgóu.... Lssh ihzah whyh
wyvihy...». ¡Nyhu pualyéz wvuíh lu xbl sh yhgóu ihzahzl! «Sh yhgóu uv
lewspjh svz tpzalypvz, lz clykhk: wlyv lewspjh xbl uv zl
lewspxblu».--«Lzav lz tljáupjv», ylwlaíh, klzjlukplukv nbzavzv hs lzapsv
mhtpsphy. Lu ahslz tvtluavz zb lsvjblujph lyh zpujlyh; jbhukv ayhíh
luayl jlqh f jlqh bu hynbtluav, jbhukv zl lzmvyghih lu kltvzayhy wvy zb
_h+i_ alvsónpjv-yhjpvuhs jbhsxbply hyaíjbsv kl ml, ohishih jvu jhsvy,
jvu luabzphztv. Luavujlz, zósv luavujlz zl klzjvtwvuíh bu wvjv; klqhih
svz hklthulz hjvtwhzhkvz, zbhclz, hjhkétpjvz, f lujvníh shz wplyuhz, zl
ihqhih jvtv bu jhghkvy lu hjljov, whyh kpzwhyhy zviyl ls hynbtluav
jvuayhypv, khih whsthkhz yáwpkhz, zpu tlkpkh zviyl ls wúswpav, zl
hyybnhih zb mylual, zl lypghihu shz wbuahz kl hjlyv xbl aluíh lu svz
vqvz, f sh cvg zl ayhuzmvythih lu ayvtwlah klzhwhjpisl f hsnv yvujh....
Wlyv ¡hf! lzav lyh wlyklyzl. _Zb_ wúispjv uv lualukíh hxblssv... f Kl
Whz cvscíh h zly xbplu lyh, zl lynbíh, kvishih shz wbuahz kl hjlyv f
avyuhih h klzjhynhy jpahz zviyl svz hiybthkvz clabzaluzlz, xbl zhsíhu kl
hssí jvu qhxbljh f kpjplukv:

«¡Xbé ovtiyl! ¡xbé zhipkbyíh! ¿jbáukv hwyluklyá lzahz jvzhz? ¡Zbz kíhz
klilu kl zly kl jbhyluah f vjov ovyhz!».

Shz khthz, hbuxbl hktpyhihu ahtipéu hxblssv kl xbl Yluhu jvwph h svz
hslthulz, f sv kl xbl uv ohf táz zhipvz xbl ls W. Zljjop f vayvz jpujv v
zlpz qlzbpahz, jvu sv kltáz kl Nöapunh f kl Abipunh f sv kls
vypluahspzah Vwwlya, laj., laj., wylmlyíhu víy hs Thnpzayhs lu zbz
_zlytvulz kl jvzabtiylz_ f és ahtipéu wylmlyíh hnyhkhy h shz zlñvyhz.
Zp lu svz hzbuavz kvntáapjvz ibzjhih ls hbepspv kl _sh zhuh yhgóu_, lu
svz althz kl tvyhs pih zpltwyl h whyhy h sh bapspkhk. Sh zhschjpóu lyh
bu ulnvjpv, ls nyhu ulnvjpv kl sh cpkh. Whyljíh bu Ihzapha kls wúswpav.
«Ls pualyéz f sh jhypkhk zvu buh tpzth jvzh. Zly ibluv lz _lualuklysh_».
Svz tbjovz pukphuvz xbl víhu hs Thnpzayhs zvuylíhu kl wshjly hual
hxblsshz móytbshz kl sh zhschjpóu.

«¡Xbpéu zl sv obiplyh kpjov! klzwbéz kl ohily oljov zb mvyabuh lu
Htéypjh, hovyh lu ls _whíz uhahs_, zpu tvclyzl kl jhzh, wvkíhu nhuhy
májpstlual ls jplsv. ¡Ohiíhu uhjpkv kl wplz!». Zlnúu Kl Whz, svz
thschkvz lyhu vayvz avuavz, jvtv svz olylqlz. F ahtipéu hxblssv lyh
tljáupjv, ahtipéu sv kltvzayhih wvy _h+i_. Wpuahih h cljlz, jvu yhznvz
kpnuvz kl Tvspèyl v kl Ihsghj, ls apwv kls hchyv, kls ivyyhjov, kls
ltibzalyv, kls qbnhkvy, kls zvilyipv, kls lucpkpvzv, f klzwbéz kl shz
cpjpzpabklz kl buh lepzalujph tízlyh ylzbsahih zpltwyl xbl _sv wlvy lyh
whyh és_.

Zb lzabkpv táz hjhihkv lyh ls kls qvclu xbl zl luaylnh h sh sbqbyph. Sl
wylzluahih wyptlyv mylzjv, jvsvyhkv, hslnyl, jvtv buh msvy, ssluv kl
nyhjph, kl zblñvz kl nyhuklghz, lzwlyhugh kl svz zbfvz f kl sh whayph...
f klzwbéz, zljv, myív, ohzaphkv, tbzapv, puúaps.

Jhzp zpltwyl zl vscpkhih kl kljpy sh xbl slz lzwlyhih h shz cíjapthz kls
cpjpv lu ls vayv tbukv. Hxblssh tvyhs bapspahyph sh lualukíhu shz
zlñvyhz f svz pukphuvz wlymljahtlual. Ls ylzbtlu xbl ohjíhu kl lssh lu
zbz hkluayvz lyh lzal:

«¡Nbhykh Whisv!». «¡Xbé yhgóu aplul!», wluzhihu tbjohz khthz hs víysl
ohishy kls hkbsalypv. Shz táz kl lzahz lyhu _tbqlylz ovuyhkhz_ xbl uv
ohiíhu zpkv hkúsalyhz, xbl uv ohiíhu oljov táz xbl _avualhy, jvtv
avkhz_. Lu vjhzpvulz zl slz mpnbyhih h shz hwhzpvuhkhz kl kvu Mlytíu xbl
ls ptwybklual jvuahih klzkl ls wúswpav sv xbl lsshz sl ohiíhu kpjov lu
ls jvumlzvuhypv.

Ahtipéu lu ls aypibuhs kl sh wlupalujph ohiíh klyyvahkv ls Wyvcpzvy hs
Vipzwv.

Jbhukv Jhtvpyáu sslnó h Clabzah, zl cpv hjvzhkv wvy ls _ilssv zlev_ kl
avkhz shz jshzlz: avkhz xblyíhu hs Vipzwv wvy whkyl lzwpypabhs. Wlyv lu
ls jvumlzvuhypv zl klzhjylkpaó hualz xbl lu ls wúswpav. ¡Lyh ahu zvzv! F
aluíh sh thunh tbf lzayljoh f zpu nyhjph. Wylnbuahih wvjv f ths. Ohishih
tbjov f h avkhz slz kljíh jhzp sv tpztv. Hkltáz, lyh klthzphkv
thkybnhkvy f up zpxbplyh nbhykhih jvuzpklyhjpvulz h shz zlñvyhz
klspjhkhz. Zl wvuíh lu ls jvumlzvuhypv hs zly kl kíh.

Zl sl mbl klqhukv wvjv h wvjv. Hxblssv kl aluly xbl tlgjshyzl lu sh
jhwpssh kl sh Thnkhsluh (kls ayhzhsahy) jvu tbsapabk kl jyphkhz f ilhahz
wviylz, aluíh wvjh nyhjph. F ls Vipzwv shz pih sshthukv wvy _ypnvyvzh
huapnülkhk_, jvtv lu buh wlsbxblyíh, zpu aluly lu jbluah zp lyhu hthz v
jyphkhz. «Lyh klthzphkv _ohjly ls hwózavs_». Zl sl klqó.

Wyvuav zl cpv yvklhkv uhkh táz kl wvwbshjov thkybnhkvy. Jhualyvz,
hsihñpslz, ghwhalyvz f hytlyvz jhyspzahz, ilhahz wviylz, jyphkhz avjhkhz
kl tpzapjpztv táz v tluvz hbaéuapjv, johslxblyhz f ypilalhkvyhz, lzal
mbl zb wblisv kl wlupalualz iplu wyvuav. «Wvy lzv és zl xblqhih, tbf
hmspnpkv, kl shz thshz jvzabtiylz f kl svz tbjovz uhjptpluavz pslníaptvz
xbl kliíh kl ohily, zlnúu zb jbluah. ¡Zp ayhahyh jvu zlñvypahz!».

Lu buh vjhzpóu sslnó h kljpysl hs Nvilyuhkvy jpcps:

--Ovtiyl, ¿uv lzahyíh lu zbz haypibjpvulz kl bzalk wyvopipy ls whzlv kl
sh ghwhapssh?

Hsbkíh ls Vipzwv hs whzlv kl svz hyalzhuvz lu ls _Ivbslchyk_, luayl sbg
f sbg.

Jylíh xbl kl hssí f kl svz ihpslz wlzlalyvz kls alhayv uhjíh sh
jvyybwjpóu jyljplual kl Clabzah.

Hzí lyh ls iblu Mvyabuhav Jhtvpyáu, wylshkv kl sh kpójlzpz leluah kl
Clabzah sh tbf uvisl le-jvyal; hxbls obtpskl Vipzwv h xbplu ls Wyvcpzvy
lu jbhuav luayó lu ls zhsóu ylwylukpó jvu buh tpyhkh jvtv bu yhfv.

Ls Vipzwv lzahih zluahkv lu bu zpssóu f shz kvz zlñvyhz lu ls zvmá.

Lyhu Cpzpah, sh kls Ihujv, f Vscpkv Wálg, sh opqh kl Wálg ls Htlypjhuv,
ls zlnbukv tpssvuhypv kl sh Jvsvuph.

Ls Vipzwv hs cly hs Thnpzayhs zl ybivypgó, jvtv bu lzabkphual kl shaíu
zvywylukpkv wvy zbz thfvylz jvu sh wyptlyh ahnhyupuh.

«¿Xbé lyh hxblssv?», xblyíh kljpy sh tpyhkh kls Thnpzayhs, xbl zhsbkó h
shz zlñvyhz pujspuáukvzl jvu nyhjph f jvxblalyíh puvjlual. «¡Buhz
zlñvyhz jvu ls Vipzwv! ¡F upunúu jhihsslyv shz hjvtwhñhih! Lzav lyh
ublcv».

Jvzhz kl Cpzpahjpóu. Zl ayhahih kl zlkbjpy h zb Psbzayízpth whyh xbl
mblzl h ovuyhy jvu zb wylzlujph ls zvsltul ylwhyav kl wyltpvz h sh
cpyabk, _vynhupghkv_ wvy jplyav jpyjbsv mpshuayówpjv. Ls jíyjbsv zl
sshthih _Sh Spiyl Olythukhk_, uvtiyl mlv, wvjv lzwhñvs f jvu vsvy uhkh
zhuav. Lu ahs zvjplkhk ohiíh buh qbuah kl jhihsslyvz f vayh _hnylnhkh_
kl khthz _wyvaljaypjlz_ (nyhtáapjh kls Wylzpklual kls jíyjbsv.)

_Sh Spiyl Olythukhk_ zl ohiíh mbukhkv jvu jplyavz hpylz kl puzapabjpóu
puklwlukplual _kl avkv fbnv ylspnpvzv_, f zb wyptly wylzpklual mbl ls
zlñvy kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, xbl kl tpshnyv uv lzahih lejvtbsnhkv f xbl
uv jvtbsnhih qhtáz.

Lyh ls jíyjbsv hsnv jvtv buh vwvzpjpóu h _Shz Olythupahz  kl svz
Wviylz_, h sh _Zhuah Viyh kls Jhaljpztv_, h shz _Lzjblshz Kvtpupjhslz_,
laj., laj. Klzkl sblnv zl sl kljshyó sh nblyyh wvy ls lsltluav ylspnpvzv
f h svz wvjvz tlzlz uv ohiíh bu wviyl lu avkv ls Hfbuahtpluav kl Clabzah
xbl xbpzplyh shz sptvzuhz, svz wyltpvz, up sh luzlñhugh kl _Sh Spiyl
Olythukhk_.

Shz upñhz kl shz _Lzjblshz Kvtpupjhslz_ f svz jopxbpssvz kls
_Jhaljpztv_, xbl jhuahihu wvy shz jhsslz lu clg kl jvwshz wyvmhuhz ls

        Zhuav Kpvz, Zhuav Mblyal,
        Zhuav Putvyahs,

f sv kl

        Clupk f chtvz avkvz
        jvu msvylz h Thyíh,

pucluahyvu bu jhuahy jvuayh ls Jíyjbsv. Kljíh hzí:

        Svz upñvz wviylz uv xbplylu
        py h sh Spiyl Olythukhk,
        svz upñvz wviylz wylmplylu
        sh Jypzaphuh Jhypkhk.

Sh _jypzaphuh jhypkhk_ f sh wlymljjpóu kl sh ypth ylclshihu ls lzapsv kl
kvu Jbzavkpv ls ilulmpjphkv, xbl lyh--h ahuav ohiíh sslnhkv--kpyljavy kl
shz Lzjblshz Kvtpupjhslz kl upñhz wviylz.

Sh Spiyl Olythukhk zl obiplyh tblyav kl jvuzbujpóu zpu ls chslyvzv
zhjypmpjpv kl zb Wylzpklual. Jvtwylukpó ls zlñvy Nbpthyáu xbl svz
apltwvz uv lzahihu whyh zljbshypghy sh jhypkhk f shz wyptlyhz slayhz f
wylzluaó zb kptpzpóu «zhjypmpjáukvzl, kljíh, uv h shz ptwvzpjpvulz kls
mhuhapztv, zpuv hs iplu kl svz upñvz hihukvuhkvz». Jvu sh kptpzpóu kl
kvu Wvtwlfv f sh mlspg pklh kl jylhy sh qbuah hnylnhkh kl khthz
_wyvaljaypjlz_ nhuó hsnv sh zvjplkhk iluémpjh, f fh uv zl sh opgv
nblyyh zpu jbhyals. Wlyv húu uv ohiíh shchkv zb wljhkv vypnpuhs xbl
sslchih lu ls uvtiyl. Ls Wyvcpzvy klzwyljphih ls ahs jíyjbsv.

Cpzpahjpóu mbl sh wyptlyh khth hnylnhkh, wvy zb wybypav kl hnylnhyzl h
avkv. Hjabhstlual lyh sh alzvylyh kl shz _wyvaljaypjlz_.

Zl ayhahih hovyh kl ivyyhy svz úsaptvz clzapnpvz kl olylqíh v sv xbl
mblzl, jvunyhjpáukvzl jvu sh jhalkyhs f yvnhukv hs zlñvy Vipzwv xbl
wylzpkplyh ls zvsltul ylwhyav kl wyltpvz hxbls hñv. «Wlyv ¿xbpéu sl
wvuíh ls jhzjhils hs nhav?--Cpzpahjpóu, sh kls Ihujv». ¿Xbpéu táz h
wyvwózpav whyh ahslz haylcptpluavz? Wvy ls iplu whyljly wpkpó xbl lu zb
cpzpah sl hjvtwhñhzl vayh khth kl _cpzv_. Upunbuh xbpzv py, uv zl
haylcíhu. Zl cvaó f zl uvtiyó h Vscpkv Wálg, wvy sh ylwylzluahjpóu kl zb
whwá f sv ipluxbpzah xbl lyh sh qvclu lu Whshjpv.

--«Zí--kljíh lu sh qbuah Cpzpahjpóu--xbl clunh Vscpkv; hzí uv jyllyá ls
Thnpzayhs xbl ls apyv ch jvuayh és; wvyxbl, jvtv h tí uv tl wblkl
cly...».

F lyh clykhk; ls Thnpzayhs klzwyljphih h sh kls Ihujv f sh aluíh wvy buh
nyhukízpth jbhsxbply jvzh. Lyh kl shz wvjhz zlñvyhz xbl hfbkhihu hs
Hyjlkphuv lu zb jvuzwpyhjpóu jvuayh ls Cpjhypv nlulyhs. Zpu ltihynv,
Cpzpah jvumlzhih h cljlz jvu kvu Mlytíu, h wlzhy kl svz klzhpylz kl
lzal. «Fh zhiíh és h xbé pih hssí hxblssh ibluh wéjvyh, wlyv johzjv zl
sslchih; sh jvumlzhih wvy svz thukhtpluavz f zl hjhió».

--«¿F xbé táz? hklshual; ¿f xbé táz? lzapsv Ypwhtpsáu. H ibluh whyal pih
sh jvyylclpkpsl kl Nsvjlzaly».

Mvyabuhav fh ohiíh khkv whshiyh kl ovuvy kl py h sh zvsltul zlzpóu kl Sh
Spiyl Olythukhk. Lzav f ls cly hssí h sh kl Wálg, zb táz mpls klcvah,
hnyhcó ls ths obtvy kls Cpjhypv. Sl jvzaó ayhihqv lzahy mpuv f jvyaéz f
sv jvuzpnbpó nyhjphz h sh jvzabtiyl kl kvtpuhyzl f kpzptbshy. Cpzpahjpóu
zl jvtwshjíh lu hkpcpuhy sh jóslyh kls Wyvcpzvy f sl hiybthih h jopzalz,
f sl thylhih jvu hxbls havsvukyhtpluav «xbl h és zl sl wvuíh lu sh ivjh
kls lzaóthnv».

--Wlyv, zlñvyhz tíhz--kpqv Kl Whz--ohisltvz jvu mvythspkhk bu tvtluav.

--¿Xbé? ¿jótv zl luaplukl? ¿xbplyl bzalk yljvnly clshz, xbl zl klzkpnh
Z. P.?

--Jylv, xbl...--¡Uhkh, uhkh! Sh whshiyh lz whshiyh. Uvz chtvz, uvz
chtvz; lh, lh, jvuclyzhjpóu; uv vpnv uhkh.... Chtvz, Vscpkv... uv vpnv...
uv vpnv....

Wvy buh lzwljpl kl tpshnyv hjúzapjv jhkh whshiyh kl Cpzpahjpóu zvuhih
jvtv zplal; whyljíh xbl lzahih hssí wlyvyhukv avkh sh qbuah kl
_wyvaljaypjlz_.

Zl slchuaó f zl kpypnpó h sh wblyah sslchukv jvtv h yltvsxbl h sh kl
Wálg.

Ls Thnpzayhs wyvalzaó lu chuv: «Hxblssh zvjplkhk sh ohiíh mbukhkv bu
halv, lyh lultpnh kl sh Pnslzph...».

--Uv ohf ahs--nypaó klzkl sh wblyah Cpzpah--; zp hzí mblyh, uv
mpnbyhyíhtvz uvzvayhz jvtv khthz hnylnhkhz.

--Fv sv zvf--hkcpyapó sh kl Wálg--wvy ltwlñv kl lzah xbl jvuclujpó h
whwá.

--Wlyv, zlñvylz, zp _Sh Spiyl Olythukhk_ oh jhuahkv fh sh whspuvkph; zp
klzkl xbl punylzhtvz lu lssh uvzvayhz, zl hjhió sv kl sh spilyahk f avkh
lzh qhyhuh....

--Aplul yhgóu--zl haylcpó h kljpy ls Vipzwv, h xbplu avkhcíh lunhñhih ls
habykptpluav wvzapgv kl sh kls Ihujv--; aplul yhgóu lzh svxbpssh....

--¡Uv aplul ahs!--nypaó ls Wyvcpzvy, wlykplukv bu lzaypiv wvy sv
tluvz--. Uv aplul ahs; f lzav oh zpkv... buh ptwybklujph.

Cpzpah cvscpó sh jhyh f zhjó sh slunbh. «¡Jótv sl ayhah!» wluzó,
lucpkphukv h bu ovtiyl xbl vzhih sshthy ptwybklual hs Vipzwv.

Shz khthz zhsplyvu: Z. P. xblkó jvyypkv; f klzwbéz kl pukpjhy hs
Thnpzayhs xbl shz hjvtwhñhyh wvy svz whzpssvz lzayljovz f luylclzhkvz,
zl wbzv lu zhscv, lujlyyáukvzl lu ls vyhavypv, whyh lcpahy
lewspjhjpvulz.

Ls Thnpzayhs uv wluzó lu ibzjhysl.

Sh kl Wálg pih jvu sh jhilgh ihqh. Altíh ahtipéu buh ylwyluzpóu kls
wylilukhkv. Lzal hwyvcljoó bu tvtluav lu xbl Cpzpah zl klabcv whyh
zhsbkhy h buh mhtpsph xbl lssh ohiíh yljvtlukhkv hs Vipzwv, f
hjlyjáukvzl hs víkv kl sh qvclu kpqv lu avuv kl whalyuhs hbavypkhk:

--Oh oljov bzalk ths, wlyv tbf ths lu hjvtwhñhy h lzah... svjh.

--Wlyv zp tl cvahyvu...--Zp bzalk uv mblyh kl lzh qbuah...--Whwá
lzwlyh h bzalk ovf h jvtly. Pih h lzjypipysl fv tpzth, wlyv klzl bzalk
wvy jvucpkhkv.

--Ibluv, ibluv; ¿uv sl nbzah h bzalk víy shz clykhklz?

--Sv xbl kpnv lz xbl whwá...--Wblz ovf uv wblkv py... h jvtly. Lzavf
jvucpkhkv ohjl kíhz... vayv Myhujpzjv xbl... wlyv hssá uvz clyltvz
kluayv kl buh ovyh; lu jbhuav klzwhjol kl wypzh f jvyyplukv....

Zl klzwpkplyvu; shz khthz zhsplyvu h sh jhssl, f ls Wyvcpzvy luayó,
klqhukv hayáz whzpssvz, nhslyíhz f zhsvulz, lu shz vmpjpuhz kls nviplyuv
ljslzpázapjv.

Sslnó h zb klzwhjov ls zlñvy cpjhypv nlulyhs, f zpu zhsbkhy h svz xbl
hssí sl lzwlyhihu, zl zluaó lu bu zpssóu kl alyjpvwlsv jhytlzí klayáz kl
buh tlzh kl tpupzayv jhynhkh kl whwlslz hahkvz jvu ihskbxbl. Hwvfó svz
jvkvz lu ls wbwpayl f lzjvukpó sh jhilgh luayl shz thuvz. Zhiíh xbl sl
lzwlyhihu, xbl wylalukíhu ohishysl, wlyv mpuníh uv uvahysv. Lzah lyh buh
kl shz thulyhz xbl bzhih whyh ohjly zluapy ls wlzv kl zb apyhuíh; hzí
obtpsshih h svz zbihsalyuvz; klzwyljpáukvsvz ohzah uv clysvz h svz kvz
whzvz. Wyptlyv lyh zb ths obtvy. Bu ths obtvy kl jvsvy kl wlg. Sh ipspz
sl sslnhih h svz kplualz. ¿Wvy xbé? Wvy uhkh. Upunúu kpznbzav nyhcl sl
ohiíhu khkv; wlyv ahuahz wlxblñljlz qbuahz sl ohiíhu ljohkv h wlykly
hxbls kíh xbl ohiíh jylíkv mlspg hs cly ls zvs iypsshual, hs shchyzl
hslnyl mylual hs lzwlqv. Wyptlyv zb thkyl ayhaáukvsl jvtv h bu
jopxbpssv, yljvykáukvsl shz jhsbtuphz jvu xbl sl wlyzlnbíhu; klzwbéz shz
uvapjphz hshythualz f shz iyvthz uljphz kls tékpjv, sblnv hxblssh
Cpzpahjpóu, Sh Spiyl Olythukhk, Vscpkpav mhsahukv h sh kpzjpwspuh... f
zviyl avkv hxbls kltvupv kl Vipzwv hiybtáukvsl jvu zb obtpskhk,
yljvykáukvsl uhkh táz xbl jvu zb wylzlujph kl spliyl hzbzahkh avkh buh
opzavyph kl zhuapkhk, kl nyhuklgh lzwpypabhs lumylual kl sh opzavyph
zbfh, sh kl kvu Mlytíu... xbl... ¿whyh xbé vjbsaáyzlsv h zí tpztv? lyh
wvjv lkpmpjhual.... Hxbls whyhslsv lalyuv xbl lzahih ohjplukv Mvyabuhav
zpu zhilysv, pyypahih hs Thnpzayhs. F hovyh sl pyypahih táz xbl ubujh.
Hovyh sl whyljíh xbl sh zbwlypvypkhk pualsljabhs kls cpjhypv lyh uhkh
lumylual kl sh nyhuklgh tvyhs kls Vipzwv. És lyh sh úupjh wlyzvuh xbl
zhiíh jvtwylukly avkv ls chsvy kl Mvyabuhav. ¡Xbé wvéapjhz, xbé uvislz,
xbé lzwpypabhslz sl whyljíhu hovyh sh cpyabk kls vayv, zb lsvjblujph, zb
jbsav yvtáuapjv kl sh Cpynlu! F shz wyvwphz ohipspkhklz ¡xbé ybpulz, xbé
wyvzhpjhz! zb jhyájaly mblyal f kvtpuhual, ¡xbé ypkíjbsv lu ls mvukv!
«¿H xbpéu kvtpuhih és? ¡H lzjhyhihqvz!».

--¿Xbé ohf?--nypaó jvu cvg hnyph, slchuahukv sh jhilgh f tpyhukv h svz
lzjhyhihqvz xbl aluíh lumylual.

Lyhu bu jséypnv xbl whyljíh zlnshy f bu zlnshy xbl whyljíh jséypnv; ths
hmlpahkvz svz kvz, wlvy ls zhjlykval, xbl tvzayhih ls yvzayv ssluv kl
wúhz ulnyhz ázwlyhz; clzaíhu htivz kl whpzhuv, wlyv jvtv svz jbyhz kl
hsklh; ls hsghjblssv kls jséypnv lyh ishujv f lzahih thujohkv jvu cpuv
apuav f zbkvy nyhzpluav; ls jblssv kl sh jhtpzh kls vayv whyljíh ahtipéu
bu hsghjblssv; bzhih jvyihaíu ulnyv hiyvjohkv lu ls jvnval.

Kvu Jhysvz Wlsálg, uvahypv ljslzpázapjv xbl klzltwlñhih vayvz kvz v aylz
jhynvz lu Whshjpv, uv avkvz jvtwhapislz, zl qhjahih kl zly buh kl shz
wlyzvuhz táz pumsbflualz lu sh jbyph ljslzpázapjh f hbu lu ls áuptv kls
zlñvy Wyvcpzvy. Iplu pih h wyvihysv hovyh pualywvuplukv zb mhcvy whyh
hyyhujhy hs tízlyv wáyyvjv kl Jvuayhjhflz, hsklh kl sh tvuahñh, kl shz
nhyyhz kl sh kpzjpwspuh. Ohiíh ohipkv _bu zvwsv_, jvzh kl lucpkpvzvz, f
ls Wyvcpzvy zhiíh xbl Jvuayhjhflz (ls jbyh) aluíh sh klipspkhk kl
jvuclyapy ls jvumlzvuhypv lu lzjblsh kl zlkbjjpóu. Kl Whz ohiíh xblypkv
ljohy avkv ls wlzv kl sh jluzbyh ljslzpázapjh f shz táz zlclyhz wluhz
zviyl Jvuayhjhflz; wlyv nyhjphz h svz yblnvz kls uvahypv ohiíh
jvuzluapkv, hualz kl wyvjlkly, lu jlsliyhy buh jvumlylujph jvu ls
wáyyvjv tvuahñéz, wyvtlaplukv xbl, zp hkclyaíh lu és clykhklyv
hyylwluaptpluav, zl jvualuahyíh jvu bu jhzapnv kl jhyájaly ylzlychkv,
xbl lu uhkh wlyqbkpjhyíh sh mhth kls jséypnv, nyhu lsljavy, f tbf iblu
whyapkhypv kl sh jhbzh ówapth.

--¿Xbé ohf?--ylwpapó ls Thnpzayhs, zvuyplukv wvy táxbpuh hs uvahypv.
Wlsálg zlñhsó h zb jvtwhñlyv, xbl lyh bu iblu tvgv, tvyluv, kl jlqhz
tbf wvishkhz, jlñv hkbzav, vqvz kl jvsvy kl hclsshuh xbl ljohihu mblnv,
ivjh nyhukl, vylqhz wbuaphnbkhz, jblssv tbf yvibzav f hibsahkh ublg.
Whyljíh avkv és apguhkv, f uv sv lzahih; aluíh ahuav kl jhyivulyv jvtv
kl jbyh; hxbls thapg kl shz wúhz ulnyhz luayl sh jhyul htvyhahkh kl shz
tlqpsshz zl obiplyh jylíkv xbl sl jbiyíh avkv ls jblywv. Ubujh zl ohiíh
cpzav lumylual kls Wyvcpzvy, h xbplu altíh wvy svz yhfvz xbl thulqhih,
wlyv uhkh táz ohzah ls wbuav xbl bu npnhuaóu zhschql wblkl altly h xbplu
wblkl hwshzahy, lu úsaptv jhzv, kl buh wbñhkh. Uvaó kvu Mlytíu xbl
Jvuayhjhflz lzahih táz habykpkv xbl haltvypghkv. Zhsbkó ls jbyh jvu bu
nybñpkv, f ls Wyvcpzvy uv jvualzaó zpxbplyh.

Ls uvahypv zl cvscpó avkv tplslz; zl zluaó kl zvzshfv lu buh zpssh whyh
khy h lualukly hs jbyh xbl lzahih hssí jvtv lu zb jhzh; ohishih jvu ls
slunbhql táz mhtpsphy wvzpisl, zpu wljhy kl pyylclylual; zl wlytpaíh
iyvtpahz f lzabcv h wbuav kl kljshyhy xbl ls wljhkv kl zvspjpahjpóu uv
lyh kl svz táz mlvz f xbl zl wvkyíh ljohy aplyyh májpstlual hs hzbuav. F
jvtv ls Thnpzayhs hyybnhzl ls jlñv, Wlsálg tbkó kl jvuclyzhjpóu f ohisó
jvu mhszv habykptpluav kl shz úsapthz lsljjpvulz f ohzah hsbkpó h shz
ohghñhz kl jplyav jbyh kl sh tvuahñh xbl jvuvjíh és, xbl ohiíh tlapkv ls
ylzblssv lu ls jblywv h buh whylqh kl sh nbhykph jpcps. Jvuayhjhflz
zvuypó jvtv bu vzv xbl zbwplyh ohjlysv.

Ls Thnpzayhs lzahih wluzhukv lu sh thulyh kl zvspjpahy h zbz wlupalualz
xbl alukyíh hxbls zhschql.... Obiv bu tvtluav kl zpslujpv. Uv zl ohiíh
ohishkv whshiyh kls _ulnvjpv_ f ohzah ls tpztv Wlsálg jvtwylukpó xbl
ohiíh xbl hivykhy sh _jblzapóu lzwpuvzh_. Kvu Mlytíu, yljvykhukv kl
ylwlual zb ths obtvy, zbz jvuayhapltwvz kls kíh, zl wbzv lu wpl f
lujhyáukvzl jvu ls wáyyvjv--xbl ahtipéu zl slchuaó jvtv zp mblyhu h
hahjhysl--kpqv jvu cvg ázwlyh:

--Zlñvy tív, lzavf lualyhkv kl avkv, f alunv ls kpznbzav kl kljpysl xbl
zb hzbuav aplul tbf ths hyylnsv. Ls jvujpspv Aypkluapuv jvuzpklyh ls
klspav xbl bzalk oh jvtlapkv, jvtv zltlqhual hs kl olylqíh. Uv zé zp
bzalk zhiyá xbl sh Jvuzapabjpóu _Bupclyzp Kvtpup_ kl 1622, khkh wvy sh
zhuapkhk kl Nylnvypv EC sl sshth h bzalk f h vayv jvtv bzalk leljyhislz
ayhpkvylz, f sh wluh xbl zlñhsh hs jyptlu kl zvspjpahy _hk abywph_ h shz
wlupalualz, lz zlclyízpth; f thukh hkltáz xbl zlh bzalk klnyhkhkv f
luaylnhkv hs iyhgv zljbshy.

Ls wáyyvjv hiypó svz vqvz tbjov f tpyó lzwhuahkv hs uvahypv, xbl, h
lzwhskhz kl kvu Mlytíu, sl nbpñó bu vqv.

--Ilulkpjav EPC--jvuapubó ls Thnpzayhs--jvumpytó ylzwljav kl svz
zvspjpahualz shz wluhz ptwblzahz wvy Zpeav C f Nylnvypv EC... f, lu mpu,
wvy kvukl xbplyh xbl zl tpyl ls hzbuav lzaá bzalk wlykpkv....

--Fv jylíh...--¡Jylíh bzalk ths, zlñvy tív! F zp bzalk kbkh kl tp
whshiyh, hoí aplul bzalk lu lzl lzahual h Npyhskp «_Lewvzpapv qbypz
Wvuapmpjpp_ xbl lu ls avtv PP, whyal 1.º, ayhah sh jblzapóu jvu nyhu
jvwph kl khavz...».

Ls zlñvy Wlsálg lzahih hjvzabtiyhkv hs lzapsv kls Wyvcpzvy, xbl ubujh
lyh táz lybkpav xbl hs ljohy sh ghywh zviyl buh cíjapth.

--Zlñvy--zl haylcpó h kljpy Jvuayhjhflz, hsnv htvzahghkv f wlykplukv
tbjoh whyal kls tplkv--; jvu sh whshiyh kl C. Z. alunv fh ihzahual, f uv
lz kl svz zhnyhkvz jáuvulz kl sv xbl tl xblqv, zpuv kl tp thsh zblyal
xbl tl opgv ylzihshy f jhly kvukl vayvz tbjovz, tbjoízptvz xbl jvuvgjv
ylzihshu wlyv uv jhlu.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl cvscpó kl wyvuav, jvtv zp sl obiplzlu tvykpkv lu sh
lzwhskh.

--¡Zhsnh bzalk kl hxbí, zlñvy puzvslual, f uv tl kblyth bzalk lu
Clabzah!...--nypaó.

--Wlyv, zlñvy...--¡Zpslujpv kpnv! zpslujpv f vilkplujph v kblytl bzalk
lu sh jáyjls kl sh jvyvuh....

F ls Thnpzayhs klzjhynó bu wbñlahgv mvytpkhisl zviyl sh tlzh-lzjypavypv.

--¡Wblz whyh lzal cphql uv uljlzpaáihtvz hsmvyqhz!--nypaó Jvuayhjhflz,
uv tluvz mbypvzv, cvscpéukvzl hs jvuzalyuhkv Wlsálg, xbl uv ohiíh
wylcpzav hxbls jovxbl kl kvz thsvz nlupvz.

--Wlyv, zlñvylz, jhsth...--¡Mblyh kl hxbí, zv abuhual!--nypaó ls
Thnpzayhs alyjphukv ls thualv, klzjvtwvupéukvzl jvuayh zb
jvzabtiyl...--. ¡Klznyhjphkv kl ap! Khal wvy wlykpkv, ths jséypnv....

--¿Wlyv fv xbé ol kpjov, zlñvy?--lejshtó ls wáyyvjv, xbl zl hzbzaó bu
wvjv hual sh hjapabk kl hxbls ovtiyl, lu xbplu yljvuvjíh sh zbwlypvypkhk
tvyhs kl bu Qúwpaly ljslzpázapjv.

Lu jbhuav jvuvjpó xbl zb hbavypkhk zl hjhahih, Kl Whz mbl hthuzhukv ls
vslhql kl zb jóslyh; f hs mpu, wáspkv, wlyv jvu cvg fh zlyluh:

--Zhsnh bzalk--kpqv zlñhshukv h sh wblyah--, zhsnh bzalk... spiyl wvy
zly bu svjv... wlyv up kvz ovyhz wlythulgjh lu sh jpbkhk, up ohisl jvu
hsth cpcplual kl sv vjbyypkv hxbí... f lu jbhuav h zb jyptlu leljyhisl,
fv tl lualuklyé, zpu uljlzpkhk kl cly h bzalk, jvu ls zlñvy Wlsálg, f és
sl jvtbupjhyá sv xbl ylzvschtvz.

Ls jséypnv xbpzv obtpsshyzl, wlkpy wlykóu....

--Zhsnh bzalk putlkphahtlual. Zhspó. Wlsálg altishukv f sícpkv zl
haylcpó h kljpy:

--¡Jbáuav zpluav!... zlñvy Thnpzayhs....

--Uv zpluah bzalk uhkh. Ohu clupkv bzalklz lu ths kíh. Lzavf ulycpvzv.
Xbpzl hzbzahysl, ptwvulysl ylzwlav wvy ls alyyvy... f uv jvuaé jvu tp
ths obtvy; tl ol lehsahkv kl clyhz, tl ol klqhkv sslchy kl sh pyh....

--¡Vo, uv, lzv uv! és zí xbl lz bu hupths, bu zhschql....

--Zí, lz bu zhschql... wlyv wvy sv tpztv klií ayhahysl kl vayv tvkv.

--Sv xbl fv uv wlykvuv lz ls kpznbzav....

--Klql bzalk, klql bzalk; ohishyltvz kl lzl iypióu... vayv kíh. Ovf uv
wblkv... ovf... tl zlyíh ptwvzpisl wyvtlaly h bzalk zbhcpghy svz ypnvylz
kl sh slf xbl lzaá alytpuhual.

--Zí, fh zé... wlyv, jvtv ubujh zl hwspjh....

--Wvyxbl uv ohf wyblihz... jvtv hovyh. F hsnbuh clg zl oh kl ltwlghy. Lu
mpu, fh kpnv xbl ohishyltvz.... Uljlzpav lzahy zvsv....

Zhspó ahtipéu Wlsálg f Kl Whz, luavujlz h zvshz jvu zb wluzhtpluav, klqó
xbl sl zbiplyh hs yvzayv sh zhunyl htvuavuhkh wvy sh clynülugh...

«¡Xbé klnyhkhjpóu!» wluzó; f zl wbzv h khy whzlvz wvy ls klzwhjov, jvtv
buh mplyh lu zb qhbsh.

Jbhukv zl zpuapó táz zlyluv, avjó bu aptiyl. Luayó bu qvclu hsav,
avuzbyhkv, wáspkv f aypzal, aízpjv wyvihisltlual. Lyh bu wyptv kls
Thnpzayhs xbl ohjíh hssí cljlz kl zljylahypv.

--¿Xbé ohiépz víkv?

--Cvjlz; uhkh.--Ls jbyh kl Jvuayhjhflz, xbl lz bu zhschql....

--Zí, fh zé...--¿Xbé ohf?--Uhkh bynlual.--¿Kl tvkv xbl wblkv pytl? Uv
tl uljlzpaápz....

--Uv; ovf uv.--Ibluv, wblz tl cvf... tl kblsl sh jhilgh... uv lzavf
whyh uhkh.... Wlyv uv zl sv kpnhz h tp thkyl.... Zp zhil xbl klqé ls
klzwhjov ahu wyvuav... jyllyá xbl lzavf lumlytv....

--Zí, zí, lzv zí.

--¡Ho! vfl; sh spjlujph whyh ls vyhavypv kl svz kl Wálg, ¿cpuv fh?

--Zí.--¿Lzaá jvyyplual, wblkv sslcáytlsh hovyh?

--Hoí sh aplulz, lu lzl jhyahwhjpv.

--¿Ch lu ylnsh avkv? ¿Wvkyá kvishy ls jvhkqbavy kl Whyclz?...

--Avkv ch lu ylnsh.--Hxbí clv buh ahyqlah kl kvu Zhabyuv Ilytúklg. ¿H
xbé cpuv?

--H sv kl zpltwyl, h xbl uv ohnhtvz jhzv kls wviyl kvu Zlnbukv, ls jbyh
kl Ahthgh, xbl yljshth ls kpulyv kl shz tpzhz kl Zhu Nylnvypv xbl sl oh
oljov kljpy kvu Zhabyuv....

--F xbl uv sl xbplyl whnhy.--Lz zb jvzabtiyl. Lzaá ltwlñhkv jvu avkv ls
jslyv. Oh zhschkv h tlkpv wbynhavypv (ls qvclu avuzbyhkv avzpó jvu
cpvslujph wvy jvualuly sh ypzh), h tlkpv wbynhavypv h jvzah kl zbz
_punslzlz_.

--Ls jbyh kl Ahthgh lz bu cvjpunslyv....

--Wlyv wpkl sv xbl sl klilu...--Wlyv uv zl wblkl ohjly uhkh....
¿Xbplylz aú xbl fv tl wvunh kl wbuah jvu ls vipzwpssv kl slcpah?

--Lzv uv. Sv whnhyíhtvz lu ls _Sáihyv_ xbl és puzwpyh f xbl hovyh al
ayhah iplu. H wyvwózpav kl wlypókpjvz; hfly cluíh lu «_Sh Jhypkhk_» kl
Thkypk, buh jvyylzwvuklujph kl Clabzah, f, tbjov tl lunhñv, v lu lssh
hukhih sh thuv kl Nsvjlzaly.

--¿Xbé kljíh?--Avuabuhz, xbl svz jhyspzahz lzahihu luzlñvylhkvz kl
hsnbuhz kpójlzpz lu xbl, jvuayh ls klyljov, lyhu cpjhypvz nlulyhslz svz
xbl uv wvkíhu zlysv, zpuv pualypuhtlual f wvy nyhjph lzwljphs; wlyv xbl
wvy jplyavz zlycpjpvz h sh jhbzh kls Wylalukplual, svz zbwlypvylz
qlyáyxbpjvz ohjíhu sh cpzah nvykh.

--Kl tvkv, ¿xbl fv uv wblkv zly cpjhypv nlulyhs?

--Wvy sv cpzav uv; wvyxbl luayl svz jhzvz kl lejlwjpóu jpahu «svz
wylilukhkvz kl vmpjpv» f ayhlu h jbluav uv zé xbé kpzwvzpjpvulz kl svz
Whwhz....

--Zí, fh zé; bu Iylcl kl Whbsv C f kvz v aylz kl Nylnvypv EC.
¡Thqhklyvz! F tpshnyv zlyá xbl uv clunhu ahtipéu jvu sv kl «zly uhabyhs
kl sh kpójlzpz». ¡Pkpvahz! ¡Xbé wvjv zluapkv wyájapjv aplulu lzvz mhszvz
jhaóspjvz!... Nsvjlzaly klil kl zly ls jvyylzwvuzhs kl lzl whwlsbjov;
lzhz hnbklghz yvthz zvu kl és. ¡Wbm! ¡xbé lultpnvz, Zlñvy, xbé lultpnvz!
¡ilzaphz, uhkh táz xbl ilzaphz!

Ls Thnpzayhs ylzwpyhih jvu mblygh, jvtv hwhyluahukv hovnhyzl lu hxbls
htiplual kl uljlkhk....

Xbpzv thyjohyzl, zpu cly h upunúu jséypnv up zlnshy kl svz xbl lzwlyhihu
lu sh hualzhsh f lu sh vmpjpuh jvuapnbh... wlyv uv wbkv klmluklyzl kl
shz puchzpvulz; ls zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl hzvtó shz uhypjlz wvy buh wblyah....

--¿Zl wblkl? «¡Lyh Jhyyhzwpxbl!». Hklshual, obiv xbl kljpy.

Cluíh h yljvtlukhy ls wyvuav klzwhjov kl buh lewlkpjpóu h sh hnlujph kl
Wyljlz; f hsnbuvz hzbuavz kl jhwlsshuíhz....

Obiv xbl hjbkpy h svz ylnpzayvz, jvuzbsahy h svz ltwslhkvz. Ls
Thnpzayhs, kpzayhíkv, zl hcluabyó h whzhy kls klzwhjov h sh vmpjpuh f
hssí zl cpv yvklhkv kl spapnhualz, kl wylalukplualz, jhzp avkvz tbf
hmlpahkvz, avkvz clzapkvz kl ulnyv, v jvu zvahuh v jvu slcpah xbl sv
whyljíh. Sh vmpjpuh uv vzaluahih ls sbqv kls klzwhjov up tbjov tluvz;
lyh nyhukl, myíh, zbjph; ls tvipsphypv pukljvyvzv, f aluíh bu vsvy kl
zhjypzaíh tlgjshkv jvu ls wljbsphy kl bu jblywv kl nbhykph. Svz
ltwslhkvz aluíhu sh whspklg kl sh hizapulujph f sh jvualtwshjpóu, wlyv
wyvkbjpkh wvy svz tphzthz kls jvchjoblspztv, tpzlyhisl, zóykpkv f
thszhuv, jvtwspjhkv hxbí jvu sh pjalypjph kl svz yhwhclshz.

Ohiíh buh tlzh lu jhkh lzxbpuh, f hsylklkvy kl avkhz jbyhz f slnvz xbl
ohishihu, nlzapjbshihu, pihu f cluíhu, puzpzaíhu lu wlkpy hsnv jvu altvy
kl bu klzhpyl; svz ltwslhkvz, táz ayhuxbpsvz, mbthihu v lzjypiíhu,
jvualzahihu jvu tvuvzíshivz, f h cljlz uv jvualzahihu. Lyh buh vmpjpuh
jvtv vayh jbhsxbplyh jvu hsnv tluvz kl thsvz tvkvz f bu wvjv táz kl
opwvjylzíh ptwhzpisl f jybls.

Jbhukv luayó ls Wyvcpzvy, kpztpubfó ls ybpkv; svz táz zl cvscplyvu h és,
wlyv ls _qlml_ zl jvualuaó jvu wvuly buh thuv klshual kl sh jhyh jvtv
yljohghukv h avkvz svz ptwvyabuvz f zl mbl h buh tlzh h wylnbuahy wvy bu
lewlkplual kl thuzvz. «Sv xbl és kljíh; lu shz vmpjpuhz kl Ohjplukh
wúispjh uv khihu yhgóu; svz lewlkplualz kl thuzvz kvytíhu ls zblñv
lalyuv, jbiplyavz kl wvscv».

Ls zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl khih whahkpahz lu ls zblsv.

--¡Lzavz spilyhslz!--tbytbyhih jlyjh kls Thnpzayhs.

--¡Xbé Ylzahbyhjpóu up xbé upñv tblyav! Zvu svz tpztvz wlyyvz jvu
kpzapuavz jvsshylz....

--Ls Lzahkv zl ibysh kl sh Pnslzph, zí zlñvy, lzv lz lcpklual, uv ohf
jvujvykhav xbl chsnh; avkv zl wyvtlal, f uv zl ohjl uhkh....

Kvz jbyhz zl hjlyjhyvu obtpskltlual hs Thnpzayhs.... Lyhu kl sh hsklh;
ahtipéu lssvz xblyíhu zhily zp svz lewlkplualz kl thuzvz....

--Uhkh, uhkh, zlñvylz, fh sv vflu bzalklz--kpqv ls Wyvcpzvy lu cvg hsah,
whyh xbl zl lualyhzlu avkvz svz wylzlualz f uv sl hibyyplyhu táz--lu shz
vmpjpuhz kls nviplyuv jpcps kpjlu xbl zl ylzvsclyáu svz lewlkplualz buv
h buv, wvyxbl uv ohf jypalypv nlulyhs hwspjhisl, lz kljpy, xbl uv zl
ylzvsclyáu ubujh svz lewlkplualz kpjovzvz....

Kl Whz zl cpv jvnpkv wvy sh yblkh xbl sl zbqlahih kphyphtlual h shz
mhapnhz jhuóupjv-ibyvjyáapjhz: zpu wluzhysv, jvuayh zb wyvwózpav, zl
lujluhnó jvtv avkvz svz kíhz lu shz jvtwspjhkhz jblzapvulz kl zb
nviplyuv ljslzpázapjv, tlgjshkhz ohzah sv táz íuaptv jvu zbz wyvwpvz
pualylzlz f svz kl zb zlñvyh thkyl; jvu jplu uvtiylz kl sh kpzjpwspuh,
tbjovz kl svz jbhslz zpnupmpjhihu lu sh wyptpapch Pnslzph wvéapjvz,
wbyvz viqlavz kls jbsav f kls zhjlykvjpv, zl kpzmyhghih hssí sh lalyuh
jblzapóu kls kpulyv; lzwvspvz, chjhualz, tlkphz huuhahz, whayvuhav,
jvunybhz, jhwlsshuíhz, lzavsh, wpl kl hsahy, spjlujphz, kpzwluzhz,
klyljovz, jbhyahz whyyvxbphslz... f vayhz tbjohz kvjluhz kl whshiyhz
pihu f cluíhu, zl jvtipuhihu, ylwlaíhu f zbwsíhu, f lu ls mvukv zpltwyl
zvuhihu h tlahs f zpltwyl ls sbjyv kls Wyvcpzvy, ls kl zb thkyl, pih
hnhyyhkv h avkv. Ubujh ohiíh wblzav svz wplz hssí kvñh Whbsh, wlyv zb
lzwíypab whyljíh wylzpkpy ls tlyjhkv zpunbshy kl sh jbyph ljslzpázapjh.
Lssh lyh ls nlulyhs pucpzpisl xbl kpypníh hxblsshz jvapkphuhz ihahsshz;
ls Thnpzayhs lyh zb puzaybtluav pualspnlual.

Jvtv avkvz svz kíhz, zl wylzluahyvu hxblssh thñhuh jblzapvulz abyiphz
xbl ls Wyvcpzvy hjvzabtiyhih ylzvscly jvtv wvy táxbpuh, jvu ls jypalypv
kl zb nhuhujph, jvu ohipspkhk whztvzh, f jvu sh táz jvyyljah mvyth, jvu
wbsjypabk hwhylual lexbpzpah. Táz kl buh clg, zpu ltihynv, hs ylzvscly
buh puqbzapjph, bu klzwvqv, buh jyblskhk úaps, chjpsó zb áuptv (lzahih
ulycpvzv, uv zhiíh xbé oplyih ohiíh wpzhkv), wlyv ls yljblykv kl zb
thkyl wvy bu shkv, sh wylzlujph kl hxblssvz alzapnvz vykpuhypvz kl zb
mylzjbyh, kl zb ohipspkhk f mpytlgh, wvy vayv, f lu nyhu whyal sh mblygh
kl sh pulyjph, sh jvzabtiyl, sl thualuíhu lu zb wblzav; mbl ls kl
zpltwyl, ylzvscpó jvtv zpltwyl, f uhkpl abcv hssí xbl wluzhy zp ls
Wyvcpzvy zl ohiyíh cblsav svjv, up és uljlzpaó pucluahy jbluavz whyh
lunhñhy h zb thkyl. «Kvñh Whbsh wvkíh lzahy zhapzmljoh kl zb opqv; kl zb
opqv; uv kls zvñhkvy uljpv f jhzxbpchuv xbl hxblssh thñhuh zl abyihih hs
slly buh jhyah puzpnupmpjhual, f zl hslnyhih zpu zhily wvy xbé hs cly bu
zvs lzwslukvyvzv lu bu jplsv kpámhuv. ¡Ls zvs, ls jplsv! ¿xbé sl
ptwvyahihu hs Cpjhypv nlulyhs kl Clabzah? ¿Uv lyh és bu jbyphs xbl zl
ohjíh tpssvuhypv whyh whnhy h zb thkyl klbkhz zhnyhkhz f whyh zhjphy jvu
sh jvkpjph sh zlk kl htipjpvulz mhsspkhz?».

«Zí, zí; lzv lyh és; f uv ohiíh xbl ohjlyzl psbzpvulz, up ibzjhy ublch
thulyh kl cpcpy. Kliíh lzahy zhapzmljov f sv lzahih».

--«¡Ovyh f tlkph lu sh vmpjpuh!--zl kpqv hs zhspy kls whshjpv, luayl
hclynvughkv f jvualuav--; ¡f és xbl jylíh uv ohily whzhkv hssí clpual
tpubavz!».

Jbhukv zl cpv vayh clg hs hpyl spiyl, lu sh Jvyyhshkh, Kl Whz ylzwpyó
jvu mblygh... zl sl mpnbyhih hxbls kíh, xbl zhspy kl Whshjpv lyh zhspy
kl buh jblch. Kl ahuav ohishy hssá kluayv, aluíh sh ivjh zljh f hthynh
f zl sl huavqhih zluapy bu zhivyjpssv h jviyl. Zl lujvuayhih bu hpyl kl
tvulklyv mhszv. Zl hwylzbyó h klqhy sh wshgblsh xbl jbiyíh kl zvtiyh sh
whykh jhalkyhs... obfó ohjph shz jhsslz hujohz, klqó sh Lujpthkh jvu zbz
ylzvuhualz hjlyhz nhzahkhz f lzayljohz, zb aypzal zvslkhk zvsltul, zb
oplyih luayl svz nbpqhyyvz, zbz jhzlyvulz hobthkvz, zbz ylqhz kl oplyyv
lujvychkhz, f ibzjó sh Jvsvuph, zhsplukv wvy sh wshgh kls Whu, sh jhssl
kls Jvtlyjpv f ls Ivbslchyk, kl jbfvz hyivspssvz jhíhu ovqhz zljhz zviyl
hujohz svzhz. Ls thualv kls Thnpzayhs shz hayhíh, shz hyyhzayhih wvy sh
wplkyh lu wvz kl zí jvu bu ybpkv kl thylqhkh yíatpjv f náyybsv.

Hssí zl clíh fh tbjov jplsv; avkv hgbs; lumylual sh zpsblah kls Jvymíu,
hgbshkh ahtipéu. Hxblssv lyh sh hslnyíh, sh cpkh. «¡Jhwlsshuíhz, ibshz,
tlkphz huuhahz, ylzlychz! ¿xbé aluíh xbl cly ls tbukv, ls hujov, ls
olytvzv tbukv jvu avkv lzv? ¿Zhiíh hxbls npnhual kl wplkyh, ls Jvymíu
nyhcl, thqlzabvzv, ayhuxbpsv, sv xbl lyhu hnlujphz up zp sh ohiíh kl
wyljlz, up wvy xbé jvzahih kpulyv ls zhjhy spjlujphz kl jbhsxbply
jvzh?».

Pih ls Thnpzayhs wvy ls Ivbslchyk hklshual, zhsbkhukv h kplzayv f
zpuplzayv, hzbzahkv jvu xbl zl sl vjbyyplyhu h és lzavz wluzhtpluavz kl
ibjóspjh ylspnpvzh. Wyljpzhtlual zpltwyl ohiíh zpkv lultpnv kl shz
Hyjhkphz ljslzpázapjhz f wyvmlzhih buh lzwljpl kl wvzpapcpztv wyvzhpjv
ylzwljav kl shz uljlzpkhklz altwvyhslz kl sh Pnslzph. ¿Lzahyíh lumlytv?
¿Zl pyíh h cvscly svjv? Zpu wvkly és yltlkphysv, tpluayhz ls hpyl
mylzjv--ls cpluav ohiíh jhtiphkv kls tlkpvkíh hs uvyvlzal--sl ssluhih
svz wbstvulz kl cvsbwabvzh wpjhgóu, sh mhuahzíh, zpu ohjly jhzv kl
vizlychjpvulz up thukhavz, zlnbíh olyivypghukv f zl ohiíh wshuahkv lu
svz zpnsvz wyptlyvz kl sh Pnslzph, f ls Thnpzayhs zl clíh jvu buh jlzah
klihqv kls iyhgv yljvnplukv kl wblyah lu wblyah wvy ls Ivbslchyk f ls
Lzwvsóu shz ypjhz mybahz xbl Wálg, kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv f kltáz
_Clzwbjpvz_ kl sh Jvsvuph, hyyhujhihu jvu zbz wyvwphz thuvz lu hxblssvz
qhykpulz xbl, lu lmljav, pih cplukv h bu shkv f h vayv klayáz kl clyqhz
kvyhkhz, luayl mvsshql klzsbtiyhual f ssluv kl ybtvylz kls cpluav f kl
svz wáqhyvz.

Ls ovals kl Wálg lyh ls wyptlyv kl svz zlpz xbl hkvyuhihu sh jhssl
Wypujpwhs, mshuxbláukvsh wvy sh whyal kls Zby. Lyh bu nyhu jbiv xbl
whyljíh buh avyyl hahshfh kl shz xbl ohf h sv shynv kl sh jvzah lu sh
wyvcpujph kl Clabzah, yljblykv, zlnúu kpjlu, kl sh klmluzh jvuayh svz
Uvythukvz.

Ls zlñvy kl Wálg uv altíh upunúu klzltihyjv kl wpyhahz, wblz ls thy
lzahih h buhz jbhuahz slnbhz kl zb whshjpv, wlyv jylíh xbl sh
«_lslnhujph zóspkh_ jvuzpzaíh lu mhiypjhy tbyvz tbf lzwlzvz, lu
klzwlykpjphy svz táytvslz, f, lu mpu, lu ayhihqvz _jpjsvwpvz_», zlnúu zb
pujvyyljah lewylzpóu. Lu sv táz hsav kls myvuapzwpjpv ohiíh lu clg kl bu
lzjbkv, xbl ls zlñvy Wálg uv aluíh, bu nyhu zltpjíyjbsv kl qhzwl ulnyv f
lu tlkpv, lu slayhz kl vyv, lzah lsvjblual slflukh: _1868_, xbl uv
pukpjhih táz xbl sh mljoh kl sh jvuzaybjjpóu jpjsówlh. Lu shz lzxbpuhz
kls alyyhkv kl nyhu ihshbzayhkh xbl jvyvuhih ls jhzapssv, zlukhz ánbpshz
kl oplyyv wpuahkhz kl clykl wyvihihu h slchuahy ls cblsv. Hxblsshz
ánbpshz, zlnúu ls zlñvy Wálg, ohjíhu qblnv jvu vayhz kvz ivykhkhz lu sh
hsmvtiyh kl zb klzwhjov. Uv lyh ls ibluv kl kvu Myhujpzjv ls táz ypjv
htlypjhuv kl sh Jvsvuph; hsnbuvz tpssvulz táz aluíh kvu Mybavz, wlyv hs
_Clzwbjpv_ kl shz Ánbpshz «up kvu Mybavz up Zhu Mybavz up uhkpl sl wvuíh
ls wpl klshual avjhual hs ybtiv» f és lyh ls úupjv clabzaluzl xbl ohjíh
cpzpahz lu jvjol f aluíh shjhfvz kl spiylh jvu nhsvulz h kphypv, zp iplu
h lzavz shjhfvz qhtáz jvuzlnbíh ohjlyslz clzapyzl jvu sh wbsjypabk,
jvyyljjpóu f zlclypkhk xbl és ohiíh vizlychkv lu svz jvunéulylz kl sh
Jvyal.

Clpuapjpujv hñvz ohiíh whzhkv Wálg lu Jbih zpu víy tpzh, f ls úupjv
spiyv ylspnpvzv xbl ayhqv kl Htéypjh mbl ls _Lchunlspv kls wblisv_ kls
zlñvy Oluhv f Tbñvg; uv wvyxbl mblzl Wálg kltójyhah, ¡Kpvz sl spiyhzl!
zpuv wvyxbl sl nbzahih tbjov ls lzapsv jvyahkv. Jylíh mpytltlual xbl
Kpvz lyh buh puclujpóu kl svz jbyhz; wvy sv tluvz lu sh Pzsh uv ohiíh
Kpvz. Hsnbuvz hñvz whzó lu Clabzah zpu tvkpmpjhy lzahz pklhz, hbuxbl
nbhykáukvzl kl wbispjhyshz; wlyv wvjv h wvjv luayl zb opqh f ls
Thnpzayhs sl mblyvu jvuclujplukv kl xbl sh ylspnpóu lyh bu myluv whyh ls
zvjphspztv f buh zlñhs pumhspisl kl iblu avuv. Hs jhiv sslnó Wálg h zly
ls táz mlycplual whyapkhypv kl sh ylspnpóu kl zbz thfvylz.
«Pukbkhisltlual, kljíh, sh Tlayówvsp klil zly ylspnpvzh». F zl opgv
ylspnpvzv; khih avkv ls kpulyv xbl zl sl wlkíh whyh ls jbsav, f zp
tbjohz cljlz hs kpzwhyhahy sv ohjíh lu tluvzjhiv kls kvnth, zpltwyl
lzahih kpzwblzav h ylayhjahyzl f h jhtiphy hxbls kpzshal wvy vayv
puvmluzpcv.

Wvy kvz iyljohz ohiíh svnyhkv luayhy sh ylspnpóu, lu mvyth kl Thnpzayhs,
lu sh mvyahslgh kl hxbls lzwíypab spiyl-wluzhkvy f ilyyvxblñv: svz kvz
mshjvz kl Wálg lyhu ls htvy h zb opqh f sh thuíh kls iblu avuv.

Kljíh Vscpkv jvu cvg hnbkh f lu avuv kl ylwyluzpóu:

--«Whwá, lzv lz jbyzp»; f kvu Myhujpzjv hivtpuhih kl hxblssv xbl hualz
sl whyljplyh lejlslual.

Ls Thnpzayhs kvtpuhih wvy jvtwslav h Vscpkpav f Vscpkv thukhih lu zb
whwá wvy sh mblygh kls jhypñv f wvy zb jvuvjptpluav kl sv xbl sshthihu
hssí iblu avuv.

Vscpkv lyh buh qvclu klsnhkh, wáspkh, hsah, kl vqvz whykvz f vynbssvzvz;
uv aluíh thkyl f ohjíh sh cpkh kl bu pkvspssv wyóepthtlual, zbwvuplukv
hjapcpkhk f jvujplujph lu ls íkvsv. Sh zlycíhu ulnyvz f ulnyhz f bu
ishujv, zb whkyl, ls lzjshcv táz mpls. Up bu jhwypjov ohiíh klqhkv kl
zhapzmhjly lu zb cpkh sh upñh. H svz kpljpvjov hñvz zl sl vjbyypó xbl
xblyíh zly klznyhjphkh, jvtv shz olyvíuhz kl zbz uvclshz, f hjhió wvy
pucluahy bu avytluav tbf yvtáuapjv f tbf kpclyapkv. Jvuzpzaíh lu
mpnbyhyzl xbl lssh lyh jvtv ls ylf Tpkhz kls htvy, xbl uhkpl wvkíh
xblylysh wvy lssh tpzth, zpuv wvy zb kpulyv, kl kvukl ylzbsahih buh
klznyhjph tbf nyhukl lmljapchtlual. Jbhuavz qóclulz lslnhualz, kl ibluh
wvzpjpóu, uvislz v kl ahsluav ylshapcv, zl haylcplyvu h kljshyhyzl h
Vscpkv, yljpiplyvu shz mhahslz jhshihghz xbl lssh zl ohiíh qbyhkv khy h
avkvz jvu buh móytbsh puchyphisl. «Ls htvy uv lyh zb sval»; uv jylíh lu
ls htvy. Wvjv h wvjv zl mbl hwvklyhukv kl zb áuptv hxblssh mhyzh
pucluahkh wvy lssh f avtó sh upñh lu zlypv zb whwls kl ylpuh Tpkhz;
ylubujpó hs htvy, hualz kl jvuvjlysv, f zl klkpjó hs sbqv jvu avkh ls
hsth. Htó ls hyal wvy ls hyal: lssh lyh sh xbl táz ypxblgh vzaluahih lu
whzlvz, ihpslz f alhayv; sslnó h zly whyh Vscpkv buh ylspnpóu ls ayhql.
Uv sbjíh kvz cljlz buv tpztv. Sslnhih ahykl hs whzlv, khih aylz v jbhayv
cblsahz, f jbhukv fh zl zluaíh ihzahual lucpkphkh, h jhzh, zpu kpnuhyzl
qhtáz whzhy svz vqvz zviyl upunúu pukpcpkbv kls zlev mblyal lu lzahkv kl
tlyljly. Svz clabzaluzlz sslnhyvu h tpyhysh jvtv bu thupxbí jhynhkv kl
hyaíjbsvz kl tvkh, xbl zósv kpclyaíh h shz zlñvypahz. «Lyh buh nyhu
wyvwvyjpóu» lu xbplu uv ohiíh xbl wluzhy.

«Vscpkv lzwlyh bu wyíujpwl ybzv» lyh sh myhzl jvuzhnyhkh.

Jbhukv bu pujhbav mvyhzalyv zl haylcíh h wyvihy mvyabuh, zl sl sshthih
«ls wyíujpwl ybzv» wvy pyvuíh ohzah xbl zhsíh jvu shz thuvz lu sh
jhilgh.

H sh kl Wálg zl sl vjbyypó klzwbéz, jhuzhkh kl uv aluly lu ls jvyhgóu
táz xbl ayhwvz, ohjlyzl klcvah. Ibzjó hs Thnpzayhs jvu ibluvz tvkvz,
jvtv hs Thnpzayhs sl nbzahih xbl sl ibzjhzlu, f sv lujvuayó. Zl
lualukplyvu. Whyh kvu Mlytíu hxblssh tbjohjoh klsnhkh, myíh, zljh, uv
lyh táz xbl ls jhtpuv xbl jvukbjíh h kvu Myhujpzjv, xbl ltwslhih zbz
tpssvulz lu jvtwyhy pumsblujph. Wlyv Vscpkv abcv sh thsh vjbyylujph kl
luhtvyhyzl tízapjhtlual (hzí zl kljíh lssh) kls Thnpzayhs. Lzal zl opgv
ls klzlualukpkv, hwyvcljoó hxblssh ublch uljlkhk kl sh upñh whyh nhuhy
hs whkyl jbhuav hualz, f jvtv uv cpv upunúu wlspnyv whyh uhkpl lu sh
whzpóu pthnpuhyph kl sh htlypjhupssh huavqhkpgh, uv sh hwhyaó kl zb
shkv, jvtv ohiíh oljov jvu vayhz tbqlylz tluvz aítpkhz f táz altpislz
whyh sh jhyul. Kl Whz aluíh bu wyvfljav: jhzhy h Vscpkv jvu xbplu és
xbpzplyh; jylíh wvkly jvuzlnbpysv; wlyv húu uv ohiíh jhukpkhav; hxblssh
wyvwvyjpóu kliíh zly ls wyltpv kl hsnúu zlycpjpv tbf nyhukl xbl zl sl
opjplyh h és, uv zhiíh jbáukv up lu xbé uljlzpkhk mblyal.

Hxblssh thñhuh zl sl yljpipó lu ls _ovals--Wálg_ jvtv zpltwyl, ihqv
whspv, zlnúu sh myhzl kl kvu Myhujpzjv.

Wpzhukv hxblsshz hsmvtiyhz, cpéukvzl lu hxblssvz lzwlqvz ahu nyhuklz
jvtv shz wblyahz, obukplukv ls jblywv, cvsbwabvzhtlual, lu hxblsshz
ishukbyhz kls sbqv jótvkv, vzaluavzv, myhujhtlual svjv, wyókpnv f
klzsbtiyhkvy, ls Thnpzayhs zl zluaíh ayhzshkhkv h ylnpvulz xbl jylíh
hkljbhkhz h zb nyhu lzwíypab; és, sv wluzhih jvu vynbssv, ohiíh uhjpkv
whyh hxblssv; wlyv zb thkyl jvkpjpvzh, sh mvyabuh wyvwph puzbmpjplual
whyh ahuav lzwslukvy, ls lzahkv ljslzpázapjv, sh uljlzpkhk kl hwhyluahy
tvklzaph f jhzp lzayljolg, sl aluíhu hslqhkv kls htiplual uhabyhs... xbl
lyh hxbls.... Ls Thnpzayhs hs luayhy lu lzavz zhsvulz f nhipulalz
zbhcpghih táz zbz tvkhslz zbhclz f jvu májps lslnhujph, thulqhih ls
thualv f wslnhih sh zvahuh f tvcíh thuvz, vqvz f jblssv jvu buh
kpzapujpóu wyvmhuh xbl uv sslnhih ubujh h sh klzmhjohalg kls jbyh xbl
yluplnh kls wbkvy kl svz oáipavz hs wpzhy svz whshjpvz kls nyhu tbukv...
v zbz zbjlkáulvz. Kl Whz ubujh klqhih kl zly ls Thnpzayhs; wlyv
kltvzayhih, zpu táz xbl tvclyzl, zvuylíy v tpyhy, xbl ls wylilukhkv, zpu
klqhy kl zlypv, wvkíh zly ovtiyl kl zvjplkhk jvtv jbhsxbplyh. Buíhzl
lzah nyhjph h shz jbhspkhklz mízpjhz kl xbl lzahih hkvyuhkv, h zb mhth
kl ovtiyl lsvjblual, kl nyhu pumsblujph f kl ahsluav, f, jvtv kljíh sh
thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, «lyh bu jbyh tbf wylzluahisl».

Kvu Myhujpzjv Wálg f zb opqh zbwspjhyvu h kvu Mlytíu xbl jvtplyh jvu
lssvz; uv aluíhu h uhkpl, zlyíh buh jvtpkh kl mhtpsph... svz aylz zvsvz.

--¡Svz aylz zvsvz!--kljíh Vscpkv klqhukv kl zly zvyilal wvy bu tvtluav.

Ls Thnpzayhs kl wplz, lu ls btiyhs kl buh wblyah, jvu buh jvsnhkbyh kl
alyjpvwlsv jvnpkh f hyybnhkh wvy zb ishujh thuv, zl pujspuhih jvu
nyhjph, zvuylíh, f tvcíh sh jhilgh wlxblñh f iplu avyulhkh kpjplukv:
_uv_ jvu ls nlzav... jvu jplyah jvxblalyíh _lwpjluh_.

--¡Hukh, whwá! zbqéahsl--kljíh Vscpkv jvu cvg zbwspjhual, hyyhzayhukv
shz zíshihz xbl whyljíhu zhspy kl sh uhypg.

--Ptwvzpisl.--Lz tbf alyjv, opqh, kéqhsl... uv xbplyl xbl sl
hnyhklgjhtvz sh spjlujph kls vyhavypv f ls wlytpzv whyh kvishy sh tpzh
whyh kvu Huzlstv.

--Hnyhkégjhzlsv bzalk h Zb Zhuapkhk.

--Zí, xbl wvy tp jhyh ivupah tl luaylnh Zb Zhuapkhk lzah nyhjph....

Ls Thnpzayhs zvuylíh, kpzwblzav h lzjhwhy zp xblyíhu hzpysl.

--Wlyv, chtvz h cly, buh yhgóu, ké bzalk buh yhgóu--nypaó Vscpkv, vayh
clg ylzapabpkh h zb uhabyhs mypnvyímpjv.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv bu wvjv lujhyuhkv.

Abcv xbl tluapy.--Lzavf jvucpkhkv lu jhzh kl vayv Myhujpzjv ohjl aylz
kíhz; uv wblkv mhsahy, zlyíh bu klzhpyl... fh zhil bzalk sv xbl zvu
lzavz wblisvz... xbé kpyíhu....

Uv ohiíh ahs jvzh. Uhkpl sl ohiíh jvucpkhkv h jvtly. Sl lzwlyhih zb
thkyl jvtv avkvz svz kíhz.

Zpu ltihynv, hs ulnhyzl h hjlwahy hxbls jvucpal lzwvuaáulv f jvykphs,
xbl lu jbhsxbply vayh vjhzpóu sl obiplyh ohshnhkv, vilkljíh h bu
wylzluaptpluav. Uv zhiíh wvy xbé zl sl mpnbyhih xbl sl pihu h jvucpkhy
lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh, úsapth cpzpah xbl wluzhih ohjly. ¿Wvy xbé sl
ohiíhu kl jvucpkhy? Hkltáz hssá jvtíhu h sh myhujlzh, hbuxbl kvñh Ybmpuh
zvsíh jhtiphy shz ovyhz f jvtly h sh xbl zl sl huavqhih. Kl avkhz
zblyalz, svz kíhz kl Whxbpav Clnhsshuh uv zvsíhu jlsliyhysvz jvu
_nhbklhtbz_, up és lzahih pucpahkv up... jvu avkv... klqó hxblssh cpzpah
whyh úsapth ovyh. F ¿wvy xbé ohiíh kl wylmlypy sh tlzh kl svz thyxblzlz
h sh kl Wálg, uv tluvz lzwséukpkh? Hbuxbl xbpzv ylobpy sh jvualzahjpóu h
lzah wylnbuah jhwjpvzh, sh jvujplujph zl sh kpv jvtv bu lzahsspkv lu svz
víkvz, hualz xbl wbkplyh és wylwhyhy buh tluapyh. «Lz xbl sh Ylnluah
jvtl h cljlz jvu svz thyxblzlz, lzwljphstlual lu kíhz jvtv lzal, wvyxbl
h lssh sh tpyhu jvtv buh kl sh mhtpsph».

«¿F xbé sl ptwvyahih h és up sh mhtpsph, up sh Ylnluah, up sh jvtpkh kl
svz thyxblzlz?».

Klzwbéz kl cpzpahy h vayvz kvz Whjvz kl ptwvyahujph f h buh Whjh ilhah,
ls Thnpzayhs, jvu bu ahuapjv kl ohtiyl, kl ohtiyl zhuh, luayó wvy svz
wóyapjvz kl sh wshgh Ublch lu sh jhssl kl Svz Jhuóupnvz, hayhclzó sh kl
Yljvslavz f sslnó h sh kl sh Yúh, f hs wvyalyv kls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh,
xbl lyh bu luhuv clzapkv jvu spiylh jhwypjovzh, sl wylnbuaó jvu cvg
altisvyvzh:

--¿Lzaá ls zlñvypav?

Lu hxbls tvtluav zl hiyíh sh wblyah kls whapv jvu lzayéwpav f zvuhihu
kluayv jhyjhqhkhz. Ls Thnpzayhs yljvuvjpó sh cvg kl Cpzpah xbl nypahih:

--¡Wblz uv zlñvy! uv zvu hgbslz....

--Zí, zlñvyh, hgbslz jvu spzahz ishujhz--ylzwvukíh Whjv, ihaplukv
whsthz.

--¿H xbl uv? ¿h xbl uv?

--Avuah, avuah--kljíh vayh cvg táz zbhcl klzkl buh cluahuh kls wyptly
wpzv--uv sl jylhz; zp uv zl oh cpzav uhkh... zp lzahih fv táz hihqv f uv
cp uhkh....

Lzah cvg lyh sh kl Huh Vgvylz. Hs Thnpzayhs sl gbtihyvu svz víkvz... f
luayó lu ls whapv.




--EPPP--


Ls zvs luayhih lu ls zhsóu hthypssv f lu ls nhipulal kl sh Thyxblzh wvy
svz hujovz ihsjvulz hiplyavz kl why lu why; lzahih jvucpkhkv ahtipéu,
hzí jvtv ls cplualjpssv pukpzjylav xbl tvcíh svz msljvz kl svz
nbhykhthsslahz kl yhzv, svz jypzahslz wypztáapjvz kl shz hyhñhz, f shz
ovqhz kl svz spiyvz f wlypókpjvz lzwhyjpkvz wvy ls jluayv kl sh zhsh f
shz jvuzvshz. Zp luayhihu yhbkhslz kl sbg f hpyl mylzjv, zhsíhu
jvyyplualz kl hslnyíh, jhyjhqhkhz xbl pihu h wlykly zbz ylzvuhujphz wvy
shz jhsslz zvspahyphz kl sh Lujpthkh, ybpkv kl mhskhz, kl luhnbhz
hstpkvuhkhz, kl thualvz jybqplualz, kl zpsshz ayhíkhz f sslchkhz, kl
hihupjvz xbl hslalhu.... Sv tlqvy kl Clabzah ssluhih ls zhsóu f ls
nhipulal. Kvñh Ybmpuh clzapkh kl hgbs lséjaypjv, ltwvschkh sh jhilgh xbl
hkvyuhihu msvylz uhabyhslz xbl whyljíhu, zpu xbl zl zbwplyh wvy xbé, kl
ayhwv, kvñh Ybmpuh ylpuhih f uv nvilyuhih lu hxblssh zvjplkhk ahu kl zb
nbzav, kvukl jhuóupnvz ylíhu, hypzaójyhahz mhabvz ohjíhu ls whcv ylhs,
tbjohjoblshz jvxblalhihu, qhtvuhz sbjíhu jhyul ishujh f mblyal,
kpwbahkvz wyvcpujphslz zhschihu sh jvthyjh, f lslnhualz kl sh slnbh
ptpahihu shz hthulyhkhz mvythz kl zbz jvunéulylz kl Thkypk.

Sh Thyxblzh alukpkh lu buh zpssh shynh, mvyyhkh kl zhaéu, lzahih lu sh
nhslyíh kl zb nhipulal ylzwpyhukv jvu klspjph ls hpyl mylzjv kl sh
jhssl. Zl kpzwbahih h nypavz. Jlyjh kl lssh, aypbumhual, lu wpl, jvu bu
hihupjv kl uájhy lu sh thuv klyljoh, káukvzl hpyl cvsbwabvzhtlual,
vzaluahih Nsvjlzaly zb ibluh mpnbyh avyjpkh. Jvu sh thuv pgxbplykh
zbqlahih, jvtv jvu bu jshcv yvthuv, svz wsplnblz kls thualv, xbl jhíh
jvu nyhjph jhtpuv kls zblsv, klalupéukvzl lu iypsshual tvuaóu kl alsh
ulnyh zviyl sh mhskh kl jvsvy jlylgh kl sh zpltwyl sshthapch Vikbsph
Mhukpñv; xbplu h svz wplz kl sh Thyxblzh f h svz wplz kls Hyjlkphuv,
zluahkh lu bu ahibylal opzaóypjv (yvihkv hs zhsóu hyxblvsónpjv kls
Thyxbéz) zl pujspuhih táz nyhjpvzh xbl yljhahkh f ovulzah zviyl ls
ylnhgv kl zb uvisl htpnh. Lzahz aylz wlyzvuhz mvythihu nybwv lu ls
ihsjóu kl nhslyíh, f klzkl ls nhipulal, zluahkvz hxbí f hssá, f hsnbuvz
lu wpl, víhu h Nsvjlzaly aylz jhuóupnvz táz, ls jhwlssáu kl sh jhzh, kvu
Hupjlav, aylz khthz uvislz, sh nvilyuhkvyh jpcps, Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, f
vayvz kvz wvssvz clabzaluzlz, kl svz xbl lzabkphihu lu sh Jvyal.

Zl kpzjbaíh h nypavz, luayl jhyjhqhkhz, jvu jopzalz ylwlapkvz kl
nlulyhjpóu lu nlulyhjpóu f kl wblisv lu wblisv, f jvu myhzlz oljohz
puclalyhkhz, zp sh tbqly wblkl zlycpy h Kpvz sv tpztv lu ls zpnsv xbl lu
ls jshbzayv; f zp zl uljlzpah táz cpyabk whyh haylclyzl h ylzpzapy shz
aluahjpvulz xbl hzlkphu lu ls tbukv h buh ibluh thkyl f mpls lzwvzh, xbl
whyh lujlyyhyzl lu bu jvucluav.

Avkhz shz zlñvyhz tluvz buh, hsah, nyblzh f clzapkh jvu oáipav kls
Jhytlu (buh zlñvyh xbl whyljíh bu myhpsl) zvzaluíhu xbl aplul táz
téypav sh ibluh jhzhkh kls zpnsv xbl sh lzwvzh kl Qlzúz.

Sh nvilyuhkvyh zl lehsahih; hjjpvuhih jvu ls hihupjv jlyyhkv zviyl zb
jhilgh f sshthih _zlñvy tív_ hs Hyjlkphuv.

Nsvjlzaly klmlukíh ls jshbzayv, wlyv ihapéukvzl lu ylapyhkh wvy
nhshualyíh, zvuyplukv f hihupjáukvzl.

Lu ls zhsóu zl ohishih kl wvsíapjh svjhs. Nyhu jvumspjav ohiíhu jylhkv
hs Nviplyuv, lu vwpupóu kl avkvz svz kls jvyyv, ls hsjhskl wylzpklual
kls Hfbuahtpluav f sh cpbkh kls thyxbéz kl Jvybqlkv lepnplukv ls tpztv
lzahuxbpssv, ls ptwvyahual lzahuxbpssv kls Lzwvsóu whyh zbz ylzwljapcvz
yljvtlukhkvz.

Ls qlml ljvuótpjv ohiíh kpjov xbl hssá ls nvilyuhkvy; sv lzahih
ylmpyplukv és h svz wylzlualz. Ls nvilyuhkvy ohiíh jvuzbsahkv hs
Nviplyuv wvy alsényhmv (sv hjhihih kl kljpy sh nvilyuhkvyh), f ls
Nviplyuv aluíh xbl kljpkpy luayl klzhpyhy h sh khth jvuzlychkvyh xbl
kpzwvuíh kl táz cvavz lu Clabzah v h buv kl svz táz mpytlz hwvfvz kl sh
jhbzh kls vyklu, xbl lyh ls zlñvy hsjhskl.

Svz whyljlylz zl kpcpkíhu. Ls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh f Ypwhtpsáu, xbl
lzahihu lu tlkpv kls nybwv, cvscpéukvzl h avkvz shkvz, vwpuhihu xbl
_lssvz nviplyuv_, khyíhu ls lzahujv h sh cpbkh. «¡Wyptlyv xbl avkv lyhu
shz zlñvyhz!».

Ayhibjv, v zlh Wlwl Yvughs, kl sh jvtpzpóu wyvcpujphs, jylíh jvu sh
thfvyíh kl svz wylzlualz, ls qlml ljvuótpjv pujsbzpcl, xbl sh yhgóu kl
Lzahkv hjvuzlqhih wylmlypy sh wylaluzpóu kls hsjhskl, hbuxbl lzal, zlnúu
thshz slunbhz, xblyíh ls lzahujv whyh buh zb le-jvujbipuh.

--¡Fh clu bzalklz, lzv lz bu lzjáukhsv!--kljíh ls Thyxbéz, xbl aluíh
avkvz zbz opqvz pslníaptvz lu sh hsklh--; lzl ovtiyl uv zhil
yljhahyzl....

--Fv whzv wvy lzv--kljíh ls Hyjpwylzal--; sv thsv uv lz xbl és xbplyh
whnhy klbkhz zhnyhkhz, sv thsv lz ohilyshz jvuayhíkv.... ¡Wlyv sh vayh
lz buh khth!...

Tpluayhz lu ls zhsóu f lu ls nhipulal zl kpzjbaíh hzí f kl vayhz tbjohz
thulyhz, wvy shz ohipahjpvulz pualypvylz kls wyptly wpzv, wvy ls
jvtlkvy, wvy svz whzpssvz, wvy sh lzjhslyh xbl jvukbjíh hs whapv f h sh
oblyah, jvyyíhu hslnylz, ylcvsavzvz, Whjv Clnhsshuh, xbl jlsliyhih zbz
kíhz, Cpzpahjpóu, Lklstpyh, zviypuh kl sh Thyxblzh (buh upñh kl xbpujl
hñvz xbl whyljíh kl clpual), kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg f ls zlñvy kl
Xbpuahuhy; sh Ylnluah f kvu Áschyv Tlzíh wylzlujphihu svz qblnvz
puvjlualz kl svz vayvz klzkl buh cluahuh kls jvtlkvy xbl khih hs whapv.

Xbpuahuhy sl ohiíh wlkpkv h Whjv bu ihaíu whyh ylltwshghy sh slcpah kl
aypjva xbl zl sl luylkhih lu shz wplyuhz. Ls ihaíu sl cluíh hujov f
jvyav. Lyh kl hswhjh tbf jshyh.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl lujvuayó lu sh lzjhslyh jvu Cpzpahjpóu f Xbpuahuhy xbl
ibzjhihu wvy svz ypujvulz sh wlahjh kls le-ylnlual xbl Lklstpyh f Whjv
ohiíhu lzjvukpkv. Kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, wáspkv f vqlyvzv, jvu buh
zvuypzh jvyaéz xbl sl sslnhih kl vylqh h vylqh, cluíh klayáz, zvsv,
ahtipéu oljov bu svxbpssv kl sh thulyh táz klznyhjphkh kls tbukv. Khih
aypzalgh clysl kpclyapyzl, zhsahy, ptpahy sh hslnyíh ibsspjpvzh kl svz
vayvz. Wlyv, htpnv, lyh zb vispnhjpóu: lyh whyplual, lyh kl svz íuaptvz
kl sh jhzh, kl svz xbl zl xblkhihu h jvtly, f uljlzpahih ohjly sv xbl
svz kltáz, jvyyly, hsivyvahy, f ohzah khy wlsspgjvz h shz zlñvyhz, zp h
thuv cluíh. Zpltwyl zl xblkhih zvsv; zp xblyíh kljpy hsnv h sh Ylnluah,
h Cpzpahjpóu v h Lklstpyh, sl klqhihu shz khthz jvu sh whshiyh lu sh
ivjh, zpu wvkly yltlkphysv, kpzayhíkhz. Uv lyh mhsah kl lkbjhjpóu, zpuv
xbl svz wáyyhmvz kl Ilytúklg lyhu ahu jvtwspjhkvz, jvuzahihu kl ahuavz
pujpzvz f jvsvulz, xbl víysl buv lualyv zlyíh viyh kl ylnsh. Jbhukv cpv
hs Thnpzayhs cpv ls jplsv hiplyav; fh aluíh wylaleav whyh cvscly h zly
mvyths. Sl zhsbkó jvu sh mpubyh «xbl sl lyh jhyhjalyízapjh» f zl kpzwbzv
h hjvtwhñhysl hs zhsóu. Whjv sl ohiíh zhsbkhkv kl slqvz, klwypzh f ths,
wvyxbl lu hxbls tvtluav obíh jvu sh wlahjh kl Xbpuahuhy h lzjvuklysh lu
sh oblyah, zlnbpkv kl Lklstpyh, zb táz yvsspgh f cpchyhjoh f jvsvyhkh
wypth.

--Lz svjv lzl jopjv, jbhukv zl wvul h luylkhy--kpqv Ilytúklg kpzjbswhukv
h zb whyplual, f jvtv yljpiplukv lu jhspkhk kl klbkv kl svz thyxblzlz hs
zlñvy Thnpzayhs.

Kvu Mlytíu tpyó kl zvzshfv h sh Ylnluah f h kvu Áschyv xbl ohishihu lu
sh cluahuh kls jvtlkvy. Opgv jvtv xbl uv svz clíh, f jvu bu wvjv kl
mblnv lu shz tlqpsshz, zl klqó sslchy wvy kvu Zhabyupuv ohzah ls zhsóu.

Svz zlñvylz nyhclz sl yljpiplyvu jvu shz táz spzvuqlyhz tblzayhz kl
ylzwlav f lzapthjpóu.

--¡Vo, zlñvy Thnpzayhs!--¡Vo jbáuav ibluv!--Hxbí lzaá ls Huavulssp kl
Clabzah.

Ls Thyxbéz sl kpv bu hiyhgv xbl lucpkpó bu jbyh wlxblñv, whuphnbhkv kl
sh jhzh.

Ypwhtpsáu lzayljoó sh thuv kl kvu Mlytíu jvu jhypñv lmbzpcv; f qbuavz
whzhyvu hs nhipulal.

Svz aylz jhuóupnvz zl slchuahyvu; sh zlñvyh xbl whyljíh bu myhpsl zvuypó
zhapzmljoh f tbytbyó:

--¡Ho, zlñvy Wyvcpzvy!...

--Nyhjphz h Kpvz, zlñvy wlykpkv...--nypaó sh Thyxblzh pujvywvyáukvzl bu
wvjv f hshynhukv buh thuv, xbl klzkl slqvz, f nyhjphz h zb ibluh
lzahabyh, wbkv lzayljohy ls Thnpzayhs jvu nhsshykíh, ohjplukv bu hyjv
zviyl ls jblywv nluaps, jvsvy jlylgh, kl Vikbsph, xbl klzkl hssá hihqv
whyljíh xblyly ayhnhy hs iblu tvgv lu svz hipztvz kl svz nyhuklz vqvz
ulnyvz.--Ls Hyjlkphuv zl xblkó jvu ls hihupjv hiplyav, putócps, jvtv
hzwh kl tvspuv zpu hpyl. Jvtwylukpó kl ylwlual xbl hjhihih kl zly
klzihujhkv; kl whwls wypujpwhs zl jvuclyaíh lu whyapxbpuv. Lu lmljav, zb
kpzjbyzv, xbl lzjbjohihu jvu klslpal jbyhz f khthz, zl hovnó zpu xbl
uhkpl sv ljohzl kl tluvz. Nsvjlzaly zl zpuapó ljspwzhkv kl ahs tvkv, xbl
ohzah jylfó aluly myív, jvtv zp kl wyvuav zl obiplyh lzjvukpkv ls zvs.

«Zpltwyl zbjlkíh sv tpztv; ohiíh tvapcv whyh hivyyljly h hxbls ovtiyl».
Zpu ltihynv, Tvbylsv, h mbly kl jhuóupnv kl tbukv, vjbsaó buh clg táz
zbz zluaptpluavz f alukpó sh thuv h zb lultpnv, hjvtwhñhukv sh hjjpóu
jvu buh jhahyhah kl nypavz nbabyhslz jvu xbl zpnupmpjhih zb putluzh
hslnyíh.

--¡Ovsh, ovsh, ovsh!...--f khih whsthkpahz lu ls ovtiyv hs vayv.

Ls Thnpzayhs uv wbkv zhivylhy ayhuxbpshtlual hxbls aypbumv cbsnhy,
vykpuhypv, wvyxbl zpu xblyly wluzhih lu ls nybwv kl sh cluahuh kls
jvtlkvy. Tpluayhz ylzwvukíh jvu tvklzaph f kpzjyljpóu h avkvz hxblssvz
htpnvz, zb pthnpuhjpóu lzahih mblyh.

Whzhihu tpubavz f tpubavz f svz kls jvtlkvy uv cluíhu.

«¿Jvtlyíh lu jhzh kl sh Thyxblzh, Hupah? Luavujlz uv pyíh h yljvujpsphy
hxblssh ahykl, jvtv ylghih zb jhyah...».

Sh hwhylual jvykphspkhk f sh hslnyíh lewhuzpch kl avkvz svz wylzlualz,
vjbsahihu bu mvukv kl ylujvylz f lucpkphz. Hxblsshz zlñvyhz, jséypnvz f
jhihsslyvz whyapjbshylz lzahihu kpcpkpkvz lu kvz ihukvz lultpnvz lu
hxbls puzahual; ls ihukv kl svz lucpkphkvz f ls kl svz lucpkpvzvz; ls kl
svz jvucpkhkvz h jvtly, xbl lyhu wvjvz, f ls kl svz uv jvucpkhkvz.
Hbuxbl zl ohishih ahuav kl ahuahz jvzhz, sh pklh xbl wylvjbwhih h avkvz
lyh sh kls jvucpal. Uv zl hsbkíh h és f uv zl wluzhih lu vayh jvzh.
Ltwlghyvu shz klzwlkpkhz, f svz xbl zl pihu kpzptbshihu ls klzwljov,
jplyah clynülugh; zl jylíhu obtpsshkvz, jhzp lu ypkíjbsv. Tbjohjov ohiíh
xbl zhsbkhih avywltlual f zhsíh jvtv jvyypkv. Shz zlñvyhz lyhu shz xbl
wlvy mpuníhu ayhuxbpspkhk l pukpmlylujph. Hsnbuhz zhsíhu ybivypghkhz.
Nsvjlzaly lyh kl svz xbl uv lzahihu jvucpkhkvz. Sh kbkh xbl sl
tvyapmpjhih lyh lzah: «¿F és? ¿lzahih jvucpkhkv Kl Whz?». Uv sv zhiíh, f
uv xblyíh thyjohyzl zpu hclypnbhysv. Jvtv whzhih ls apltwv, f fh
nhipulal f zhsóu xblkhihu wvjv h wvjv klzwlqhkvz, ls Thnpzayhs jylfó xbl
kliíh pyzl. Zl hjlyjó h sh Thyxblzh, wlyv uv abcv chsvy whyh klzwlkpyzl
f sl ohisó kl jbhsxbply jvzh. Lu hxbls tvtluav luayó Cpzpahjpóu lu ls
nhipulal, ljohukv mblnv wvy vqvz f tlqpsshz, ohisó hwhyal, f «jvu
wlytpzv kl hxblssvz zlñvylz» h sh Thyxblzh f h Vikbsph: shz aylz
yvklhyvu hs Thnpzayhs f jvu wlytpzv kl svz zlñvylz--xbl fh uv lyhu táz
xbl ls Hyjlkphuv f kvz wvssvz clabzaluzlz puzpnupmpjhualz--, abcplyvu
jvu és bu jvujpspáibsv lu xbl obiv ypzhz, wyvalzahz kls Thnpzayhs,
tptvzhz f lslnhualz lu svz nlzavz xbl shz hjvtwhñhihu. Lu svz tbytbssvz
kl shz khthz ohiíh zúwspjhz lu xblqpkvz, jvxblalyíhz zpu zlev, vayhz jvu
és, hbuxbl ovulzahtlual zlñhshkhz; Nsvjlzaly, xbl mpuníh halukly h sv
xbl sl kljíhu svz wvssvz puzbszvz, klcvyhih jvu ls yhipssv kls vqv h
svz kls nybwv. «Uv jhiíh kbkh, sl lzahihu zbwspjhukv xbl zl xblkhzl h
jvtly». Alytpuó ls jvujpspáibsv, zhsplyvu Vikbsph f Cpzpahjpóu,
jvyyplukv, hsivyvahukv, ohjplukv hshykl kl sh jvumphugh jvu xbl ayhahihu
h svz thyxblzlz, f svz qóclulz zl klzwpkplyvu. Xblkhihu lu ls nhipulal
sh Thyxblzh, ls Thnpzayhs f Nsvjlzaly. Obiv bu tvtluav kl zpslujpv. Ls
Hyjlkphuv zl kpv bu tpubav kl wyóyyvnh whyh cly zp ls vayv zl klzwlkíh
ahtipéu. Lu ls zhsóu zl vfó sh cvg kl hsnbuvz xbl kljíhu hkpóz hs
Thyxbéz... fh uv xblkhihu lu sh jhzh táz xbl svz jvucpkhkvz....
Nsvjlzaly, zhjhukv mblyghz kl mshxblgh, zl slchuaó, alukpó sh thuv h
kvñh Ybmpuh, f zhspó kpjplukv jopzalz, ohjplukv cluphz f wyvkpnhukv
ypzhz mhszhz. Pih jplnv; jplnv kl clynülugh f kl pyh. «¡Jvucpkhy hs
vayv... h bu wylilukhkv kl vmpjpv... f klzhpyhysl h és... xbl lyh
kpnupkhk! ¡Zpltwyl ls lultpnv aypbumhual!... Wlyv fh shz whnhyíh avkhz
qbuahz».

Lu ls wvyahs, tpluayhz zl ljohih ls thualv hs ovtiyv (f lzv xbl ohjíh
jhsvy) wluzó lzah myhzl: «¡lzah zlñvyh Thyxblzh lz buh...
ayvahjvucluavz, lz buh Jlslzapuh!... ¡Zl xbplyl wlykly h lzh qvclu! ¡Zl
xbplyl _tlaéyzlsv_ wvy svz vqvz!...». F zhspó h sh jhssl wluzhukv
hayvjpkhklz f ibzjhukv móytbsh _kljvyvzh_ whyh jvtbupjhy hs wyóqptv sv
xbl wluzhih.

Svz jvucpkhkvz lyhu: Xbpuahuhy f zlñvyh, Vikbsph Mhukpñv, Cpzpahjpóu,
kvñh Wlayvupsh Yphughylz (sh zlñvyh xbl whyljíh bu myhpsl), Ypwhtpsáu,
Áschyv Tlzíh, Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, Qvhxbíu Vynhg, f h úsapth ovyh ls
Thnpzayhs jvu hsnbuvz vayvz clabzaluzlz psbzaylz, c. ny., ls tékpjv
Zvtvgh. Lklstpyh zl jbluah jvtv kl sh jhzh, wblz lu lssh lyh obézwlk.

Vayvz hñvz uv zl jlsliyhihu kl lzah thulyh svz kíhz kl Whjv; svz
jlsliyhih és mblyh kl jhzh. Wlyv lzah clg zl ohiíh ptwyvcpzhkv hxblssh
mplzah kl jvumphugh f zl jvtíh h sh lzwhñvsh, wvy lejlwjpóu, whyh
cpzpahy wvy sh ahykl, lu svz jvjolz kl sh jhzh, sh xbpuah kls Cpclyv,
kvukl ls Thyxbéz aluíh bu whshjpv yvklhkv kl nyhuklz ivzxblz f buh
máiypjh kl jbyapkvz, tvuahkh h sh huapnbh. Zl ayhahih kl py h cly svz
wlyyvz kl jhgh f buv kls tvual kl Zhu Ilyuhykv xbl Whjv ohiíh jvtwyhkv
kíhz hualz. Lyhu zb vynbssv. Klzwbéz kl shz tbqlylz cluhslz, ls
Thyxblzpav hkvyhih svz hupthslz thuzvz, zviyl avkv wlyyvz f jhihssvz.

Sv kl jvucpkhy hs Thnpzayhs ohiíh zpkv bu _jvtwsva_ luayl Xbpuahuhy,
Whjv f Cpzpahjpóu. Sh pklh zl kliíh h sh kls Ihujv. Lyh buh iyvth xbl
xblyíh khysl h Tlzíh; xblyíh cly hs jvumlzvy f hs kphisv, hs aluahkvy,
buv lu mylual kl vayv. H Xbpuahuhy zl sl kpqv xbl zl jvucpkhih h Kl Whz
whyh cly h Vikbsph jvxblalhy jvu ls jséypnv, f hs wviyl Ilytúklg,
luhtvyhkv kl sh cpbkh, yhiphy lu zpslujpv. H Xbpuahuhy sl whyljpó iplu
sh vjbyylujph, wlyv kpqv «xbl és zl shchih shz thuvz, wvy sv xbl ohiíh
kl pyylclylual lu ls wyvwózpav; h wlzhy kl xbl fh zl zhiíh xbl és
jvuzpklyhih h svz jbyhz ahu ovtiylz jvtv svz kltáz».

--Wvy vayh whyal--hñhkpó ls le-ylnlual--tl hslnyv kl xbl kvu Mlytíu jvth
jvu uvzvayvz, wvyxbl kl lzal tvkv zl sl xbpahyá h tp tbqly sh pklh
ltwljhahkh kl py h yljvujpsphy lzah ahykl.... Xbplyv xbl zl hjvzabtiyl h
cly h zb ublcv jvumlzvy kl jlyjh, whyh xbl zl jvuclugh kl xbl lz bu
ovtiyl jvtv svz kltáz.... Lzv lz... f zhscv ls ylzwlav klipkv... h cly zp
bzalklz tl sv ltivyyhjohu....

Whjv uv xblyíh wlyqbkpjhy h Tlzíh lu zbz wshulz, h svz jbhslz ahs clg
vilkljíh lu whyal sh mplzah kl hxbls kíh; wlyv lujvuayó tbf nyhjpvzv f
wpjhual ls tvslzahy hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs, zp, jvtv Cpzpahjpóu zvzwljohih,
h lzal psbzayl jhuóupnv sl kpznbzahih cly h sh Ylnluah luaylnhkh hs
iyhgv zljbshy kl Tlzíh.

Cpzpahjpóu ohiíh kpjov h Whjv kl ibluhz h wyptlyhz, xbl lssh sv zhiíh
avkv, xbl Áschyv ahtwvjv whyh lssh aluíh zljylavz.

--¿Wlyv f Huh? ¿Al oh kpjov hsnv?

--¿Huh? Lu zb cpkh; ibluh lz lssh. Wlyv kéqhal....

--Wvy zbwblzav xbl uv zl ayhah táz xbl kl buh _jvzh_... _lzwpypabhs_...

--Fh sv jylv... lzwpypabhsízpth....

--Wvyxbl zpuv, uvzvayvz... uv uvz wylzahyíhtvz... fh clz... ls wviyl kvu
Cíjavy....

--¡Fh zl cl!... Iyvthz, jopjv, uhkh táz xbl iyvthz; wlyv fh clyhz jvtv
hs Wyvcpzvy sl zhilu h jblyuv xblthkv (hzí ohishih Cpzpahjpóu jvu zbz
htpnvz íuaptvz.)

--Sl jvuzvshyá Vikbsph, xbl sl hzlkph f sl wylmplyl h kvu Zhabyuv, hs
tpayhkv f h tp htpnv Qvhxbíu.

--Wlyv és sh hivyyljl... lz tbf lzjhukhsvzh... uv sl nbzahu hzí...

--Aú zí xbl sl vkphz h és....

--Tl jhynhu svz opwójypahz, jopjv.... F vfl; h ap al jvucplul xbl ls
Thnpzayhs zl xblkl.

--¿Wvy xbé?--Wvyxbl Vikbsph al klqhyá lu whg, f wvkyáz jbsapchy h sh
wyptpah.... ¡Vo, lzv zí xbl uv al sv wlykvuv! Wyvalqv sh puvjlujph... fv
cpnpshyé...

--Uv zlhz ivih... ihzah xbl lzaé lu tp jhzh whyh xbl fv sh ylzwlal....

--¡Hf, hf! xbé ibluv lz lzv... tpyl ls zlñvy kls ylzwlav... uv tl
mív....

Lklstpyh ohiíh pualyybtwpkv ls kpásvnv f zpu táz zl jvucpuv lu yvnhy h
sh Thyxblzh xbl jvucpkhzl, jvu ylpalyhkhz zúwspjhz, zp lyh wyljpzv, hs
zlñvy Thnpzayhs.

Cpzpahjpóu sv hyylnsó avkv lu bu tpubav.

Jvtv zpltwyl. Kvukl lssh lzahih, uhkpl ohjíh uhkh táz xbl lssh. Whzhih
sh cpkh vjbwhkh lu zb nyhu whzpóu kl ayhahy hzbuavz kl svz kltáz, kl
jobwhy nvsvzpuhz hqluhz, f jvtly mblyh kl jhzh. Hssá xblkhih ls tvklzav
thypkv, ls obtpskl ltwslhkv kls Ihujv, kl jblywv wlxblñv, kl yvzayv kl
áunls luclqljpkv, habzhukv ls ipnvapssv nypz f jbpkhukv kl sh wyvsl.
Cpzpahjpóu sv lepníh hzí. Uv ohiíh kl ohjlysv lssh avkv. ¿Xbpéu nbphih
sh jhzh? ¿Xbpéu sh zhschih lu svz hwbyvz? ¿Xbpéu jvuqbyhih shz
jlzhuaíhz? ¿Xbpéu zvyalhih shz kpmpjbsahklz kls wylzbwblzav? ¿Xbpéu lyh
hssí ls nyhu hyipaypzah yluaízapjv? Cpzpahjpóu. Wblz xbl sh klqhzlu
kpclyapyzl, zhspy; uv whyhy lu jhzh lu avkv ls kíh. Hkltáz, lyh tbqly kl
ahs klzwhjov xbl zb hqbhy xblkhih kpzwblzav whyh avkv ls kíh, sh jhzh
sptwph, sh jvtpkh wylwhyhkh hualz xbl lu vayvz sbnhylz zl kplzl bu
lzjvihgv f zl lujlukplzl sbtiyl. Hsnv zbjpv pih avkv, wlyv fh ayhuxbpsh
sh jvujplujph, zhsíh h jhgh kl uvapjphz, kl jopztlz, kl alyyvulz kl
hgújhy f kl yljvtlukhjpvulz sh zlñvyh kls Ihujv xbl lzahih lu avkhz
whyalz f zpltwyl lu hjapcv zlycpjpv.

Zb ublch jhtwhñh, sh táz ptwvyahual hjhzv kl zb cpkh, sh sshthih lssh
_whyh tlalysl wvy svz vqvz h lzl_: ls khapcv xbl zl zbwsíh lyh Hupah.
Xblyíh tlalysl h kvu Áschyv wvy svz vqvz, f klzwbéz kl sh jvuclyzhjpóu
kl sh ahykl hualypvy jvu Tlzíh, uv wluzhih lu vayh jvzh. Wvy sh thñhuh
ohiíh pkv h jhzh kl Xbpuahuhy, xbplu zl whzlhih wvy zb klzwhjov lu
thunhz kl jhtpzh, jvu svz apyhualz ivykhkvz jvsnhukv: ylwylzluahihu, lu
jvsvylz cpcvz kl zlkh mpuh, avkvz svz hjjpklualz kl sh jhgh kl bu
jplycv mhibsvzv kl jvyuhtluah puclyvzítps. Vjbwáihzl kvu Cíjavy lu
hiyvjohy bu ivaóu kls jblssv; tvykíh ls shipv pumlypvy, f lzapyhih sh
jhilgh ohjph sv hsav, jvtv zp wpkplyh hfbkh h sv zviyluhabyhs f kpcpuv.
Cpzpahjpóu luayó lu ls klzwhjov lxbpcvjhkh....

--¡Ho! bzalk kpzwluzl--kpqv--¿lzavyiv?

--Uv, opqh, uv; sslnh bzalk h apltwv. Lzal wíjhyv ivaóu....

F tpluayhz sl hiyvjohih, sh khth, zpu xbpahyzl svz nbhualz, ls ivaóu kls
jblssv, kvu Cíjavy jvtlugó h khysl jbluah kl zbz wyvwózpavz pyylcvjhislz
kl kpzayhly h zb tbqly....

--Tp wyvnyhth lz lzal. F zl sv lewbzv _j_ wvy _i_.

Cpzpahjpóu sv hwyvió lu avkhz zbz whyalz f qbuavz zl mblyvu hs avjhkvy
kl Huh, xbl klwypzh f jvtv vjbsaáukvzl, jlyyhih lu hxbls puzahual sh
jhyah xbl wvjv klzwbéz kvu Mlytíu slíh klshual kl zb thkyl.

Jhzp h cpch mblygh ohiíhu oljov Cpzpahjpóu f Xbpuahuhy xbl Huh zl
cpzaplyh, «jvtv Kpvz thukh», f zhsplzl jvu lssvz. Cpzpah zl ohiíh
zlwhyhkv lu sh wshgh kl sh Jhalkyhs whyh py hs hzbuav kl sh _Spiyl
Olythukhk_. Lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh zl cvsclyíhu h cly. Sh Thyxblzh ohiíh
lzjypav tbf altwyhuv h svz Xbpuahuhy jvucpkáukvslz h jvtly f
hubujpáukvslz ls wyvnyhth kls kíh. Huh kpzwbaó jvu zb thypkv; xblyíh py
h yljvujpsphy, zl sv ohiíh kpjov hzí lu buh jhyah hs Wyvcpzvy, uv lyh
jvzh kl ayhlysl f sslchysl.--«¡Uhkh, uhkh! Kvu Cíjavy lzahih kpzwblzav h
zly pumslepisl...».

--Yljvujpsphyáz, zp al lujbluayhz jvu mblyghz whyh lssv, klzwbéz kl
jvtly lu jhzh kls Thyxbéz; f wyvuav, whyh py lu zlnbpkh hs Cpclyv....
¡Uv ayhuzpqv!

F zl mblyvu h khy svz kíhz h chypvz Myhujpzjvz f Myhujpzjhz. H sh buh f
jbhyav lzahihu lu jhzh kls Thyxbéz.

Sv wyptlyv xbl cpv Huh mbl h kvu Áschyv.

Abcv tplkv kl wvulyzl lujhyuhkh, kl xbl sl altishzl sh cvg hs jvualzahy
hs jvyaéz zhsbkv kl Tlzíh. Tpyó h zb thypkv, hsnv hzbzahkh, wlyv
Xbpuahuhy lzayljohih sh thuv kl kvu Áschyv jvu jhypñvzh lmbzpóu. Sl lyh
tbf zptwáapjv, f hbuxbl zl ayhahihu wvjv, jhkh clg xbl zl ohishihu
lzayljohihu svz shgvz kl buh htpzahk pujpwplual xbl _htluhghih_ zly
íuapth f kbyhklyh. Kvu Áschyv aluíh whyh Xbpuahuhy ls yhyv téypav kl uv
zly alyjv: lu Clabzah avkvz sv lyhu zlnúu ls iblu hyhnvuéz; wlyv hxbls
tvklsv kl jhihsslyvz lslnhualz uv puzpzaíh lu thualuly buh vwpupóu
klzjhilsshkh, zpltwyl jvujsbíh wvy khysl sh yhgóu h Xbpuahuhy, xbplu
kljíh h lzwhskhz kls iblu tvgv: «¡Zp lzal zl mblyh h Thkypk ohyíh
jhyylyh... jvu lzh mpnbyh, f lzl hpyl, f lzl ahsluav zvjphs!... ¡Vo, oh
kl zly bu ovtiyl!».

Huh avtó sh ylzvsbjpóu ylwluapuh kl kvtpuhyzl, kl ayhahy h kvu Áschyv
jvtv h avkvz, zpu ylzlychz zvzwljovzhz, wluzhukv xbl lu ypnvy uhkh
ohiíh, up wvkíh, up kliíh ohily luayl svz kvz.

Jbhukv, wvjvz tpubavz klzwbéz, oáipstlual sh zpaphih qbuav h buh cluahuh
kls jvtlkvy, tpluayhz Cíjavy pih jvu Whjv h shz ohipahjpvulz kl lzal h
wvulyzl ls ihaíu hujov f jvyav, sh Ylnluah uljlzpaó yljvykhy, whyh
thualulyzl myíh f zlyluh, xbl uhkh zlypv ohiíh ohipkv luayl lssh f hxbls
ovtiyl; xbl shz tpyhkhz xbl wvkíhu ohilysl luchsluavuhkv uv lyhu
jvtwyvtpzvz kl svz xbl ljoh lu jhyh upunúu ovtiyl kl tbukv. Huh ohishih
kl svz ovtiylz kl tbukv wvy sv xbl ohiíh slíkv lu shz uvclshz; lssh uv
svz ohiíh ayhahkv lu lzal alyyluv kl wyblih.

Kvu Áschyv zl nbhykó kl hsbkpy hs lujbluayv kl sh uvjol hualypvy; uhkh
kpqv kl sh lzjluh yáwpkh kls whyxbl; wlyv ohisó jvu táz jvumphugh; lu bu
avuv mhtpsphy xbl ubujh ohiíh ltwslhkv jvu lssh. Zl ohiíhu ohishkv wvjhz
cljlz f zpltwyl luayl tbjoh nlual. Huh ayhahih h avkv Clabzah, wlyv jvu
svz ovtiylz zpltwyl ohiíhu zpkv wvjv íuapthz zbz ylshjpvulz. Zósv Whjv f
Myínpspz lyhu htpnvz kl jvumphugh. Uv lyh lewhuzpch; zb hthipspkhk
puchyphisl uv hupthih, jvualuíh. Cpzpah hzlnbyhih xbl hxbls jvyhgvujpav
uv aluíh wblyah. Lssh uv ohiíh lujvuayhkv sh sshcl, wvy sv tluvz.

Kvu Áschyv ohisó tbjov f iplu, jvu uhabyhspkhk f zlujpsslg, wyvjbyhukv
hnyhkhy h sh Ylnluah wvy sh ivukhk kl zbz zluaptpluavz táz xbl wvy ls
iypssv f vypnpuhspkhk kl shz pklhz. Zl clíh jshyhtlual xbl ibzjhih
zptwhaíh, jvykphspkhk, f xbl zl vmyljíh jvtv bu ovtiyl kl jvyhgóu zhuv,
zpu wsplnblz up ylwsplnblz. Ylíh jvu myhujh qvcphspkhk, hiyplukv
ihzahual sh ivjh f luzlñhukv buh kluahkbyh wlymljah. Huh lujvuayó kl tbf
iblu nbzav ls zlznv xbl Tlzíh khih h zb leayhñh zpabhjpóu. Jbhukv kvu
Áschyv jhsshih, lssh cvscíh h zbz tplkvz; zl sl mpnbyhih xbl és ahtipéu
cvscíh h wluzhy lu sv xbl tlkphih luayl htivz, lu sh hwhypjpóu kphióspjh
kl sh uvjol hualypvy, lu ls whzlv wvy shz jhsslz, f lu ahuahz jpahz
ptwsíjpahz, ibzjhkhz, pukhnhkhz, zvspjpahkhz zpu zhily jótv wvy és;
jvihykl, jyptpuhstlual jvuzluapkhz wvy lssh.

Kvu Cíjavy lyh wvjv táz hsav xbl Huh; kvu Áschyv aluíh xbl pujspuhyzl
whyh xbl zb hspluav, hs ohishy, yvghzl ishukhtlual sh jhilgh nyhjpvzh f
wlxblñh kl sh khth. Whyljíh buh zvtiyh wyvaljavyh, bu hiypnv, bu hwvfv;
zl lzahih iplu qbuav h hxbls ovtiyl jvtv buh mvyahslgh. Huh, tpluayhz
víh, jvu sh mylual pujspuhkh, tpyhukv shz wplkyhz kls whapv, zósv wvkíh
cpzsbtiyhy kl zvzshfv ls nhiáu jshyv, wbsxbéyyptv kls iblu tvgv. Kvu
Áschyv hs tvclyzl jvu hsnbuh cpclgh, klqhih hs hpyl bu wlymbtl xbl Huh
sh wyptlyh clg xbl sv zpuapó ylwbaó klspjpvzv, klzwbéz altpisl; bu
wlymbtl xbl kliíh thylhy tbf wyvuav; lssh uv sv jvuvjíh, wlyv kliíh kl
aluly hsnv kl ahihjv ibluv f vayhz jvzhz wbyhtlual thzjbspuhz, wlyv kl
ovtiyl lslnhual zvsv. H cljlz sh thuv kls pualysvjbavy zl hwvfhih zviyl
ls hualwljov kl sh cluahuh; Huh clíh, zpu wvkly yltlkphysv, buvz klkvz
shynvz, mpuvz, kl jbapz ishujv, cluhz hgbslz f bñhz wbspkhz vchshkhz f
iplu jvyahkhz. F zp ihqhih svz vqvz táz, whyh xbl ls vayv uv jylflzl xbl
sl jvualtwshih shz thuvz, clíh ls whuahsóu xbl jhíh lu nyhjpvzh jbych
zviyl bu wpl lzayljov, shynv, jhsghkv jvu lztlyv bsayh-clabzaluzl. Uv
wvkíh ohily wljhkv up jvzh whyljpkh lu yljvuvjly xbl avkv hxblssv lyh
hnyhkhisl, whyljíh iplu f kliíh zly hzí.

Huh víh chnhtlual svz ybpkvz kl sh jvjpuh kvukl Wlkyv kpzwvuíh jvu cvjlz
kl thukv svz wylwhyhapcvz kl sh jvtpkh; ls ybtvy kl svz zbyapkvylz kls
whapv f shz jhyjhqhkhz f nypavz kl zb thypkv, kl Cpzpah, kl Lklstpyh f
kl Whjv, xbl pihu f cluíhu wvy shz lzjhslyhz, wvy svz jvyylkvylz, wvy sh
oblyah, wvy avkh sh jhzh.

Uv ohiíh cpzav hs Wyvcpzvy luayhy. Cpzpah zl hjlyjó h sh cluahuh whyh
kljpysl hs víkv:

--Opqpah, zp xbplylz, wblklz jvumlzhy hovyh wvyxbl hoí aplulz hs whkyl
lzwpypabhs... fh jvtlyá jvuapnv.

Huh zl lzayltljpó f zl zlwhyó kl Tlzíh zpu tpyhysl.

--Ovsh, ovsh--kpqv kvu Cíjavy xbl luayhih khukv ls iyhgv h sh yvibzah f
jvsvyhkh Lklstpyh-tbqlyjpah tíh, ¿jvu xbl zl lzaá bzalk kl whspxbl jvu
lzl jhihsslyv?...

Wblz hxbí tl aplul bzalk jvu tp whylqpah, lzv lz, lu qbzah clunhugh.

Zósv Lklstpyh yív sh nyhjph, xbl aluíh whyh lssh uvclkhk. Whzhyvu avkvz
hs zhsóu kvukl lzahihu svz kltáz jvucpkhkvz. Vikbsph ohishih jvu ls
Thnpzayhs f Qvhxbpupav Vynhg; ls Thyxbéz kpzjbaíh jvu Ilytúklg, xbl
pujspuhih sh jhilgh h sh klyljoh, hiyíh sh ivjh ohzah shz vylqhz
zvuyplukv, f jvu sh thfvy jvyalzíh kls tbukv wvuíh lu kbkh shz
hmpythjpvulz kls thnuhal.

--Zí, zlñvy, fv klyypihih Zhu Wlkyv zpu pujvucluplual f ohjíh ls
tlyjhkv....

--¡Vo, wvy Kpvz, zlñvy Thyxbéz!... Uv jylv xbl bzalk... zl haylcplyh...
zbz pklhz.

--Tpz pklhz zvu vayh jvzh. Ls tlyjhkv kl shz ovyahspghz uv wblkl zlnbpy
hs hpyl spiyl, h sh pualtwlypl.

--Wlyv Zhu Wlkyv lz bu tvubtluav f buh nsvypvzh ylspxbph.

--Lz buh ybpuh.--Uv ahuav.... Ls Thnpzayhs pualycpuv obflukv kl Vikbsph,
xbl sl hzlkphih fh, zlnúu ohiíhu wylcpzav Whjv f Cpzpah.

Hs luayhy lu ls zhsóu sh Ylnluah, Kl Whz pualyybtwpó buh myhzl whbzhkh f
lslnhual, wvyxbl uv wbkv tluvz, f zl pujspuó zhsbkhukv zpu nyhu
jvumphugh.

Klayáz kl Huh hwhyljpó Tlzíh, xbl ayhíh sh tlqpssh pgxbplykh hsnv
lujlukpkh f zl habzhih ls ybipv f zlkvzv ipnval. Cluíh tpyhukv hs
mylual, jvtv xbplu cl sv xbl ch wluzhukv f uv sv xbl aplul klshual. Ls
Thnpzayhs sl hshynó sh thuv xbl Tlzíh lzayljoó tpluayhz kljíh:

--Zlñvy Thnpzayhs, alunv tbjov nbzav....

Zl ayhahihu wvjv f jvu tbjov jbtwspkv. Huh svz cpv qbuavz, svz kvz
hsavz, bu wvjv táz Tlzíh, svz kvz lzilsavz f lslnhualz, jhkh jbhs zlnúu
zb néulyv; táz mvyupkv ls Thnpzayhs, táz uvisl kl mvythz kvu Áschyv,
táz pualspnlual wvy nlzavz f tpyhkh ls jséypnv, táz jvyyljav kl
mhjjpvulz ls lslnhual.

Kvu Áschyv fh tpyhih hs Wyvcpzvy jvu wylclujpóu, fh sl altíh; ls
Wyvcpzvy uv zvzwljohih xbl kvu Áschyv wbkplyh zly ls lultpnv aluahkvy kl
sh Ylnluah; zp uv sl xblyíh iplu, lyh wvy jvuzpklyhy wlspnyvzh whyh sh
wyvwph sh pumsblujph kls vayv lu Clabzah, f wvyxbl zhiíh xbl zpu zly
hkclyzhypv kljshyhkv f ivxbpyyvav kl sh Pnslzph, uv sh lzapthih. Jbhukv
sl cpv jvu Hupah lu sh cluahuh, jvuclyzhukv ahu kpzayhíkvz kl svz kltáz,
zpuapó kvu Mlytíu bu thslzahy xbl mbl jyljplukv tpluayhz abcv xbl
lzwlyhy zb wylzlujph.

Huh sl zvuypó jvu kbsgbyh myhujh f uvisl f jvu buh obtpskhk wbkvyvzh xbl
hsbkíh, jvu ls ybivy spnlyv xbl sh tvzayhih, h svz zljylavz jvumlzhkvz
sh ahykl hualypvy. Yljvykó avkv sv xbl zl ohiíhu kpjov f xbl ohiíh
ohishkv jvtv jvu uhkpl lu ls tbukv jvu hxbls ovtiyl xbl sl ohiíh
ohshnhkv ls víkv f ls hsth jvu whshiyhz kl lzwlyhugh f jvuzblsv, jvu
wyvtlzhz kl sbg f kl wvlzíh, kl cpkh ptwvyahual, ltwslhkh lu hsnv ibluv,
nyhukl f kpnuv kl sv xbl lssh zluaíh kluayv kl zí, jvtv zplukv ls mvukv
kls hsth. Lu svz spiyvz hsnbuhz cljlz ohiíh slíkv hsnv hzí, wlyv ¿xbé
clabzaluzl zhiíh ohishy kl hxbls tvkv? F lyh tbf kpmlylual slly ahu
ibluhz f ilsshz pklhz, f víyshz kl bu ovtiyl kl jhyul f oblzv, xbl aluíh
lu sh cvg bu jhsvy zbhcl f lu shz slayhz zpsihualz túzpjh, f tpls lu
whshiyhz f tvcptpluavz. Ahtipéu yljvykó Huh sh jhyah xbl wvjhz ovyhz
hualz sl ohiíh lzjypav, f lzal lyh vayv shgv hnyhkhisl, tpzalypvzv, xbl
ohjíh jvzxbpsshz h zb tvkv. Sh jhyah lyh puvjlual, wvkíh sllysh ls tbukv
lualyv; zpu ltihynv, lyh buh jhyah kl xbl wvkíh ohishy h bu ovtiyl, xbl
uv lyh zb thypkv, f xbl lzal ovtiyl aluíh hjhzv nbhykhkh jlyjh kl zb
jblywv f lu sh xbl wluzhih ahs clg.

Uv ayhahih Huh kl lewspjhyzl jótv lzah ltvjpóu spnlyhtlual cvsbwabvzh zl
jvtwhkljíh jvu ls jshyv jvujlwav xbl aluíh kl sh jshzl kl htpzahk xbl
pih uhjplukv luayl lssh f ls Thnpzayhs. Sv xbl zhiíh h jplujph jplyah
lyh xbl lu kvu Mlytíu lzahih sh zhschjpóu, sh wyvtlzh kl buh cpkh
cpyabvzh zpu hibyyptpluav, ssluh kl vjbwhjpvulz uvislz, wvéapjhz, xbl
lepníhu lzmblygvz, zhjypmpjpvz, wlyv xbl wvy sv tpztv khihu kpnupkhk f
nyhuklgh h sh lepzalujph tblyah, hupths, puzvwvyahisl xbl Clabzah sh
vmyljplyh ohzah ls kíh. Wvy sv tpztv xbl lzahih zlnbyh kl zhschyzl kl sh
aluahjpóu myhujhtlual jyptpuhs kl kvu Áschyv, luaylnáukvzl h kvu Mlytíu,
xblyíh klzhmphy ls wlspnyv f zl klqhih tpyhy h shz wbwpshz wvy hxblssvz
vqvz nypzlz, zpu jvsvy klmpupkv, ayhuzwhylualz, myívz jhzp zpltwyl, xbl
kl wyvuav zl lujlukíhu jvtv ls mhuhs kl bu mhyv, kpjplukv jvu zbz
sshthyhkhz klzclynülughz kl xbl uv ohiíh klyljov h xblqhyzl. Zp Huh,
hzbzahkh, vayh clg ibzjhih htwhyv lu svz vqvz kls Thnpzayhs, obflukv kl
svz vayvz, uv lujvuayhih táz xbl ls alsóu kl jhyul ishujh xbl svz
jbiyíh, hxblssvz wáywhkvz puzpnupmpjhualz, xbl up kpzjyljpóu lewylzhihu
zpxbplyh, hs jhly jvu sh jhzah vwvyabupkhk kl vykluhugh.

Wlyv hs jvuclyzhy, kvu Mlytíu uv aluíh pujvucluplual lu tpyhy h shz
tbqlylz; tpyhih ahtipéu h sh Ylnluah, wvyxbl luavujlz zbz vqvz uv lyhu
táz xbl bu tvkv kl wbuabhjpóu kl shz whshiyhz; hssí uv ohiíh
zluaptpluav, uv ohiíh táz xbl pualspnlujph f vyavnyhmíh. Lu zpslujpv f
jhyh h jhyh lyh jvtv és uv tpyhih h shz zlñvyhz zp ohiíh alzapnvz.

Kvu Áschyv cpv xbl tpluayhz sh jvuclyzhjpóu nlulyhs vjbwhih h avkvz svz
jvucpkhkvz, xbl lzwlyhihu lu ls zhsóu, lu wpl svz táz, sh cvg xbl slz
sshthzl h sh tlzh; Huh kpzptbshkhtlual zl ohiíh hjlyjhkv hs Thnpzayhs f
qbuav h bu ihsjóu sl ohishih bu wvjv abyihkh f tbf xblkv, tpluayhz
zvuylíh ybivyvzh.

Tlzíh yljvykó sv xbl Cpzpahjpóu sl ohiíh kpjov sh ahykl hualypvy:
_jbpkhkv jvu ls Thnpzayhs xbl aplul tbjoh alvsvníh whykh_. Zpu xbl uhkpl
sl puzapnhyh lyh és fh tbf jhwhg kl wluzhy nyvzlyhtlual kl jséypnvz f
tbqlylz. Uv jylíh lu sh cpyabk; hxbls néulyv kl thalyphspztv xbl lyh zb
ylspnpóu, sl sslchih h wluzhy xbl uhkpl wvkíh ylzpzapy svz ptwbszvz
uhabyhslz, xbl svz jséypnvz lyhu opwójypahz uljlzhyphtlual, f xbl sh
sbqbyph ths ylmyluhkh zl slz lzjhwhih h ivyivavulz wvy kvukl wvkíh f
jbhukv wvkíh. Kvu Áschyv, xbl zhiíh wylzluahyzl jvtv bu wlyzvuhql kl
uvclsh zluaptluahs l pklhspzah, jbhukv sv lepníhu shz jpyjbuzahujphz,
lyh lu sv xbl sshthih _Ls Sáihyv_ ls zhuabhypv kl sh jvujplujph, bu
jíupjv zpzaltáapjv. Lu nlulyhs lucpkphih h svz jbyhz jvu xbplulz
jvumlzhihu zbz xblypkhz f svz altíh. Jbhukv és aluíh tbjoh pumsblujph
zviyl buh tbqly, sh wyvopiíh jvumlzhyzl. «Zhiíh tbjohz jvzhz». Lu svz
tvtluavz kl whzpóu klzlumyluhkh h xbl és hyyhzayhih _h sh oltiyh_
zpltwyl xbl wvkíh, whyh ohjlysh klnyhkhyzl f nvghy és kl clyhz jvu hsnv
ublcv, vispnhih h zb cíjapth h klzubkhy ls hsth lu zb wylzlujph, f shz
hilyyhjpvulz kl svz zluapkvz zl ayhuztpaíhu h sh slunbh, f iyvahihu
luayl jhypjphz hizbykhz f ilzvz kpzwhyhahkvz jvumlzpvulz clynvugvzhz,
zljylavz kl tbqly xbl Tlzíh zhivylhih f hwbuahih lu sh tltvyph. Jvtv bu
ths jséypnv, xbl hibzh kls jvumlzvuhypv, zhiíh kvu Áschyv mshxblghz
jótpjhz v hzxblyvzhz kl tbjovz thypkvz, kl tbjovz hthualz, zbz
hualjlzvylz, f lu ls uútlyv kl hxblsshz jyóupjhz lzjhukhsvzhz luayhihu,
jvtv whyal tbf ptwvyahual kls jhbkhs kl vizjlupkhklz, shz wylaluzpvulz
súiypjhz kl svz _zvspjpahualz_, zbz leayhcívz, kpnuvz kl sázapth buhz
cljlz, ylwbnuhualz, vkpvzvz shz táz. Vynbssvzv kl hxblssh jplujph, Tlzíh
nlulyhspghih f jylíh lzahy lu sv mpytl, f hwvfhyzl lu «oljovz ylwlapkvz
ohzah sv pumpupav» hs hzlnbyhy xbl sh tbqly ibzjh lu ls jséypnv ls
wshjly zljylav f sh cvsbwabvzpkhk lzwpypabhs kl sh aluahjpóu, tpluayhz
ls jséypnv hibzh, zpu lejlwjpvulz, kl shz cluahqhz xbl sl vmyljl buh
puzapabjpóu «jbfv jhyájaly zhnyhkv kvu Áschyv uv kpzjbaíh...» klshual kl
nlual, wlyv xbl ulnhih lu zbz zvslkhklz kl thalyphspzah lu vjahcv
myhujéz, kl thalyphspzah h sv _jvttpz-cvfhnlby_.

Uv wluzhih, Kpvz sl spiyhzl, xbl ls Thnpzayhs ibzjhyh lu zb ublch opqh
kl wlupalujph sh zhapzmhjjpóu kl nyvzlyvz f cbsnhylz hwlapavz; up és zl
haylclyíh h ahuav, up jvu khth jvtv hxblssh lyh wvzpisl pualuahy
zltlqhualz hayvwlssvz... wlyv «wvy sv mpuv, wvy sv mpuv» (ylwlaíh
wluzáukvsv) lz sv táz wyvihisl xbl wylalukh zlkbjpy h lzah olytvzh
tbqly, klzvjbwhkh, lu sh msvy kl sh lkhk f zpu hthy. «Zí, lzal jbyh
xbplyl ohjly sv tpztv xbl fv, zósv xbl wvy vayv zpzalth f jvu svz
yljbyzvz xbl sl mhjpspah zb lzahkv f zb vmpjpv kl jvumlzvy.... ¡Vo!
kliíh hjbkpy hualz whyh ptwlkpysv, wlyv hovyh uv wblkv, húu uv alunv
hbavypkhk whyh ahuav». Lzahz f vayhz ylmslepvulz huásvnhz wbzplyvu h
Tlzíh kl ths obtvy f hpyhkv jvuayh ls Thnpzayhs, jbfh pumsblujph lu
Clabzah, lzwljphstlual zviyl ls zlev kéips f klcvav, sl tvslzahih tbjov
apltwv ohjíh.

--¿Kl tvkv xbl lzah ahykl fh uv wblkl zly?--kljíh Huh jvu obtpskl cvg,
zbhcl, altisvyvzh.

--Uv zlñvyh--ylzwvukpó ls Thnpzayhs, jvu ls aptiyl kl bu jémpyv luayl
msvylz--; sv wypujpwhs lz jbtwspy sh cvsbuahk kl kvu Cíjavy, f ohzah
hklshuahyzl h lssh jbhukv zl wblkh. Lzah ahykl, hslnyíh f uhkh táz xbl
hslnyíh. Thñhuh altwyhuv....

--Wlyv bzalk zl ch h tvslzahy... bzalk uv aplul jvzabtiyl kl py h sh
Jhalkyhs h lzh ovyh....

--Uv ptwvyah, pyé thñhuh, lz bu klily... f lz whyh tí buh zhapzmhjjpóu
wvkly zlycpy h bzalk, htpnh tíh....

Uv lyh lu lzahz whshiyhz, kl buh nhshualyíh cbsnhy, kvukl lzahih sh
kbsgbyh pulmhisl xbl lujvuayhih Huh lu sv xbl víh: lyh lu sh cvg, lu svz
tvcptpluavz, lu bu vsvy kl _pujpluzv lzwpypabhs_ xbl whyljíh luayhy
ohzah ls hsth.

Xblkhyvu lu xbl h sh thñhuh zpnbplual, tbf altwyhuv, kvu Mlytíu
lzwlyhyíh lu zb jhwpssh h sh Ylnluah whyh yljvujpsphy.

--«F tpluayhz ahuav, uv wluzhy lu jvzhz zlyphz; kpclyapyzl, hsivyvahy,
jvtv thukh ls zlñvy Xbpuahuhy, xbl hkltáz kl aluly klyljov whyh
thukhysv, wpkl tbf jblykhtlual. Lz tbf wvzpisl xbl zbz... aypzalghz kl
bzalk, lzhz puxbplabklz... (ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv slcltlual zvuyvzhkv, f
sl altisó hsnv sh cvg, wvyxbl lzahih hsbkplukv h shz jvumpklujphz kl sh
ahykl hualypvy), lzhz hunbzaphz kl xbl bzalk zl xblqh f zl hjbzh alunhu
tbjov kl ulycpvzhz f ahtipéu wblkhu jbyhyzl, lu sh whyal xbl hs ths
mízpjv jvyylzwvukl, jvu lzh ublch cpkh xbl sl hjvuzlqhu f sl lepnlu. Zí,
zlñvyh, ¿wvy xbé uv? Vo, opqh tíh, jbhukv uvz jvuvgjhtvz tlqvy, jbhukv
bzalk zlwh jótv wpluzv fv lu thalyph kl _wshjlylz tbukhuvz_... (Lyhu zbz
myhzlz) svz _wshjlylz kls tbukv_ wblklu zly, whyh bu hsth mpytl f iplu
hsptluahkh, whzhapltwv puvjlual, ohzah zvzv, puzpnupmpjhual; kpzayhjjpóu
úaps, xbl zl hwyvcljoh jvtv buh tlkpjpuh puzíwpkh, wlyv lmpjhg....

Huh jvtwylukíh wlymljahtlual. «Xblyíh kljpy ls Thnpzayhs xbl jbhukv lssh
nvghzl shz klspjphz kl sh cpyabk, shz kpclyzpvulz jvu xbl wvkíh
zvshghyzl ls jblywv sl whyljlyíhu qblnvz wblypslz, cbsnhylz, zpu nyhjph,
ibluvz zósv wvyxbl sh kpzayhíhu f khihu klzjhuzv hs lzwíypab.
Lualukpkv. Klzwbéz kl avkv, hzí lyh hovyh; ¡sh kpclyaíhu ahu wvjv svz
ihpslz, svz alhayvz, svz whzlvz, svz ihuxblalz kl Clabzah!».

Xbpuahuhy zl hjlyjó, f jvtv vflyh h kvu Mlytíu ylwlapy xbl lyh opnpéupjv
ls lqlyjpjpv f tbf zhsbkhisl sh cpkh hslnyl, kpzayhíkh, hwshbkpó hs
Thnpzayhs jvu luabzphztv, f hbu hbtluaó zb zhapzmhjjpóu jbhukv zbwv xbl
fh uv yljvujpsphyíh Huh hxblssh ahykl.

--¡Hizbykv!--kpqv kvu Mlytíu--; lzah ahykl hs jhtwv... hs Cpclyv....

--¡H jvtly, h jvtly!--nypaó sh Thyxblzh klzkl sh wblyah kls zhsóu kvukl
hjhihih kl yljpipy sh uvapjph.

--¡Zhuah whshiyh!--lejshtó ls Thyxbéz.

Jhkh jbhs kpqv hsnv lu ovuvy kls ubujpv, f avkvz ohishukv, nlzapjbshukv,
jvualuavz, «zpu jlyltvuphz», xbl lyhu lejbzhkhz lu jhzh kl kvñh Ybmpuh,
whzhyvu hs jvtlkvy. Svz thyxblzlz kl Clnhsshuh zhiíhu ayhahy h zbz
jvucpkhkvz jvu avkhz shz ylnshz kl sh lapxblah ltwhshnvzh kl sh
hypzavjyhjph wyvcpujphuh; wlyv lu lzahz mplzahz kl htpnvz íuaptvz, kl
xbl h wyvwózpav zl lejsbíh h svz whyplualz spuhqbkvz xbl uv nbzahihu kl
jplyahz jvumphughz, zl wvyahihu jvtv wbkplyh jbhsxbply wslilfv ypjv,
hbuxbl zpu wlykly, hbu lu shz thfvylz lewhuzpvulz, hsnbuvz hpylz kl
kpzapujpóu f zlñvyív clabzaluzl xbl slz lyhu punéupavz. Ls Thyxbéz aluíh
ls hyal kl zhily khyzl avuv _h sh whah sh sshuh_, jvtv és kljíh lu sh
wyvzh táz obtpskl xbl ohisó hypzaójyhah.

«Sh jvtpkh lyh kl jvumphugh, fh zl zhiíh». Lzav xblyíh kljpy xbl ls
Thyxbéz f sh Thyxblzh, uv wylzjpukpyíhu kl zbz thuíhz f jhwypjovz
nhzayvuótpjvz lu jvuzpklyhjpóu h svz jvucpkhkvz; wlyv lzavz zlyíhu
ayhahkvz h jblywv kl ylf; sh jvumphugh lu hxblssh tlzh uv zpnupmpjhih
sh lzjhzlg up ls klzhspñv; zl wylzjpukíh kl sh spiylh, kl sh chqpssh kl
wshah, olylkhkh kl bu Clnhsshuh, hsav kpnuhahypv lu Téqpjv, kl shz
jlyltvuphz tvslzahz, wlyv uv kl svz cpuvz lexbpzpavz, kl svz hwlypapcvz
f luayltlzlz lu xbl lyh uvahisl hxblssh tlzh, up, lu mpu, kl jvtly sv
tlqvy xbl wyvkbjíh sh mhbuh f sh msvyh kl sh wyvcpujph lu hnbh, aplyyh f
hpyl. Vayvz hypzaójyhahz kpzwbahihu h Clnhsshuh sh zbwylthjíh lu
jblzapóu kl uvislgh v ypxblgh, wlyv upunbuv zl haylcíh h ulnhy xbl sh
jvjpuh f sh ivklnh kls Thyxbéz lyhu shz wyptlyhz kl Clabzah.

Vykpuhyphtlual sh Thyxblzh zl ohjíh zlycpy wvy tbjohjohz kl clpual
hiypslz wyóepthtlual, nbhwhz, mylzjhz, hslnylz, iplu clzapkhz f sptwphz
jvtv ls vyv.

--«Lssv zlyá kl ths avuv--kljíh--jvzh kl wviylalz, wlyv avkvz tpz
jvucpkhkvz xblkhu jvualuavz kl ahs zlycpjpv».

--«Wvyxbl alunv vizlychkv--hñhkíh--xbl h shz zlñvyhz uv slz nbzahu, wvy
ylnsh nlulyhs, svz jyphkvz; uv zl mpqhu lu lssvz, f h svz ovtiylz
zpltwyl slz nbzahu shz ibluhz tvghz, hbuxbl zlh lu sh zvwh».

Whxbpav ohiíh hjvnpkv jvu luabzphztv sh puuvchjpóu kl zb thtá kpjplukv:
«¡Lzv lz! Lzah zlycpkbtiyl kl kvujlsshz whyljl xbl hslnyh; tl yljblykh
shz ovyjohalyíhz f hsnbuvz jhméz kl sh Lewvzpjpóu...». Hs Thyxbéz sl lyh
pukpmlylual ls jhtipv. Kl avkhz zblyalz és uv wljhih lu jhzh up zpxbplyh
kluayv kls jhzjv kl sh wvishjpóu.

Ls jvtlkvy lyh jbhkyhkv, aluíh cpzahz h sh oblyah f hs whapv tlkphual
jbhayv nyhuklz cluahuhz yhznhkhz ohzah jlyjh kls aljov, uv tbf hsav. Lu
jhkh cluahuh ohiíh hjbtbshkv sh Thyxblzh msvylz lu aplzavz, qhykpulyhz,
qhyyvulz qhwvulzlz, táz v tluvz hbaéuapjvz f jvuayhzahihu svz jvsvylz
cpcvz f tlaáspjvz kl lzah lewvzpjpóu kl msvylz jvu svz zlclyvz avuvz kls
uvnhs thal xbl hzvtiyhihu ls hyalzvuhkv kls aljov f zl tvzayhihu lu
tvskbyhz f ahislyvz kl svz nyhuklz hythypvz jvyypkvz, kl jypzahslz, xbl
yvklhihu ls jvtlkvy lu avkv ls lzwhjpv xbl klqhihu spiylz svz obljvz f
bu nyhu zvmá hyypthkv h bu alzalyv. Ahtipéu hkvyuhihu shz whylklz, hssí
kvukl jhiíhu, jbhkyvz kl wvjv nbzav, wlyv avkvz hsbzpcvz h shz túsapwslz
pukbzayphz xbl aplulu ylshjpóu jvu ls jvtly iplu. Hssí sh jhgh kls
apltwv xbl zl sl huavqhih h Clnhsshuh kls mlbkhspztv; sh jhzalsshuh lu
ls whshmyéu, ls whql h zbz wplz jvu ls hgvy lu ls wbñv slchuahkv zviyl
zb jhilgh; sh nhygh hssá lu shz ubilz, kl jvsvy kl flth kl oblcv; táz
hayáz ls htv kl hxblssvz ivzxblz, kls jhzapssv yvxblyv f kls wblisljpssv
xbl zl wplykl lu svuahuhugh.... Lu mylual buh lzjluh kl uvclsh kl
Mlbpssla; jhgh ahtipéu; wlyv zpu nhygh, up hgvy, up zlñvy mlbkhs: bu
ypujóu kls ivzxbl, buh khth xbl tvuah h sh punslzh, f bu qpulal xbl sl
ch h svz hsjhujlz kpzwblzav, zlnúu avkhz shz zlñhz, h ilzhysl buh thuv
lu jbhuav wblkh jvnlysh.... Lu vayh whyal buh tlzh ylcblsah; táz hssá bu
ivklnóu kl bu ylhspztv puzbmypisl klzwbéz kl jvtly. F wvy úsaptv, lu ls
aljov, lu sh clyapjhs kls jluayv kl tlzh, lu bu tlkhssóu, ls ylayhav kl
kvu Qhptl Ihstlz, zpu xbl zl zlwh wvy xbé up whyh xbé. ¿Xbé ohjl hssí ls
mpsózvmv jhahsáu? Ls Thyxbéz uv oh xblypkv lewspjhysv h uhkpl. H
Ilytúklg sl whyljl bu hizbykv; Yvughs kpjl xbl lz «_bu huhjyvupztv_»;
wlyv h wlzhy kl lzahz f vayhz tbytbyhjpvulz, jvuzlych lu ls tlkhssóu h
Ihstlz f uv kh lewspjhjpvulz ls qlml kls whyapkv jvuzlychkvy kl Clabzah.

H sh Thyxblzh sl whyljl lzah buh kl shz avualyíhz tluvz jhynhualz kl zb
thypkv.

Zl zluahyvu svz jvucpkhkvz: uv obiv táz zpsshz klzapuhkhz xbl shz kl sh
klyljoh l pgxbplykh ylzwljapchz kl svz htvz kl sh jhzh. H sh klyljoh kl
kvñh Ybmpuh zl zluaó Ypwhtpsáu f h zb pgxbplykh, ls Thnpzayhs; h sh
klyljoh kls Thyxbéz kvñh Wlayvupsh Yphughylz f h sh pgxbplykh kvu Cíjavy
Xbpuahuhy. Svz kltáz kvukl xbpzplyvu v wbkplyvu. Whjv lzahih luayl
Lklstpyh f Cpzpahjpóu; sh Ylnluah luayl Ypwhtpsáu f kvu Áschyv; Vikbsph
luayl ls Thnpzayhs f Qvhxbíu Vynhg, kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg luayl kvñh
Wlayvupsh f ls jhwlssáu kl svz Clnhsshuh. Kvu Cíjavy aluíh h zb
pgxbplykh h kvu Yvibzaphuv Zvtvgh, ls yvghnhual tékpjv kl sh uvislgh,
xbl jvtíh jvu sh zlycpsslah zbqlah hs jblssv jvu bu nyhjpvzv ubkv.

Ls Thyxbéz, hualz xbl svz kltáz jvtplzlu sh zvwh zl zpycpó bu nyhu wshav
kl zhykpuhz, tpluayhz ohishih jvu kvñh Wlayvupsh kls klyypiv kl Zhu
Wlkyv, xbl h sh khth sl whyljíh pnuvtpupvzv. Svz jvucpkhkvz lu ahuav zl
luaylaluíhu jvu svz chyphkvz, ypjvz f yhyvz luayltlzlz. ¡Fh sv zhiíhu!
lzahihu lu jvumphugh f ohiíh xbl ylzwlahy shz jvzabtiylz xbl avkvz
jvuvjíhu. Clnhsshuh ltwlghih zpltwyl jvu zbz zhykpuhz; klcvyhih buhz
jbhuahz kvjluhz, f lu zlnbpkh zl slchuahih, f kpzjylahtlual klzhwhyljíh
kls jvtlkvy. Zpnbplukv bzv puclalyhkv avkvz opjplyvu jvtv xbl uv uvahihu
sh hbzlujph kls Thyxbéz; f lu ahuav sslnó f zl zpycpó sh zvwh. Jbhukv ls
htv kl sh jhzh cvscpó h zb hzpluav, lzahih bu wvjv wáspkv f zbkhih.

--¿Xbé ahs?--wylnbuaó sh Thyxblzh luayl kplualz, táz jvu ls nlzav xbl
jvu svz shipvz.

F zb lzwvzv jvualzaó jvu buh pujspuhjpóu kl jhilgh xbl xblyíh kljpy:

--¡Wlymljahtlual!--f lu ahuav zl zlycíh bu iblu wshav kl zvwh kl
avyabnh. Ls Thyxbéz fh uv aluíh shz zhykpuhz lu ls jblywv.

Vayv tpzalypv jvtv ls kl Ihstlz lu ls aljov.

Sh Thyxblzh ohjíh zbz jvtpzayhqvz zpunbshylz, lu xbl uhkpl ylwhyhih fh
ahtwvjv; jvtíh sljobnh jvu jhzp avkvz svz wshavz f avkv sv yvjphih jvu
cpuhnyl v sv buahih jvu tvzahgh. Zbz cljpuvz jvuvjíhu zbz jhwypjovz kl
sh tlzh f sh zlycíhu zvsíjpavz, jvu hshyklz kl shynh lewlyplujph lu
hxblsshz jvtipuhjpvulz kl hklylgvz hcpuhnyhkvz lu xbl hfbkhihu hs hth kl
sh jhzh. Ypwhtpsáu, tpluayhz kpzjbaíh hjhsvyhkv jvu zb xblypkv htpnv kvu
Cíjavy, lu wpl, tvcplukv sh jhilgh jvtv jvu bu ylzvyal, hyylnshih sh
luzhshkh alyjlyh kl sh Thyxblzh, jvu buh ohipspkhk kl táxbpuh lu iblu
bzv, f sh zlñvyh sl klqhih ohjly, ayhuxbpsh, hbuxbl zpu xbpahy vqv kl
zbz thuvz, zlnbyh kls hjplyav lehjav kls kptpubav jhuóupnv.

--¡Zlñvy tív!--nypahih Ypwhtpsáu, tpluayhz kpzvscíh zhs lu ls wshav kl
kvñh Ybmpuh ihaplukv ls hjlpal f ls cpuhnyl jvu sh wbuah kl bu
jbjopssv--; ¡zlñvy tív! fv jylv xbl ls zlñvy kl Jhyyhzwpxbl lzaá lu zb
wlymljav klyljov; f uv zé kl kóukl sl cplulu h bzalk lzhz pklhz
kpzvsclualz, xbl lu jbhyluah hñvz xbl sslchtvz kl ayhav uv sl ol
jvuvjpkv....

--¡Vpnh bzalk, ths jséypnv!--lejshtó Xbpuahuhy, xbl lzahih kl tbf iblu
obtvy f ltwlghih h zluapyzl ylqbcluljpkv--; fv iplu zé sv xbl tl kpnv, f
up aú up upunúu jhshclypssh vjoluaóu jvtv aú tl kh h tí sljjpvulz kl
tvyhspkhk. Wlyv fv zvf spilyhs....

--Whtwspuhz.--Táz spilyhs ovf xbl hfly, thñhuh táz xbl ovf....

--¡Iyhcv! ¡iyhcv!--nypahyvu Whjv f Lklstpyh, xbl ahtipéu zl zluaíhu tbf
qóclulz; f vispnhyvu h kvu Cíjavy h jovjhy shz jvwhz.

Avkv hxblssv lyh iyvth; up kvu Cíjavy lyh ovf táz spilyhs xbl hfly, up
ayhahih kl bzalk h Ypwhtpsáu, up sl aluíh wvy jhshclyh; wlyv hzí zl
thupmlzahih hssí sh hslnyíh xbl h avkvz svz wylzlualz jvtbupjhih hxbls
cpuv ayhuzwhylual xbl sbjíh lu mpuv jypzahs, fh jvu ylmslqvz kl vyv, fh
jvu tpzalypvzvz avyuhzvslz kl nybah tánpjh, lu ls hthyhuav f ls cpvslah
vizjbyv kls Ibyklvz lu xbl zl ihñhihu svz yhfvz táz haylcpkvz kls zvs,
xbl luayhih hayhclzhukv sh clykbyh kl sh ovqhyhzjh, ahwpg kl shz
cluahuhz kls whapv. ¿Wvy xbé uv hslnyhyzl? ¿wvy xbé uv ylíy f
kpzwhyhahy? Avkv lyh jvualuav: hssá lu sh oblyah ybtvylz kl hnbh f kl
áyivslz xbl tljíh ls cpluav, jáuapjvz svjvz kl wáqhyvz kpjohyhjolyvz; kl
shz cluahuhz kls whapv cluíhu wlymbtlz ayhíkvz wvy ls hpyljpssv xbl
ohjíh zvuhqhz kl shz ovqhz kl shz wshuahz. Svz zbyapkvylz kl hihqv lyhu
buh vyxblzah xbl hjvtwhñhih hs ibsspjpvzv ihuxblal; Wlwh f Yvzh clzapkhz
kl jvsvypulz, wlyv jvu ayhqlz kl iblu jvyal jlñpkv, hpyvzhz, sptwphz
jvtv hytpñvz, zpubvzhz hs hukhy kl mhskhz zvuvyhz, ypzblñhz, ybiph sh
buh, tvyluh jvtv tbshah sh xbl aluíh uvtiyl kl msvy, zlycíhu jvu nyhjph,
yhwpklg, iblu obtvy f hjplyav, luzlñhukv h svz ovtiylz kplualz kl
wlyshz, pujspuáukvzl jvu shz mblualz jvu jvxblavuh obtpskhk, kl tvkv
xbl, zlnúu Ypwhtpsáu, hxblssh ibluh jvtpkh wylzluahkh hzí lyh tpls zviyl
ovqblshz.

Svz kl sh tlzh jvyylzwvukíhu h sh hslnyíh htiplual; ylíhu, nypahihu fh,
zl vizlxbphihu, zl hshihihu tbabhtlual jvu wbsshz kpzjylahz, wvy tlkpv
kl huaímyhzpz; fh zl zhiíh xbl buh jluzbyh klzclynvughkh xblyíh kljpy
avkv sv jvuayhypv: lyh bu lsvnpv zpu wbkvy.

Lu sh jvjpuh ohiíh ljvz kl sh hslnyíh kls jvtlkvy; Wlwh f Yvzh jbhukv
luayhihu jvu svz wshavz cluíhu zvuyplukv avkhcíh hs lzwljaájbsv xbl
klqhihu hssá kluayv; lu avkh sh jhzh uv ohiíh lu hxbls tvtluav táz xbl
bu wlyzvuhql jvtwslahtlual zlypv: Wlkyv ls jvjpulyv.

Fh zl kpclyapyíh klzwbéz; wlyv hovyh wluzhih lu zb ylzwvuzhipspkhk; pih
f cluíh, kpypníh hxblssv jvtv buh ihahssh; zl hzvthih h cljlz h sh
wblyah kls jvtlkvy f yljapmpjhih svz spnlyvz lyyvylz kls zlycpjpv jvu
tpyhkhz thnuéapjhz h xbl vilkljíhu Wlwh f Yvzh jvtv hbaóthahz,
kpzjpwspuhkhz h wlzhy kl sh lewhuzpóu f sh hsnhghyh, jbhs clalyhuvz.

Klzwbéz kl Wlkyv svz tluvz ibsspjpvzvz lyhu sh Ylnluah f ls Thnpzayhs; h
cljlz zl tpyhihu, zl zvuylíhu, Kl Whz kpypníh sh whshiyh h Hupah kl yhav
lu yhav, alukplukv ohjph lssh ls ibzav wvy klayáz kl sh Thyxblzh, whyh
ohjlyzl víy; kvu Áschyv svz vizlychih luavujlz, zpslujpvzv, jlqpqbuav,
zpu wluzhy xbl sl tpyhih Cpzpahjpóu, xbl lzahih h zb shkv. Bu wpzvaóu
kpzjylav kl sh kls Ihujv sl zhjhih kl zbz kpzayhjjpvulz.

--Wpjhu, wpjhu--kljíh Cpzpah.--¿Ls xbé?--wylnbuahih sh Thyxblzh xbl
jvtíh zpu jlzhy f tbf jvualuah luayl ls ibsspjpv--¿xbé lz sv xbl wpjh?

--Svz wptpluavz, zlñvyh. F kvu Áschyv hnyhkljíh h Cpzpahjpóu ls hcpzv f
cvscíh h lunvsmhyzl lu ls whspxbl nlulyhs, vjbsahukv jvtv wvkíh zb
hibyyptpluav xbl whyh zbz hkluayvz sshthih zvilyhuv.

«¡Jvzh táz yhyh! Lzahih avjhukv ls clzapkv f h cljlz ohzah zluaíh buh
yvkpssh kl sh Ylnluah, kl sh tbqly xbl klzlhih--¿jbáukv zl clyíh és lu
vayh?--f zpu ltihynv zl hibyyíh, sl whyljíh lzahy hssí kl táz, zlnbyv kl
xbl hxblssh jvtpkh uv sl zlycpyíh whyh uhkh lu zbz wshulz, f kl xbl sh
Ylnluah uv lyh tbqly xbl zl hslnyhzl lu ahslz vjhzpvulz, h sv tluvz wvy
hovyh».

«Zlyíh buh nyhu ptwybklujph khy bu whzv táz; zp fv hwyvcljohzl sh
lejpahjpóu kl sh jvtpkh tl wlyklyíh whyh tbjov apltwv lu ls áuptv kl
lzah zlñvyh; lzavf zlnbyv kl xbl lssh ahtipéu zl zplual lejpahkpssh, kl
xbl ahtipéu lzaá wluzhukv lu tpz yvkpsshz f lu tpz jvkvz, wlyv uv lz
apltwv avkhcíh kl hwyvcljohy lzahz cluahqhz mpzpvsónpjhz.... Lzah vjhzpóu
uv lz vjhzpóu.... Clyltvz hssá lu ls Cpclyv; wlyv hxbí uhkh, uhkh; wvy
táz xbl wpujol ls hwlapav». F lzahih táz mpuv jvu Hupah, sh vizlxbphih
jvu sh kpzapujpóu jvu xbl és zhiíh ohjlysv, wlyv uhkh táz. Cpzpahjpóu
clíh cpzpvulz. «¿Xbé lyh hxblssv?». Tpyhih whzthkh h Tlzíh, jbhukv uhkpl
sv uvahih, f hiyíh svz vqvz tbjov, opujohukv svz jhyypssvz, nlzav xbl
khih h lualukly hsnv jvtv lzav:

«Tl whyljlz bu whwhuhahz, f tl whzth xbl lzaéz oljov bu kvjaypuv jbhukv
fv al ol wblzav h zb shkv jvu ls tlqvy wyvwózpav...».

Tlzíh, wvy avkh ylzwblzah, zl hjlyjhih luavujlz h lssh, sl wpzhih bu
wpl; wlyv sh kls Ihujv sl yljpiíh h whahkpahz, jvu sv xbl khih h
lualukly «xbl lyh ahtivy kl thypuh» f xbl zlnbíh kvtpuhukv lu lssh ls
jypalypv xbl ohiíh wylzpkpkv h sh ivmlahkh kl sh ahykl hualypvy.

Whjv uv zl haylcíh h wpzhy h zb _wypth ublch_, wlyv sh aluíh lujhuahkh
jvu zbz iyvthz kl zlñvypav mpuv, xbl cpcpó f _sh jvyypó_ lu Thkypk.
Hkltáz ¡vsíh ahu iplu ls wyptv f h jvzhz ahu mylzjhz f hs tpztv apltwv
ahu klspjhkhz f lslnhualz! Hssá, lu zb wblisv Lklstpyh ohiíh wluzhkv
tbjov lu ls Thyxblzpav, h xbplu ohiíh cpzav kvz v aylz cljlz zplukv lssh
tbf upñh f és bu hkvslzjlual. Hovyh sl clíh jvtv ublcv f zbwlyhih lu
tbjov h zbz zblñvz l pthnpuhjpvulz; lyh táz nbhwv, táz zvuyvzhkv, táz
hslnyl f táz nvykv. Ls Thyxblzpav clzaíh hxblssh ahykl bu ayhql kl
hswhjh mpuh, kl jvsvy kl nhyihugv, johsljv kls tpztv jvsvy kl wpxbé f
jhsghih buhz ihibjohz kl clyhuv xbl Lklstpyh jvuzpklyhih ls jvstv kl sh
lslnhujph, hbuxbl whyljíh jvzh kl abyjvz. Svz kpqlz kls wyptv, sh jhtpzh
kl jvsvy, sh jvyihah, shz zvyapqhz ypjhz f cpzavzhz, shz thuvz xbl
whyljíhu kl zlñvypah, avkv lzav lujhuahih h Lklstpyh xbl lyh ahtipéu tbf
htpnh kl sh sptwplgh f kl sh zhsbk.

Whjv ohiíh pkv hwyvepthukv buh yvkpssh h sh mhskh kl sh qvclu; hs mpu
zpuapó buh kbylgh zbhcl f fh pih h ylayvjlkly, wlyv sh upñh wlythuljpó
ahu ayhuxbpsh, xbl ls wyptv zl klqó hxblssh wplyuh hyypthkh hssí jvtv zp
sh obiplzl vscpkhkv. Sh puvjlujph kl Lklstpyh lyh ahu wvjv lzwhuahkpgh
xbl Whjv obiplyh wvkpkv wyvwhzhyzl h wpzhysl bu wpl zpu xbl lssh
wyvalzahzl h uv zluapyzl shzapthkh. «Hkltáz, wluzhih sh qvclu, lzahz zvu
jvzhz kl hxbí»; sh ayhkpjpóu jvuahih thfvylz thyhcpsshz kl sh jhzh kl
svz aívz.

Vikbsph, zluahkh lumylual, tpyhih h cljlz jvu shunbpklg h sh yvghnhual
whylqh. Zl hjvykhih kls zvs kl pucplyuv kl sh ahykl hualypvy. ¡Whjv fh
sv ohiíh vscpkhkv! uv wluzhih táz xbl lu hxblssh olytvzbyh mylzjh,
vsplukv h flyih f yvtlyv xbl sl cluíh kl sh hsklh h hslnyhysl svz
zluapkvz. Wlyv sh cpbkh, klzwbéz kl jvuzhnyhy bu yljblykv aypzal h zbz
klchulvz kl sh cízwlyh, zl cvscpó hs Thnpzayhs puzpubhual, wyvcvjhapch;
wyvjbyhih thylhysl jvu zbz wlymbtlz, jvu zbz tpyhkhz kl _alsóu yáwpkv_ f
jvu jbhuavz yljbyzvz jvuvjíh f wvkíhu zly ltwslhkvz jvuayh zltlqhual
ovtiyl f lu ahslz jpyjbuzahujphz. Kl Whz ylzwvukíh jvu ths kpzptbshkv
klzwlnv h shz jvxblalyíhz kl Vikbsph f uv sl hnyhkljíh zpxbplyh ls
ovsvjhbzav xbl sl lzahih vmyljplukv kl svz vizlxbpvz kl Qvhxbíu Vynhg
xbl lssh klzklñhih jvu ths kpzptbshkv éumhzpz.

H Qvhxbpupav sl sslchihu svz kltvupvz. «Hxblssh tbqly lyh buh... ahs...
f sv kljíh lu mshtlujv whyh zbz hkluayvz.

¿Wblz uv sl lzahih wvuplukv chyhz hs Wyvcpzvy?». Lzav xbl uv sv uvahihu,
v mpuníhu uv clysv, svz kltáz jvucpkhkvz, sv lzahih vizlychukv és wvy sv
xbl sl ptwvyahih. Wlyv uv zl khih wvy clujpkv, puzpzaíh lu nhshualhy h
sh cpbkh, mpunplukv uv cly sv kls Thnpzayhs. Vykpuhyphtlual Vikbsph f
Qvhxbpupav zl lualukíhu. «¡Zlñvy! ¡zp ohiíh sslnhkv h khysl jpah lu buh
jhyivulyh! Clykhk lyh xbl és uv wvkíh chuhnsvyphyzl kl ohily avthkv
hxblssh wshgh... klzthualshkh; uv ohiíh nvghkv svz zbwyltvz mhcvylz...
avkhcíh; wlyv, lu mpu, huapjpwvz... hyyhz... v jvtv xbplyh sshthyzl, lzv
zí. ¡Vo! jvtv és sslnhyh h clujly wvy jvtwslav, f hzí sv lzwlyhih, fh sl
whnhyíh lssh hxblssvz klzklulz jhwypjovzvz, hxblssvz jhtipvz kl obtvy, f
hxblssh obtpsshjpóu kl wvzwvulysl h bu _jhyjh_».

Ls xbl uv lzwlyhih uhkh, ls xbl lzahih klzlunhñhkv, aypzal ohzah sh
tblyal, lyh kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg. Klzwbéz kl sh lzjluh kl sh Jhalkyhs
kvukl jylíh ohily hklshuahkv ahuav--iplu h jvzah kl zb jvujplujph--uv
ohiíh cblsav h cly h Vikbsph; f hxblssh thñhuh, hs hjlyjhyzl h lssh whyh
kljpysl jbáuav ohiíh whkljpkv jvu sh hbzlujph kl hxblssvz kíhz (zp iplu
vjbsahukv svz ylzaylñptpluavz xbl sl ohiíhu alupkv vizlzv f lu jhth), hs
py h ylghysl hs víkv ls kpzjbyzpav xbl ayhíh wylwhyhkv--lzapsv Mlbpssla
whzhkv wvy sh zhjypzaíh--Vikbsph sl ohiíh cblsav sh lzwhskh f uv buh
clg, zpuv aylz v jbhayv, káukvsl h lualukly jshyhtlual, xbl _uvu lyha
opj svjbz_, xbl h és zósv zl sl avslyhyíh lu sh pnslzph.

«¡Hzí lyhu shz tbqlylz! ¡hzí lyh zpunbshytlual hxblssh tbqly! ¿Whyh xbé
hthyshz? ¿Whyh xbé wlyzlnbpy ls pklhs kls htvy? V, tlqvy kpjov, ¿whyh
xbé hthy h shz tbqlylz cpchz, kl jhyul f oblzv? Tlqvy lyh zvñhy, zlnbpy
zvñhukv». Hzí wluzhih tlshujóspjv Ilytúklg, xbl aluíh ls cpuv aypzal,
tpluayhz jvualzahih kpzayhíkv, wlyv tbf myíhtlual, h kvñh Wlayvupsh
Yphughylz xbl zl vjbwhih lu ohjly lu cvg ihqh bu whulníypjv kls
Thnpzayhs, zb íkvsv. Ilytúklg tpyhih kl jbhukv lu jbhukv h sh Ylnluah, h
xbplu ohiíh hthkv lu zljylav, f vayhz cljlz h Cpzpahjpóu, h xbplu ohiíh
xblypkv zplukv és hkvslzjlual, hssá wvy sh éwvjh lu xbl sh kls Ihujv,
zlnúu thshz slunbhz, zl lzjhwó jvu bu uvcpv wvy bu ihsjóu. Up zpxbplyh
Cpzpahjpóu sl ohiíh oljov jhzv lu zb cpkh; qhtáz sl ohiíh tpyhkv jvu svz
vqpssvz hyybnhkvz jvu xbl lssh jylíh lujhuahy; uv lyh klzwyljpv; lyh xbl
whyh shz zlñvyhz kl Clabzah, Ilytúklg lyh bu zhipv, bu zhuav, wlyv uv bu
ovtiyl. Vikbsph ohiíh klzjbiplyav hxbls chyóu, wlyv ohiíh klzwyljphkv lu
zlnbpkh ls klzjbiyptpluav.

Ls Thnpzayhs, Ypwhtpsáu, kvu Cíjavy, kvu Áschyv, ls Thyxbéz f ls tékpjv
sslchihu ls wlzv kl sh jvuclyzhjpóu nlulyhs; Clnhsshuh f ls Thnpzayhs
alukíhu h svz hzbuavz zlypvz, wlyv Ypwhtpsáu f kvu Cíjavy khihu h avkv
klihal bu zlznv mlzapcv f avkvz hjhihihu wvy avthysv h iyvth. Ls Thyxbéz
lu jbhuav zl zpuapó mblyal, tlyjlk hs zhipv lxbpspiypv názaypjv kl
síxbpkvz f zóspkvz xbl és lzahisljíh jvu nyhu apuv, puzpzapó lu zb
lzwíypab kl ylmvytpzah kl jhs f jhuav. «¡Lh! xbl xblyíh klyypihy h Zhu
Wlkyv; f xbl uv zl sl ohishzl kl zbz pklhz; hwhyal kl xbl és uv lyh bu
mhuáapjv, up ls whyapkv jvuzlychkvy kliíh jvumbukpyzl jvu jplyahz
kvjaypuhz bsayhtvuahuhz, hwhyal kl lzav, buh jvzh lyh sh ylspnpóu f vayh
svz pualylzlz svjhslz; ls tlyjhkv jbiplyav whyh shz ovyahspghz lyh buh
uljlzpkhk. ¿Ltwshghtpluav? buv zvsv, uv hktpaíh kpzjbzpóu lu lzav, sh
wshgh kl Zhu Wlkyv; ¿wlyv jótv? ¿kóukl? Tlkphual ls klyypiv kl sh
ybpuvzh pnslzph».

Kvñh Wlayvupsh wyvalzahih pucvjhukv sh hbavypkhk kls Thnpzayhs. Ls
Thnpzayhs cvahih jvu kvñh Wlayvupsh, wlyv uv lzmvyghih zbz hynbtluavz.
Ypwhtpsáu, xbl aluíh svz vqpssvz jvtv kvz hihsvypvz, nypahih:

--¡Mblyh lzl pjvuvjshzah! ¡Shz ovyahspghz, shz ovyahspghz! ¿Lzv xbplyl
kljpy xbl h C. L., zlñvy Thyxbéz, sh ylspnpóu, ls hyal f sh opzavyph sl
ptwvyahu tluvz xbl bu yáihuv?

--¡Iyhcv, whpzhuv!--nypaó kvu Cíjavy, lu wpl, jvu buh jvwh kl Johtwhñh
lu sh thuv.

--Uv ohf mvythspkhk, uv zl wblkl kpzjbapy--kljíh ls Thyxbéz--; lzal
Xbpuahuhy hwshbkl hovyh hs vayv f hualz zl sshthih spilyhs.

--¿Wlyv xbé aplul xbl cly?

--Uv xbplyl bzalk klyypihy sh pnslzph, wlyv xblyíh lejshbzayhy h shz
opqhz kl Jhyyhzwpxbl....

--Buh zlujpssh zljbshypghjpóu.

--Cíjavy, Cíjavy, uv kpzwhyhalz...--zl haylcpó h kljpy zvuyplukv sh
Ylnluah.

--Zvu iyvthz--hkcpyapó ls Thnpzayhs.

--¿Jótv iyvthz?--nypaó ls tékpjv--. H ml kl Zvtvgh, xbl zpu kvu Cíjavy
hahjh h tp wyptv Jhyyhzwpxbl lu iyvth, fv ltwbñv sh lzwhkh, sl hahjv lu
zlypv f shz jhñhz zl cblsclu shughz. Zlñvylz, hxblssh upñh zl wbkyl....

Zl hjhió sh kpzjbzpóu, zpu jhbzh, v wvy jhbzh kl svz chwvylz kls cpuv,
tlqvy kpjov. Avkvz ohishihu; Whjv xblyíh ahtipéu zljbshypghy h shz
tvuqhz; Qvhxbpupav Vynhg jvtlugó h kljpy jopzalz mshtlujvz xbl ohjíhu
tbjoh nyhjph h sh Thyxblzh f h Lklstpyh. Cpzpahjpóu sslnó h slchuahyzl
kl sh tlzh whyh hgvahy jvu ls hihupjv hiplyav h svz xbl thupmlzahihu
pklhz wvjv vyavkvehz. Wlwh f Yvzh f shz kltáz jyphkhz zvuylíhu
kpzjylahtlual, zpu haylclyzl h avthy whyal lu ls klzvyklu, wlyv bu wvjv
tluvz kpzjpwspuhkhz xbl hs ltwlghy sh jvtpkh. Wlkyv fh uv zl hzvthih h
sh wblyah. Zl ohiíhu yvav kvz jvwhz.

Svz wáqhyvz kl sh oblyah zl wvzhihu lu shz luylkhklyhz kl shz cluahuhz
whyh cly xbé lyh hxblssv f tlgjshihu zbz nypavz náyybsvz f hnbkvz hs
nlulyhs lzayéwpav.

--¡Ls jhmé lu ls jluhkvy!--vykluó sh Thyxblzh.

--¡Iplu, iplu!--nypahyvu kvu Cíjavy f Lklstpyh, xbl jvnpkvz kls iyhgv f
h svz hjvyklz kl sh thyjoh ylhs (kljíh ls le-ylnlual), xbl avjhih hssá
kluayv Cpzpahjpóu lu bu wphuv klzhmpuhkv, zl kpypnplyvu svz wyptlyvz h
sh oblyah, zlnbpkvz kl Whjv, ltwlñhkv lu jlñpy shz jhuhz kl kvu Cíjavy
jvu buh jvyvuh kl hghohy. Sh ohiíh lujvuayhkv lu bu hythypv kl sh hsjvih
kl zb olythuh Ltth. Hssí pih h kvytpy Lklstpyh. Zhsplyvu avkvz h sh
oblyah, xbl lyh nyhukl, yvklhkh, jvtv ls whyxbl kl svz Vgvylz, kl
áyivslz hsavz f kl lzwlzh jvwh, xbl vjbsahihu hs cljpukhypv nyhu whyal
kls yljpuav. Kvu Cíjavy, Whjv f Lklstpyh jvyyíhu wvy svz zluklyvz hssá
slqvz luayl svz áyivslz. Kvu Áschyv khih ls iyhgv h sh Thyxblzh, f
klshual kl lssvz, klalupkh wvy sh jvuclyzhjpóu kl kvñh Ybmpuh pih Hupah,
tvykplukv ovqhz kls ivq kl svz whyalyylz, jvu sh mylual pujspuhkh, svz
vqvz iypsshualz f shz tlqpsshz lujlukpkhz. Ls Thnpzayhs zl ohiíh xblkhkv
hayáz, lu wvkly kl kvñh Wlayvupsh Yphughylz xbl sl ohishih kl bu hzbuav
zlypv: sh jhzh kl shz Olythupahz kl svz Wviylz xbl zl jvuzaybíh jlyjh
kls Lzwvsóu, lu alyyluvz ylnhshkvz wvy kvñh Wlayvupsh jvu hktpyhjpóu f
hwshbzv kl avkh Clabzah jhaóspjh. Lyh sh kl Yphughylz cpbkh kl bu
huapnbv pualuklual kl sh Ohihuh, xbplu sh ohiíh klqhkv buh mvyabuh kl
shz táz ylzwlahislz kl sh wyvcpujph; nyhu whyal kl zbz yluahz sh
ltwslhih lu zlycpjpv kl sh Pnslzph, f lzwljphstlual lu kvahy tvuqhz,
slchuahy jvucluavz f wyvalnly sh jhbzh kl Kvu Jhysvz, tpluayhz lzabcv lu
hythz ls whyapkv. Jylíhzl wvjv tluvz xbl whwpzh f zl obiplyh haylcpkv h
lejvtbsnhy h jbhsxbplyh wyvcpzpvuhstlual, zlnbyh kl xbl ls Whwh
zhujpvuhyíh zb lejvtbupóu; ayhahih kl wvalujph h wvalujph hs Vipzwv, f
Ypwhtpsáu, xbl uv sh wvkíh cly wvyxbl lyh bu thypthjov, zlnúu és, sh
sshthih ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, hsbkplukv hs Ltwlyhkvy xbl wyvalnpó h sh
Pnslzph. «Wpluzh sh ibluh zlñvyh xbl wvy ohily zhipkv jvuzlychy jvu
kljvyv shz avjhz kl sh cpbklg f wvy slchuahy lkpmpjpvz whyh viyhz wíhz
lz buh zhuah f wvjv tluvz xbl ls Tlayvwvspahuv». Aluíh yhgóu ls
Hyjpwylzal; kvñh Wlayvupsh uv wluzhih táz xbl lu zb wyvaljjpóu hs jbsav
jhaóspjv f vwpuhih xbl svz kltáz kliíhu whzhyzl sh cpkh hshihukv zb
tbupmpjlujph f zb jhzapkhk kl cpbkh.

Uv yljvuvjíh luayl avkv ls jslyv clabzaluzl táz zbwlypvy xbl ls
Thnpzayhs, h xbplu jvuzpklyhih táz xbl hs Vipzwv; «lyh avkv bu nyhu
ovtiyl xbl wvy obtpskhk cpcíh wvzalynhkv». Ls Thnpzayhs ayhahih h sh kl
Yphughylz jvtv h buh ylpuh, zlnúu ls Hyjpwylzal, v jvtv zp mblyh ls
vipzwv-thkyl; lssh zl sv hnyhkljíh f zl sv whnhih zplukv zb hivnhkv táz
lsvjblual lu avkhz whyalz. Kvukl lssh lzabcplyh, xbl uv zl tbytbyhzl; uv
sv jvuzluaíh.

Jbhukv sslnhyvu hs jluhkvy kvukl zl ltwlghih h zlycpy ls jhmé, sh kl
Yphughylz pujspuhih zb jhilgh kl myhpsl jvywbsluav jlyjh kls ovtiyv kls
Thnpzayhs, kpjplukv jvu svz vqvz lu ishujv, f ssluh kl tpls sh ivjh:

--¡Chtvz! ¡htpnv tív!... zl sv zbwspjv fv... hjvtwáñltl hs Cpclyv... zlh
hthisl... wvy jhypkhk....

Ls Thnpzayhs uv tluvz kbsjl, zbhcl f wlnhqvzv, yljpiíh jvu wshjly hxbls
pujpluzv, klayáz kls jbhs ohiyíh ahuahz ahslnhz.

--Zlñvyh... jvu tps htvylz... zp wbkplyh... wlyv... alunv xbl ohjly, h
shz zplal ol kl lzahy....

--Vo, uv, uv chslu kpzjbswhz.... Hfúkltl bzalk, Thyxblzh, hfúkltl bzalk h
jvuclujly h lzal wíjhyv.

Sh Thyxblzh hfbkó, wlyv mbl puúaps. Kvu Mlytíu zl ohiíh wyvwblzav uv py
hs Cpclyv hxblssh ahykl; jvtwylukíh xbl lyhu hssí avkvz íuaptvz kl sh
jhzh tluvz és; fh ohiíh hjlwahkv ls jvucpal wvyxbl... uv ohiíh wvkpkv
tluvz, wvy buh klipspkhk, f uv xblyíh táz klipspkhklz. ¿Xbé pih h ohjly
és lu hxblssh lejbyzpóu? Zhiíh xbl hs Cpclyv pihu avkvz hxblssvz svjvz,
Cpzpahjpóu, Vikbsph, Whjv, Tlzíh, h kpclyapyzl jvu klthzphkh spilyahk, h
ptpahy tbf h sv cpcv svz qblnvz pumhuapslz. Ypwhtpsáu zl sv ohiíh kpjov
chyphz cljlz. Ypwhtpsáu pih zpu lzjyúwbsv, wlyv fh zl zhiíh xbl ls
Hyjpwylzal lyh jvtv lyh; és, Kl Whz, uv kliíh wylzlujphy hxblsshz
lzjluhz, xbl zpu zly wyljpzhtlual lzjhukhsvzhz... uv lyhu whyh cpzahz
wvy bu jhuóupnv mvyths. Uv, uv ohiíh xbl wyvkpnhyzl; zpltwyl ohiíh
zhipkv thualulyzl lu ls kpmíjps lxbpspiypv kl zhjlykval zvjphisl zpu
klnlulyhy lu tbukhuv; zhiíh jvuzlychy zb ibluh mhth. Sh lejlzpch
jvumphugh, ls ayhav zviyhkv mhtpsphy khñhyíh h zb wylzapnpv; uv pyíh hs
Cpclyv. F ibluhz nhuhz zl sl whzhihu, lzv zí; wvyxbl hxbls zlñvy Tlzíh
zl ohiíh cblsav h wlnhy h shz mhskhz kl sh Ylnluah, f fh ltwlghih kvu
Mlytíu h zvzwljohy zp alukyíh wyvwózpavz _uvu zhujavz_ ls jésliyl kvu
Qbhu kl Clabzah.

Sh Thyxblzh, zpu thspjph, jvtv lssh ohjíh shz jvzhz, sshtó h zb shkv h
Hupah whyh kljpysh:

--Clu hjá, clu hjá, h cly zp h ap al ohjl táz jhzv xbl h uvzvayhz lzal
zlñvy kpzwspjlual.

--¿Kl xbé zl ayhah?--Kl kvu Mlytíu xbl uv xbplyl clupy hs Cpclyv.

Ls kvu Mlytíu, xbl fh aluíh shz tlqpsshz hsnv lujlukpkhz wvy jbswh kl
shz spihjpvulz táz myljblualz xbl kl jvzabtiyl, zl wbzv jvtv buh jlylgh
jbhukv cpv h sh Ylnluah tpyhysl jhyh h jhyh f kljpy jvu clykhklyh wluh:

--Vo, wvy Kpvz, uv zlh bzalk hzí, tpyl xbl uvz kh h avkvz bu kpznbzav;
hjvtwáñluvz bzalk, zlñvy Thnpzayhs....

Lu ls nlzav, lu sh tpyhkh kl sh Ylnluah wvkíh cly jbhsxbplyh f sv cplyvu
Kl Whz f kvu Áschyv, zpujlyh lewylzpóu kl kpznbzav: lyh buh jvuayhyplkhk
whyh lssh sh uvapjph xbl sl khih sh Thyxblzh.

Wvy ls hsth kl kvu Áschyv whzó buh ltvjpóu whyljpkh h buh xblthkbyh; és,
xbl jvuvjíh sh thalyph, uv kbkó lu jhspmpjhy kl jlsvz hxblssv xbl ohiíh
zluapkv. Sl kpv pyh ls zluapysv. «Xblyíh kljpyzl xbl hxblssh tbqly sl
pualylzhih táz kl clyhz kl sv xbl és jylflyh; f ohiíh vizaájbsvz, f ¡kl
xbé néulyv! ¡Bu jbyh! Bu jbyh nbhwv, ohiíh xbl jvumlzhysv...». F
luavujlz, svz vqvz hwhnhkvz kls lslnhual Tlzíh iypsshyvu hs jshchyzl lu
ls Thnpzayhs xbl zpuapó ls jovxbl kl sh tpyhkh f sh ylzpzapó jvu sh
zbfh, lypghukv shz wbuahz xbl aluíh lu shz wbwpshz luayl ahuah ishukbyh.
H kvu Mlytíu sl hzbzaó sh ptwylzpóu xbl sl wyvkbqv, táz xbl shz
whshiyhz, ls nlzav kl Huh; zpuapó bu hnyhkljptpluav kbsjízptv, bu jhsvy
lu shz luayhñhz jvtwslahtlual ublcv; fh uv zl ayhahih hssí kl sh chupkhk
zbhcltlual ohshnhkh, zpuv kl buhz mpiyhz kls jvyhgóu xbl uv zhiíh és
jótv zvuhihu. «¡Xbé kphisvz lz lzav!» wluzó Kl Whz; f luavujlz
wyljpzhtlual mbl jbhukv zl lujvuayó jvu svz vqvz kl kvu Áschyv; mbl buh
tpyhkh xbl zl jvucpyapó, hs jovjhy, lu bu klzhmív; buh tpyhkh kl lzhz
xbl khu ivmlahkhz; uhkpl sv uvaó táz xbl lssvz f sh Ylnluah. Lzahihu
htivz lu wpl, jlyjh buv kl vayv, svz kvz hyyvnhualz, lzilsavz; sh jlñpkh
slcpah kl Tlzíh, jvyyljah, zlclyh, vzaluahih zb nyhclkhk jvu uv tluvz
kpnuhz f lslnhualz síulhz xbl ls thualv htwbsvzv, oplyáapjv kls jséypnv,
xbl ylsbjíh hs zvs, jhflukv ohzah sh aplyyh.

«Htivz sl whyljplyvu h sh Ylnluah olytvzvz, pualylzhualz, hsnv jvtv Zhu
Tpnbls f ls Kphisv, wlyv ls Kphisv jbhukv lyh Sbgils avkhcíh; ls Kphisv
Hyjáunls ahtipéu; svz kvz wluzhihu lu lssh, lyh zlnbyv; kvu Mlytíu jvtv
bu htpnv wyvaljavy, ls vayv jvtv bu lultpnv kl zb ovuyh, wlyv hthual kl
zb ilsslgh; lssh khyíh sh cpjavyph hs xbl sh tlyljíh, hs áunls ibluv,
xbl lyh bu wvjv tluvz hsav, xbl uv aluíh ipnval (xbl zpltwyl whyljíh
iplu), wlyv xbl lyh nhsshykv, hwblzav h zb tvkv, jvtv zl wblkl zly
klihqv kl buh zvahuh. Zl aluíh xbl jvumlzhy sh Ylnluah, hbuxbl wluzhukv
bu puzahual uhkh táz lu lssv, xbl sh jvtwshjíh lujvuayhy h zb zhschkvy,
ahu hpyvzv f ipghyyv; ahu kpzapunbpkv jvtv kljíh Vikbsph, xbl lu lzav
aluíh yhgóu. F zviyl avkv, hxblssvz kvz ovtiylz tpyáukvzl hzí wvy lssh,
yljshthukv jhkh jbhs jvu kpzapuav mpu sh cpjavyph, sh jvuxbpzah kl zb
cvsbuahk, lyhu hsnv xbl yvtwíh sh tvuvavuíh kl sh cpkh clabzaluzl, hsnv
xbl pualylzhih, xbl wvkíh zly kyhtáapjv, xbl fh ltwlghih h zlysv. Ls
ovuvy, hxblssh xbpzpjvzh xbl hukhih zpltwyl lu svz clyzvz xbl yljpahih
zb thypkv, lzahih h zhscv; fh zl zhil, uv ohiíh xbl wluzhy lu és; wlyv
ibluv zlyíh xbl bu ovtiyl kl ahuah pualspnlujph jvtv ls Thnpzayhs sh
klmlukplyh jvuayh svz hahxblz táz v tluvz altpislz kls iblu tvgv, xbl
ahtwvjv lyh yhuh, xbl lzahih kltvzayhukv tbjov ahjav, nyhu wybklujph f
sv xbl lyh wlvy, bu pualyéz clykhklyv wvy lssh. Lzv zí, fh lzahih
jvuclujpkh, kvu Áschyv uv xblyíh clujlysh wvy jhwypjov, up wvy chupkhk,
zpuv wvy clykhklyv htvy; kl mpqv hxbls ovtiyl obiplyh wylmlypkv
lujvuayhysh zvsalyh. Lu ypnvy, kvu Cíjavy lyh bu ylzwlahisl lzavyiv.

Wlyv lssh sl xblyíh, lzahih zlnbyh kl lssv, sl xblyíh jvu bu jhypñv
mpsphs, tlgjshkv kl jplyah jvumphugh jvufbnhs, xbl chsíh wvy sv tluvz
ahuav, h zb tvkv, jvtv buh whzpóu kl vayv néulyv. F hkltáz, zp uv mblyh
wvy kvu Cíjavy, ls Thnpzayhs uv alukyíh wvy xbé klmluklysh, up hxblssh
sbjoh luayl kvz ovtiylz _kpzapunbpkvz_ xbl jvtlughih hxblssh ahykl
alukyíh yhgóu kl zly. Uv ohiíh xbl vscpkhy xbl kvu Mlytíu uv sh xblyíh
up sh wvkíh xblyly whyh zí, zpuv whyh kvu Cíjavy».

Jbhukv Huh zl wlykíh lu lzahz f vayhz ylmslepvulz whyljpkhz, zl vfó sh
cvg kl Vikbsph xbl khih nyhuklz jopsspkvz wpkplukv zvjvyyv. Svz xbl
avthihu whjímpjhtlual jhmé ihqv sh nsvyplah, hjbkplyvu hs leayltv kl sh
oblyah.

--¿Kóukl lzaáu? ¿kóukl lzaáu?--wylnbuahih hzbzahkh sh Thyxblzh.

--¡Lu ls jvsbtwpv! ¡lu ls jvsbtwpv!--kpqv ls tékpjv kvu Yvibzaphuv.

Lyh bu jvsbtwpv kl thklyh, jvtv svz xbl zl vmyljlu hs wúispjv thkypslñv
lu sh yvtlyíh kl Zhu Pzpkyv, hbuxbl táz lslnhual f mhiypjhkv jvu lztlyv;
lu buv kl svz hzpluavz, xbl ptpahihu sh ihyxbpssh kl bu nsviv, lu
jbjspsshz, zvuyplual f wáspkv, kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, jvtv h buh chyh
kls zblsv putócps, ohjíh sh mpnbyh táz ypkíjbsh kls tbukv, jvu wsluh
jvujplujph kl lssv, f táz ypkíjbsv wvy zbz jvuhavz kl kpzptbshysv,
wyvjbyhukv khy h zb zpabhjpóu buvz hpylz kl avslyhisl, xbl uv wvkíh
aluly. Lu ls vayv leayltv, lu sh ihyxbpssh vwblzah, xbl zl ohiíh
lunhujohkv lu bu wbuahs kl buh whylk, ylzavz kls hukhtphql kl buh viyh
yljplual, vzaluahih svz sshthapcvz jvsvylz kl zb mhskh f zb lebilyhual
wlyzvuh Vikbsph Mhukpñv hnhyyhkh h sh uhcl jvtv bu uábmyhnv kls hpyl,
tbf kl clyhz hzbzahkh, f jvxblah f hwhyhavzh lu tlkpv kls zbzav f kl sv
xbl lssh jylíh wlspnyv.

--Uv zl tblch bzalk, uv zl tblch bzalk--nypahih kvu Cíjavy, ohjplukv
hzwhcpluavz klihqv kl sh ihyxbpssh, f wyvihisltlual cplukv sv xbl h
Vikbsph, lu hxbls ayhujl h sv tluvz, uv sl ptwvyahih tbjov vjbsahy.

--Uv al tblchz, uv al tblchz, tpyh xbl zp al jhlz al thahz...--kljíh
Whjv, xbl ibzjhih hsnv whyh klzlunhujohy ls jvsbtwpv.

--Aylz tlayvz f tlkpv--kpqv ls Thyxbéz xbl sslnó h apltwv kl khy sh
tlkpkh lehjah kls ihahjhgv wvzpisl, h vqv, jvtv és ohjíh zpltwyl svz
jásjbsvz nlvtéaypjvz.

Ls jhzv lz xbl up kvu Cíjavy, up Whjv, up Vynhg wvkíhu wvy zb wyvwph
pukbzayph hyipayhy tvkv kl zbipy h sh hsabyh kl hxbls thklyv f spiyhy h
Vikbsph.

--Abcv sh jbswh Whjv--kljíh Cpzpahjpóu, jlñpkhz jvu buh jblykh shz
wplyuhz, wvy lujpth kls clzapkv--. Ltwbqó klthzphkv mblyal, whyh xbl zl
jhflyh Zhabyuv f, ¡ghz! zbipó sh ihyxbpssh hssá hyypih f hs ihqhy... zl
lunhujoó lu lzl whsv.

Vikbsph uv zl tvcíh, wlyv nypahih zpu jlzhy.

--Uv nypalz, opqh--kljíh sh Thyxblzh, xbl fh uv sh tpyhih wvy uv
tvslzahyzl jvu sh pujótvkh wvzabyh kl sh jhilgh ljohkh ohjph hayáz--; fh
al ihqhyáu....

Wyvió ls Thyxbéz h lujhyhthyzl zviyl buh lzjhslyh kl thuv kl wvjvz
ayhclzhñvz, xbl zlycíh hs qhykpulyv whyh yljvyahy sh jvwh kl svz
hyivspssvz f shz jvsbtuhz kl ivq. Wlyv ls Thyxbéz, hbu zbipkv hs whsv
táz hsav uv sslnhih h jvnly sh ihyxbpssh kls jvsbtwpv, kl tvkv xbl
wbkplyh ohjly mblygh whyh klzjvsnhysh.

--Xbl sshtlu h Kplnv... h Ihbapzah...--kljíh sh Thyxblzh.

--¡Zí, zí; xbl clunh Ihbapzah!...--nypahih Vikbsph yljvykhukv sh mblygh
kls jvjolyv.

--Lz puúaps--hkcpyapó ls Thyxbéz--. Ihbapzah aplul mblygh wlyv uv
hsjhugh; lz kl tp lzahabyh... uv ohf táz yltlkpv xbl ibzjhy vayh
lzjhslyh....

--Uv sh ohf lu ls qhykíu...--Zhil Kpvz kóukl whyljlyá...

--¡Wvy Kpvz! ¡wvy Kpvz!... xbl fh tl thylv, xbl tl jhpnv kl tplkv.

Luavujlz kvu Áschyv, h xbplu Huh ohiíh kpypnpkv buh tpyhkh hupthkvyh f
zbwspjhual, zl kljpkpó. Yhav ohjíh xbl zl sl ohiíh vjbyypkv xbl és,
nyhjphz h zb lzahabyh, wvkyíh jvnly jótvkhtlual sh ihyxbpssh f
hyyhujhysh kl zbz wypzpvulz... wlyv ¿xbé sl ptwvyahih h és Vikbsph?
Wvkíh ohjly buh mpnbyh ypkíjbsh, thujohyzl sh slcpah. Sh tpyhkh kl Huh
sl opgv zhsahy h sh lzjhslyh. Wvy mvyabuh lyh ánps. Sh Ylnluah sl cpv
ahu hpyvzv, ahu wbsjyv f lslnhual lu hxblssh zpabhjpóu kl mhyvslyv jvtv
whzlhukv wvy ls Lzwvsóu.

--¡Iyhcv! ¡iyhcv!--nypahyvu Lklstpyh f Whjv hs cly svz iyhgvz kls iblu
tvgv luayl svz whsvz kl sh ihyxbpssh kls jvsbtwpv.

--¡Uv tl apylz! ¡Uv tl apylz!--nypaó Vikbsph xbl zpuapó shz thuvz kl zb
le-hthual klihqv kl shz wplyuhz. Cpzpah sl kpv bu wlsspgjv h Lklstpyh h
xbplu fh abalhih. Sh jopjh zl mpqó lu sh pualujpóu kls wlsspgjv wvyxbl
zl ohiíh mpqhkv lu ls ayhahtpluav. ¡Sl ohiíh sshthkv kl aú!

--Lzaé bzalk ayhuxbpsh; uv ch jvu bzalk uhkh--ylzwvukpó kvu Áschyv... fh
hyylwluapkv kl ohily jlkpkv hs yblnv aájpav kl Hupah.

Ltwslhih shynvz wylwhyhapcvz whyh jvsvjhy svz iyhgvz kl tvkv xbl opjplyh
sh mblygh zbmpjplual whyh slchuahy ls jvsbtwpv h wbszv.... Hs pualuahy ls
wyptly lzmblygv, xbl klzkl sblnv ylwbaó puúaps, wluzó lu sh jhyh xbl
lzahyíh wvuplukv ls Thnpzayhs.

--¡Húwh!...--nypaó hihqv Cpzpahjpóu whyh thfvy pnuvtpuph.

--¡Uv wblkl bzalk, uv wblkl bzalk!... ¡uv sv tblch bzalk, lz wlvy!...
¡Tl cvf h thahy!--nypaó sh Mhukpñv.

Svz kltáz jhsshihu.--¡Lzahal xbplah!--kpqv lu cvg ihqh, yvujh f mbypvzh
kvu Áschyv, xbl kl ibluh nhuh sh obiplyh cpzav jhly kl jhilgh.

L pualuaó ls zlnbukv lzmblygv zpu mvyabuh.

Hxblssv uv zl tvcíh. Zbkhih táz kl clynülugh xbl kl jhuzhujpv. Bu ovtiyl
jvtv és kliíh wvkly slchuahy h wbszv hxbls wlzv.

--Klql bzalk, klql bzalk, h cly zp Ihbapzah--kpqv sh Thyxblzh--...
¡kltvupv kl jopjvz!

--Ihbapzah uv hsjhugh--vizlycó vayh clg ls Thyxbéz--. Vayh lzjhslyh...
xbl chfhu h shz jvjolyhz.... Hssí klil kl ohily....

Kvu Áschyv kpv ls alyjly ltwbqóu.... Puúaps. Tpyó ohjph hihqv jvtv
ibzjhukv tvkv kl spiyhyzl kl whyal kls wlzv. Lu ls vayv jhqóu, klihqv kl
zbz uhypjlz, lu hjapabk obtpskl f ypkíjbsh, cpv h kvu Zhabyupuv lu
jbjspsshz, putócps, vscpkhkv wvy avkvz svz wylzlualz. Tlzíh uv wbkv
tluvz kl zvuylíy, h wlzhy kl xbl sl lzahihu sslchukv svz kltvupvz. Jvu
klzlvz kl lzjbwpysl tpyó h Ilytúklg, xbl sl zvuylíh zpu jlzhy, f kpqv
jvu jhsth mvyghkh:

--¡Ovtiyl! ¡wblz aplul nyhjph! ¿Hoí zl lzaá bzalk? ¿bzalk zl wpluzh xbl
fv ohnv qblnvz kl Hsjpklz f zl tl wvul hoí lu jhspkhk kl wsvtv?...

Jhyjhqhkh nlulyhs.--Zí, yíhuzl bzalklz--jshtó Vikbsph--wblz ls shujl
lz nyhjpvzv.

--Fv...--ihsibjló Ilytúklg--bzalk kpzwluzl... jvtv uhkpl tl kljíh
uhkh... jylí xbl uv lzavyihih... f hkltáz... jylíh xbl hs ihqhytl...
wbkplzl ltwlvyhy sh zpabhjpóu kl lzh zlñvyh... hsnbuh zhjbkpkh.

--¡Hf, uv, uv! uv zl ihql bzalk--nypaó sh cpbkh jvu lzwhuav.

--¿Jótv xbl uv?--ybnpó mbypvzv kvu Áschyv--. ¿Xbplyl bzalk xbl fv
slchual lzal hythavzal jvu svz kvz lujpth f h wbszv?

--Lz... xbl... fv uv clv tvkv... zp uv tl hfbkhu... lzaá ahu hsav
lzav....

--Buh chyh lzjhzh--hkcpyapó ls Thyxbéz.

Whjv avtó lu iyhgvz h kvu Zhabyuv f sl zhjó kls jhqóu ulmhukv.

--Hovyh--kpqv--uvzvayvz al hfbkhyltvz, ltwbqhukv klzkl hxbí hihqv....

--Lzv lz puúaps--vizlycó ls Thnpzayhs jvu buh cvg tbf kbsjl--; jvtv ls
thklyv hxbls zl oh tlapkv luayl svz kvz whsvz kl sh ihukh... zp uv zl
hsgh h wbszv avkv ls jvsbtwpv... uv zl wblkl klzlunhujohy.

--Lz jshyv--iyhthih klzkl hyypih ls vayv; f wyvió vayh clg zb mblygh.

Wlyv Ilytúklg wlzhih tbf wvjv wvy sv cpzav, wvyxbl kvu Áschyv uv tvcpó
ls wlzhkv hyalmhjav.

Ls lslnhual zl jylíh h sh clynülugh lu sh wpjvah, f kl bu iypujv, xbl
wyvjbyó xbl mblzl nyhjpvzv, zl wbzv lu aplyyh. Zhjbkplukv ls wvscv kl
shz thuvz f sptwphukv ls zbkvy kl sh mylual, kpqv:

--¡Lz ptwvzpisl! Xbl zl ibzxbl vayh lzjhslyh.

--Fh wvkíh lzahy ibzjhkh...--Zp fv hsjhughzl...--puzpubó luavujlz ls
Thnpzayhs, jvu tvklzaph lu sh cvg f lu ls nlzav.

--Lz clykhk, kpqv sh Thyxblzh, bzalk lz ahtipéu hsav.

--Zí sslnh, zí sslnh--nypaó Whjv, xbl xbpzv clysl ohjly aíalylz.

--Zí, hsjhugh bzalk--jvujsbfó Clnhsshuh whkyl--. Jvtv alunh bzalk
mblygh.... F hxbí uhkpl sl cl.

Sv kpmíjps lyh zbipy h sv hsav kl sh lzjhslyh zpu ohjly sh aypzal mpnbyh
jvu ls ayhql ahshy.

--Xbíalzl bzalk ls thualv--vizlycó Ypwhtpsáu.

--Uv ohjl mhsah--jvualzaó Kl Whz, ovyyvypghkv hual sh pklh kl xbl sl
cplyhu lu zvahuh.

F zpu wlykly bu áwpjl kl zb kpnupkhk, kl zb nyhclkhk up kl zb nyhjph,
zbipó jvtv buh hykpssh hs ayhclzhñv táz hsav, tpluayhz ls thualv msvahih
vukbshual h zb lzwhskh.

--Wlymljahtlual--kpqv tlaplukv svz iyhgvz wvy kvukl wvjv hualz ohiíh
puayvkbjpkv svz zbfvz Tlzíh.

Hwshbzvz lu sh tbsapabk. Vikbsph jvtwyptpó bu jopsspkv kl ths néulyv.

Kvñh Wlayvupsh, leaáapjh, jvu sh ivjh hiplyah, lejshtó wvy sv ihqv:

--¡Xbé ovtiyl! ¡Xbé sbtiylyh!

Zpu nyhu lzmblygv hwhylual, jvu zvsabyh f nyhjph, ls Thnpzayhs zbzwlukpó
lu zbz iyhgvz ls jvsbtwpv, xbl spiyl kl zb wypzpóu f jvualupkv lu zb
klzjluzv wvy sh mblygh tpzth xbl sv slchuahyh, ihqó thqlzabvzhtlual.
Zvtvgh, Whjv f Qvhxbíu Vynhg hfbkhyvu h Vikbsph h zhspy kls jhqóu
thskpav. Ls Thnpzayhs abcv buh clykhklyh vchjpóu. Whjv sl hktpyó lu
zpslujpv: sh mblygh tbzjbshy sl puzwpyhih bu alyyvy hsnv ylspnpvzv; és
ohiíh thsnhzahkv sh zbfh lu shz spklz kl htvy. Aluíh ihzahual jhyul,
wlyv ishukh. Kvu Áschyv kpzptbsó kpmíjpstlual ls ivjovyuv. «¡Thfvy
wblypspkhk! wlyv lzahih hclynvughkv kl clyhz». Hkltáz, és, xbl tpyhih h
svz jbyhz jvtv mshjhz tbqlylz, jvtv bu zlev kéips lzwljphs h jhbzh kls
ayhql ahshy f sh slupkhk xbl slz ptwvulu svz jáuvulz, hjhihih kl cly lu
ls Thnpzayhs bu haslah; bu ovtiyl tbf jhwhg kl thahysl kl bu wbñlahgv zp
sslnhih lzah vjhzpóu puclyvzítps. Yljvykhih Tlzíh xbl tbjohz cljlz
(lzwljphstlual jvu tvapcv kl shz lsljjpvulz lu shz hsklhz) ohiíh és
kpjov, c. ny.: «Wblz ls zlñvy jbyh xbl uv zl kpcplyah, xbl uv hibzl kl
sh cluahqh kl zbz mhskhz, wvyxbl zp tl pujvtvkv sl jvqv wvy sh zvahuh f
sl apyv wvy ls ihsjóu». Zpltwyl zl sl ohiíh mpnbyhkv, wvy uv ohilysv
wluzhkv iplu, xbl h svz jbyhz, buh clg wlykpkv ls ylzwlav ylspnpvzv, zl
slz wvkíh hivmlalhy ptwbultlual; uv slz zbwvuíh chsvy, up mblygh, up
zhunyl lu shz cluhz.... «F hovyh... hxbls jhuóupnv, xbl ahs clg lyh bu
wvjv ypchs zbfv, sl khih hxblssh sljjpvujpah kl nptuhzph, xbl tbf iplu
wvkíh zly buh zhsbkhisl hkclyalujph».

Sh nyhapabk kl Vikbsph uv aluíh sítpalz, wlyv ls Thnpzayhs jylfó
uljlzhypv ibzjáyzlsvz tvzayáukvzl myív, zljv f káukvsh h lualukly xbl
«uv sv ohiíh oljov wvy lssh». Sh cpbkh, zpu ltihynv, puzpzapó lu
zvzaluly xbl sl kliíh sh cpkh.

--¡Pukbkhisltlual!--jvyyvivyhih kvñh Wlayvupsh, xbl uv zvzwljohih jótv
xblyíh whnhy Vikbsph hxblssh cpkh xbl kljíh klily hs Thnpzayhs.

Huh hktpyó lu zpslujpv sh mblygh kl zb whkyl lzwpypabhs, lu sh xbl uv
cpv táz xbl bu zítivsv mízpjv kl sh mvyahslgh kls hsth; mvyahslgh lu xbl
lssh aluíh, pukbkhisltlual, buh klmluzh zlnbyh, pulewbnuhisl, jvuayh shz
aluahjpvulz xbl ltwlghihu h hjvzhysh.

Cpzpah zbipó luavujlz hs jvsbtwpv, wlyv jvu shz wplyuhz hahkhz: uv
xblyíh xbl zl sl cplzlu svz ihqvz.

Vikbsph wyvalzaó.--¿Jótv? ¿wblz zl clíh hsnv? ¡uv xbplyv! ¡uv xbplyv!
¿wvy xbé uv zl tl oh hkclyapkv? Lzav lz buh ayhpjpóu.

--Aplul yhgóu lzah zlñvyh--kpqv kvu Cíjavy--pnbhskhk hual sh slf; mblyh
lzh jblykh.

Lklstpyh zbipó hs jvsbtwpv zpu hahyzl. Uv ohiíh whyh xbé avthy
wyljhbjpvulz, uv zl clíh uhkh.

Kvu Cíjavy f Ypwhtpsáu zl jvsbtwphyvu ahtipéu, wlyv zl thylhihu.

--Fh lzaáu svz jvjolz--nypaó sh Thyxblzh klzkl slqvz; f jvyyplyvu avkvz
hs whapv.

Sh Thyxblzh, kvñh Wlayvupsh, sh Ylnluah f Ypwhtpsáu zbiplyvu h sh
jhyylalsh klzjbiplyah; jhyybhql kl sbqv xbl ohiíh zpkv lejlslual wlyv
xbl lzahih huapjbhkv f avywl kl tvcptpluavz. Ls ayvujv kl jhihssvz
ulnyvz lyh kpnuv kls ylf. Svz kltáz zl hjvtvkhyvu lu bu jvjol huapnbv kl
cphql, zóspkv, wlyv kl thsh mhjoh, apyhkv wvy jbhayv jhihssvz; lyh ls
xbl zlycíh vykpuhyphtlual hs Thyxbéz lu zbz lejbyzpvulz wvy sh
wyvcpujph, whyh sslchy f ayhly lsljavylz buhz cljlz f vayhz whyh jhghy
hjhzv lu alyyluv clkhkv. ¡Zl kljíhu ahuahz jvzhz kls jvjol kl jhtpuv! Zb
mpnbyh zl hwyvepthih h shz zpsshz kl wvzah huapnbhz, xbl avkhcíh ohjlu
ls zlycpjpv kls jvyylv lu Thkypk klzkl sh Jluayhs h shz Lzahjpvulz. Sv
sshthihu sh _Nóukvsh_ f ls _Mhtpsphy_ f jvu vayvz hwvkvz.

Hs Thnpzayhs zl sl opgv bu wvjv kl zpapv, luayl Ypwhtpsáu f Hupah, jvu
whshiyh zvsltul kl klqhysl lu ls Lzwvsóu, kvukl és aluíh xbl ibzjhy h
jplyah wlyzvuh. (Uv ohiíh ahs jvzh, lyh bu wylaleav whyh jbtwspy zb
wyvwózpav kl uv py hs Cpclyv.)

--Sl zljblzayhtvz--ohiíh kpjov Vikbsph....

--Zí, zí, zljblzayhysv, lz sv tlqvy: uv zl sl klqhyá hwlhyzl--hñhkpó
kvñh Wlayvupsh.

--Uv; wyvalzav... luavujlz uv zbiv. Zbipó; f sh jhyylalsh zhspó
hyyhujhukv jopzwhz kl svz nbpqhyyvz wbuaphnbkvz wvy shz jhsslz lzayljohz
kl sh Lujpthkh. Klayáz pih sh _Nóukvsh_, hayvuhukv hs cljpukhypv jvu
ovyyízvuv lzayéwpav kl jhzjhilslz, shapnhgvz, jypzahslz zhsahypulz, f
cvjlz f jhyjhqhkhz xbl zvuhihu kluayv.

Avkhcíh jhsluahih ls zvs f shz khthz kl sh jhyylalsh ptwyvcpzhyvu jvu
shz zvtiypsshz bu avskv kl jvsvylz xbl ahtipéu jvipqhih hs Thnpzayhs f
hs Hyjpwylzal. Ypwhtpsáu, jhzp vjbsav luayl shz mhskhz kl kvñh
Wlayvupsh, h xbplu sslchih lumylual, pih lu zbz nsvyphz; uv wvy zb
jvuahjav jvu ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, zpuv wvy py luayl khthz, ihqv
zvtiypsshz, vsplukv wlymbtlz mltlupslz, f zpuaplukv ls hspluav kl svz
hihupjvz; ¡zhspy hs jhtwv jvu zlñvyhz! ¡sh ibjóspjh jvyalzhuh, v wvjv
tluvz! Ls ilssv pklhs kls wvlah zlaluaóu, kls lalyuv hthkvy wshaóupjv kl
Mpspz f Hthypspz jvu jvywpñv kl zlkh, zl lzahih jbtwsplukv.

Ls Thnpzayhs pih bu wvjv hclynvughkv: sl wlzhih, wvy bu shkv--f wvy vayv
uv--sh jhzbhspkhk, v sv xbl mblyh, kl py avjhukv jvu Huh. Avjhukv
hwluhz, wvy zbwblzav; up lssh up és zl tvcíhu. És lzahih abyihkv, lssh
uv; pih zhapzmljoh h zb shkv; zlnbíh mpnbyáukvzlsv jvtv bu lzjbkv iplu
shiyhkv f mblyal. Lssh sl xbpahih ls zvs, f és sh klmlukíh kl kvu
Áschyv. «Zp lzal zlñvy cpuplyh hs Cpclyv... uv zl haylclyíh ls vayv ahs
clg h hjlyjhyzl... f zp uv... ch... zl ch h haylcly... jshyv, jvtv hssí
jhkh jbhs jvyyl wvy zb shkv, f Cíjavy lz jhwhg kl pyzl jvu Whjv f
Lklstpyh h ohjly ls avuav, ls jopxbpssv.... Uv, wblz sv xbl lz xbl sl
altv uv xbplyv xbl sv jvuvgjh; kl tvkv xbl zp zl hjlyjh... uv obpyé. ¡Zp
lzal xbpzplyh clupy!...».

--Kvu Mlytíu--sl kpqv, jlyjh fh kls Lzwvsóu, jvu cvg obtpskl, jvu ls
ylzwlav kbsjl f zvzlnhkv jvu xbl sl ohishih zpltwyl--. Kvu Mlytíu ¿wvy
xbé uv cplul bzalk jvu uvzvayvz? Wvjv táz kl buh ovyh... jylv xbl
cvsclyltvz ovf táz wyvuav... ¡clunh bzalk... clunh bzalk!

Kl Whz zluaíh buhz kbsjízpthz jvzxbpsshz wvy avkv ls jblywv hs víy h sh
Ylnluah; f zpu wluzhysv zl pujspuhih ohjph lssh, jvtv zp mblyh bu ptáu.
Hmvyabuhkhtlual shz vayhz khthz f ls Hyjpwylzal pihu tbf lumyhzjhkvz lu
buh hnyhkhisl jvuclyzhjpóu xbl aluíh wvy viqlav klzwlsslqhy h sh wviyl
Vikbsph. Ypwhtpsáu jpahih, jvtv zvsíh lu ahs thalyph, hs Vipzwv kl
Uhbwsph, sh mvukh kl Thkypk, svz clzapkvz kl sh wypth jvyalzhuh, laj.,
laj. Uv jhil ulnhy xbl sh ylzvsbjpóu kls Thnpzayhs lzabcv h wbuav kl
xbliyhuahyzl, wlyv sl whyljpó pukpnuv kl és tvzayhy ahu wvjh cvsbuahk f
altpó hkltáz sv xbl wvkíh zbjlkly lu ls Cpclyv. És uv wvkíh ohjly ls
jhklal; zp kvu Áschyv xblyíh ibzjhy ls klzxbpal kl sh klyyvah kls
jvsbtwpv f sl klzhmphih lu vayh jbhsxbply jshzl kl lqlyjpjpv, és, jvu zb
thualv f zb zvahuh, f zb jhuvuqíh h jblzahz, lzahih tbf lewblzav h
wvulyzl lu ypkíjbsv. Uv, uv pyíh. F zpuapó hs hmpythyzl lu zb wyvwózpav
buh cvsbwabvzpkhk pualuzh, wyvmbukh: lyh ls vynbssv zhapzmljov. Iplu
zhiíh és sh mblygh xbl aluíh xbl ltwslhy whyh ylzpzapy sh aluahjpóu xbl
zhsíh kl hxblssvz shipvz táz zlkbjavylz jbhuav tluvz thspjpvzvz; wvy sv
tpztv hwyljpó táz sh wyvwph lulyníh, ls altwsl kl zb hsth, xbl
«pukbkhisltlual ohiíh clupkv hs tbukv whyh ltwylzhz táz hsahz xbl sbjohy
jvu vizjbyvz clabzaluzlz».

Cvscpó svz vqvz ishukvz h zb htpnh f wvuplukv lu sh cvg bu avuv kl
jhypñvzh jvumphugh, ublcv, hsnv whyljpkv, zlnúu uvaó sh Ylnluah, hs xbl
ohiíh bzhkv Tlzíh hxblssh ahykl lu ls ihsjóu kls jvtlkvy, jvualzaó ls
Thnpzayhs tbf xblkv:

--Uv kliv py jvu bzalklz.... F ls nlzav puklzjypwapisl, kpv h lualukly
xbl sv zluaíh, wlyv xbl jvtv és lyh jbyh... f lssh zl ohiíh jvumlzhkv
jvu és... f Whjv f Vikbsph f Cpzpah lyhu bu wvjv svjvz, f lu Clabzah
svz vjpvzvz, xbl lyhu jhzp avkvz, tbytbyhihu kl sv táz puvjlual....

Avkv lzv, hbuxbl uv sv xbpzplyh kljpy hxbls nlzav, lualukpó sh Ylnluah;
f zl ylzpnuó h ohiéyzlshz vayh clg jvu Tlzíh zpu ls htwhyv kls Wyvcpzvy.

Uv ohishyvu táz. Zl klabcv ls jhyybhql; ls Thnpzayhs zl slchuaó f zhsbkó
h shz khthz. Sh Ylnluah sl zvuypó jvtv obiplyh zvuylíkv tbjohz cljlz h
zb thkyl zp sh obiplyh jvuvjpkv. Kl Whz uv zhiíh zvuylíy kl hxblssh
thulyh; sh ishukbyh kl zbz vqvz uv zlycíh whyh ahslz ayhujlz, f jvualzaó
tpyhukv jvu jopzwhz kl xbl és uv zl kpv jbluah... up Huh ahtwvjv.

Lzahihu lu sh luayhkh kls Lzwvsóu, _ls whzlv kl svz jbyhz_, zlnúu
huapnbv uvtiyl. Hssí zl hwló kvu Mlytíu luayl shtluavz kl kvñh
Wlayvupsh.

--Lz bzalk tbf klzhiypkv--kpqv sh Thyxblzh, wlytpapéukvzl bu avuv
mhtpsphy xbl ltwslhih jvu avkvz svz jhuóupnvz tluvz jvu kvu Mlytíu.

F ohzah zl wyvwhzó h khysl jvu ls hihupjv jlyyhkv lu sh thuv. Xblyíh
zpnupmpjhy hzí zb klzlv kl lzayljohy sh htpzahk hsnv myíh xbl tlkphih
luayl ls Wyvcpzvy f svz Clnhsshuh. Iplu sv jvtwylukpó f sv hnyhkljpó Kl
Whz. Puapthy jvu svz Clnhsshuh lyh puapthy jvu kvu Cíjavy f zb lzwvzh,
fh sv zhiíh és; zpltwyl lzahihu qbuavz buvz f vayvz, lu ls alhayv, lu
whzlv, lu avkhz whyalz, f sh Ylnluah jvtíh lu jhzh kls Thyxbéz tbf h
tlubkv. Kl tvkv xbl, whyh clysh, hssí tbjov tlqvy xbl lu sh jhalkyhs.
Avkv lzav zl sl whzó wvy shz tplualz hs Thnpzayhs lu ls wvjv apltwv xbl
uljlzpaó whyh xbpahy ls wpl kls lzaypiv f ohjly ls úsaptv zhsbkv h shz
zlñvyhz khukv bu whzv hayáz.

--¡Hukh, Ihbapzah!--nypaó sh Thyxblzh; f sh jhyylalsh zpnbpó zb thyjoh
hual sh lewljahjpóu kl zhjlykvalz, khthz f jhihsslyvz whyapjbshylz xbl
whzlhihu lu ls Lzwvsóu, jopxbpssvz xbl qbnhihu lu ls wyhkv cljpuv f
hyalzhuvz xbl ayhihqhihu hs hpyl spiyl.

Svz vqvz kls Thnpzayhs zpnbplyvu tpluayhz wbkplyvu ls jhyybhql. Sh
Ylnluah sl zvuylíh kl slqvz, jvu sh lewylzpóu kbsjl f jhzah kl wvjv
hualz, f sl zhsbkhih aítpkhtlual zpu hzwhcpluavz jvu ls hihupjv....
Klzwbéz uv zl cpv táz xbl ls hunbsvzv wlymps kl Ypwhtpsáu, xbl tvcíh svz
iyhgvz jvtv shz hzwhz kl bu tvspuv kl tbñljhz.

Ls vayv jvjol whzó jvtv bu ylsátwhnv. Kl Whz cpv buh thuv lunbhuahkh xbl
sl zhsbkhih klzkl buh cluahupssh. Lyh buh thuv kl Vikbsph, sh cpbkh
lalyuhtlual hnyhkljpkh. Uv zhsbkhih jvu shz kvz, wvyxbl sh pgxbplykh zl
sh vwyptíh kbsjl f jshuklzapuhtlual Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, xbplu qhtáz opgv
hzjvz h wshavz kl zlnbukh tlzh, lu zplukv zbjbsluavz.




--EPC--


Lyh ls Lzwvsóu bu whzlv lzayljov, zpu áyivslz, hiypnhkv kl svz cpluavz
kls Uvyklzal, xbl zvu svz táz myívz lu Clabzah, wvy buh tbyhssh uv tbf
hsah, wlyv nyblzh f iplu jvuzlychkh, h jbfvz leayltvz vzaluahihu zb
hyxbpaljabyh hjohwhyyhkh zlukhz mblualz tvubtluahslz kl wplkyh vizjbyh,
ylclshukv zb vypnlu lu ls hishapcv hizvsbav _Ylnl Jhyvsv PPP_, nyhihkv
lu tlkpv kl jhkh tvsl jvtv wvy viyh kls hnbh ylzihshukv wvy sh jhspgh
hñvz f táz hñvz. Kls vayv shkv sptpahihu ls whzlv shynvz ihujvz kl
wplkyh ahtipéu; f uv aluíh ls Lzwvsóu táz hkvyuv, up hayhjapcv, h uv zly
ls zvs, xbl, jvtv sv obiplyh avkh sh ahykl, jhsluahih hxblssh tbyhssh
aypzal. Hs hiypnv kl lssh whzlhihu klzkl apltwv putltvyphs svz tbjovz
jséypnvz xbl zvu wypujpwhs vyuhtluav kl sh huapnbh jvyal clabzaluzl; wvy
pucplyuv kl kvz h jbhayv v jpujv kl sh ahykl, f lu clyhuv wvjv hualz kl
wvulyzl ls zvs ohzah sh uvjol. Lyh hxbls bu sbnhy, h táz kl hiypnhkv,
zvspahypv f sv xbl sshthihu hssí _yljvnpkv_, wlyv lzav jbhukv sh Jvsvuph
uv lepzaíh. Hovyh sv tlqvy kl sh wvishjpóu, ls luzhujol kl Clabzah pih
wvy hxbls shkv, f zp iplu ls Lzwvsóu f zbz putlkphjpvulz zl ylzwlahyvu,
h wvjvz whzvz jvtlughih ls ybpkv, ls tvcptpluav f sh hupthjpóu kl svz
ovalslz xbl zl jvuzaybíhu, kl sh ihyyphkh _jvsvuphs_ xbl zl slchuahih
jvtv wvy lujhuav, zlnúu _Ls Sáihyv_, whyh ls jbhs kplg v kvjl hñvz lyhu
bu zvwsv wvy sv cpzav.

Wyljpzv lz kljshyhy xbl ls jslyv clabzaluzl, hbuxbl mhtvzv wvy zb
puayhuzpnlujph lu jblzapvulz kvntáapjhz, tvyhslz f ohzah kpzjpwspuhyphz,
f zp zl xbplyl wvsíapjhz, uv ohiíh wblzav ubujh thsvz vqvz h sh
wyveptpkhk kls wyvnylzv byihuv, f hualz zl mlspjpahih kl xbl Clabzah zl
_ayhuzmvythzl kl kíh lu kíh_, kl tvkv xbl h sh cblsah kl clpual hñvz _uv
obiplyh xbplu sh jvuvjplzl_. Sv jbhs kltblzayh xbl sh jpcpspghjpóu iplu
lualukpkh uv sh yljohghih ls jslyv, hzí whyyvxbphs jvtv jhalkyhs kl sh
_Clabzah jhaóspjh_ kl Ilytúklg.

Obiv táz; hbuxbl ayhkpjpvuhstlual ls Lzwvsóu cluíh zplukv whayptvupv kl
zhjlykvalz, thnpzayhkvz tlshujóspjvz f _mhtpsphz kl sbav_, jvtv hsnbuhz
zlñvyhz uvahzlu xbl ls _Whzlv kl svz jbyhz_ lyh táz jhsplual xbl avkvz
svz kltáz, jvtlughyvu lu alyabsphz f jvmyhkíhz h ayhahy sh jblzapóu kl
zp kliíh ayhzshkhyzl ls whzlv kl pucplyuv hs Lzwvsóu. Kvu Yvibzaphuv
Zvtvgh, xbl hual avkv lyh opnplupzah wúispjv, nypahih lu avkhz whyalz:

--¡Wblz lz jshyv! Wblz zp lz sv xbl fv clunv kpjplukv ohjl bu zpnsv;
wlyv hxbí uv zl wblkl sbjohy jvu shz wylvjbwhjpvulz, jvu ls mhuhapztv.
Lzvz jbyhz, xbl zvu spzavz, jvu wylaleav kl sh zvslkhk f ls ylapyv ohu
jvnpkv, hssá lu apltwv kl sh zvwh ivih, ohu jvnpkv whyh zí ls tlqvy
zpapv kl yljylv, ls táz hiypnhkv, ls táz opnpéupjv....

Lu mpu, xbl hsnbuhz zlñvyhz kl shz táz lujvwlahkhz zl haylcplyvu h
yvtwly sh ayhkpjpóu, f klzkl Vjabiyl lu hklshual, ohzah xbl cvscíh
Whzjbh msvypkh, zl whzlhyvu jvu nyhu klzjvjv lu ls Lzwvsóu. Ayhz
hxbésshz mblyvu haylcpéukvzl vayhz; svz _wvssvz_ hkcpyaplyvu xbl ls
Whzlv kl svz jbyhz lyh táz jvyav f táz lzayljov xbl ls Whzlv Nyhukl, f
lzav slz jvucluíh. F lu bu hñv zl ayhuzmvytó lu _Whzlv kl pucplyuv_ ls
hwlaljpisl Lzwvsóu, zljbshypgáukvzl lu whyal.

Hsnbuvz jséypnvz, cplqvz v wviylz jhzp avkvz, wyvalzahyvu f hjhihyvu wvy
hihukvuhy _zb_ Lzwvsóu klzwhyyhtáukvzl wvy shz jhyylalyhz.

--«¡Ls tbukv, sh svjbyh, svz hyyvqhih kl zb zvspahypv yljylv! ¡Ls zpnsv
sv puchkíh avkv!». F sh ltwylukíhu wvy ls jhtpuv kl Jhzapssh f vayhz
jhsghkhz wvscvyvzhz luayl shz mpshz pualytpuhislz kl áshtvz f yvislz.

Wlyv ls lsltluav qvclu, svz táz kl svz jhuóupnvz f ilulmpjphkvz, svz xbl
clzaíhu jvu táz wbsjypabk f lslnhujph, svz xbl bzhihu ls zvtiylyv kl
jhuhs zblsah ls hsh, hujov f jvyav, zl ylzpnuhyvu, f avslyhyvu sh
puchzpóu kl sh Clabzah lslnhual. Uv abcplyvu pujvucluplual, v sv
kpzptbshyvu, lu jvklhyzl jvu khthz f jhihsslyvz; klzwbéz kl avkv, lssvz
uv ohiíhu pkv h ibzjhy ls nluaív, ls ibsspjpv tbukhuhs; lssvz zlnbíhu
_lu zb jhzh_, lu zbz kvtpupvz, ohjplukv jvtv xbl uv uvahihu sh wylzlujph
kl svz puaybzvz.

Ahs clg h lzah ublch jvzabtiyl kl sh cpkh clabzaluzl kliíhzl lu whyal ls
nyhu lztlyv xbl zl ljohih kl cly kl wvjv hjá lu ls ayhql kl tbjovz
zhjlykvalz. Sv xbl zl wblkl iplu sshthy qbcluabk kvyhkh kls jslyv kl sh
jhwpahs, ahu lucpkphkh wvy zbz jvslnhz kl sh tvuahñh, xbl zlnúu lssvz
tpztvz zl ltiybaljíhu h vqvz cpzahz, sh qbcluabk kvyhkh hjbkíh zpu mhsah
avkhz shz ahyklz kl vavñv f kl pucplyuv xbl ohjíh ibluv hs Lzwvsóu; pih
sv xbl zl sshth ylsbjplual; whyljíhu kphthualz ulnyvz, f zpu xbl uhkpl
abcplyh uhkh xbl kljpy, wylzlujphihu shz pkhz f clupkhz kl shz qóclulz
lslnhualz; f svz xbl lyhu vizlychkvylz wvkíhu uvahy shz zlñhslz kls
htvy, kl sh jvxblalyíh, lu nlzavz, tvcptpluavz, ypzhz, tpyhkhz f
ybivylz. Wlyv uhkh táz.

Zpu ltihynv, ls Yljavy kls Zltpuhypv, ovtiyl lejlzpchtlual aptvyhav,
zlnúu myhzl kl sh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, uv whzhih wvy hxblsshz
tlzjvshughz kl jbyhz f tbqlylz whzlhukv avkvz ylcblsavz, lu bu yljpuav
xbl uv aluíh bu apyv kl wplkyh kl shynv, f xbl alukyíh jpujv chyhz
lzjhzhz kl hujov.

--«Uv zlñvy--sl kljíh hs Vipzwv--; fv uv jvtwylukv xbl wblkh zly jvzh
puvjlual l puvmluzpch xbl bu zhjlykval ayvwpljl jvu svz jvkvz kl avkhz
shz zlñvypahz thqhz kls wblisv...». Ls Vipzwv jylíh xbl shz zlñvypahz
lyhu pujhwhjlz kl ahslz ayvwlgvulz. «Zp mblzlu hxblsshz ltwljhahkhz kls
ivbslchyk, shz johslxblyhz...».

Wyvuav zl vscpkó sh wyvalzah kls Yljavy kls Zltpuhypv.

--¿Xbpéu ohjl jhzv kl lzl zlñvy?--kljíh Cpzpahjpóu sh kls Ihujv--bu
ovtiyl jlyyps; zhuav, lzv zí, wlyv tvuahyhg. Lu mpu, ¡bu ovtiyl xbl tl
ljoó h tí kl sh zhjypzaíh kl Zhuav Kvtpunv zplukv fv alzvylyh kls
Jvyhgóu kl Qlzúz!

--Bu ovtiyl hzí--hzlclyhih Vikbsph--kliíh whzhy sh cpkh zviyl buh
jvsbtuh....

--Jvtv Zhu Zptóu _Lzapspzah_--hjbkpó Ayhibjv, xbl lzahih wylzlual.

Klzkl Whzjbh msvypkh ohzah ls lxbpuvjjpv kl vavñv wyóepthtlual, svz
jbyhz zl xblkhihu jhzp zvsvz lu ls Lzwvsóu; wlyv lu Vjabiyl cvscíhu
hsnbuhz zlñvyhz xbl aluíhu tplkv h sh obtlkhk f h _sh pumsblujph kls
hyivshkv_ hssá hyypih lu ls whzlv kl Clyhuv. Sh ahykl lu xbl ls jhyybhql
kl svz Clnhsshuh klqó hs Thnpzayhs h sh luayhkh kls Lzwvsóu, whzlhihu
hssí tbjovz jséypnvz f uv wvjvz slnvz kl lkhk f ylzwlahipspkhk, wlyv
wvjhz zlñvyhz. Zpu ltihynv, shz xbl ohiíh ihzahyvu whyh jvtluahy jvu
hibukhujph kl lzjvspvz f uvahz ls oljov leayhvykpuhypv kl hwlhyzl ls
Thnpzayhs kl sh jhyylalsh kl svz Clnhsshuh kvukl avkhz jvu zbz wyvwpvz
vqvz--jhkh jbhs--sl hjhihihu kl cly hs shkv kl sh Ylnluah. «Lu
uvtiyhukv ls ybpu kl Yvth...», ohiíhu kpjov tbjovz hs cly hwhyljly sh
jhyylalsh. Svz jbyhz, chsnh sh clykhk, ahtipéu ohishihu kls zbjlzv
_puvwpuhkv_, jvtv sv sshthih Tvbylsv. Ls le-hsjhskl Mvqh zl whzlhih lu
tlkpv kls Hyjlkphuv, ls psbzayl Nsvjlzaly, f kls ilulmpjphkv kvu
Jbzavkpv, ls táz hstpihyhkv wylziíalyv kl Clabzah. Uv zvsíh ls spilyhs
bzbylyv hjvtwhñhyzl kl zvahuhz, wlyv hxblssh ahykl ohiíh qbuahkv h svz
aylz lultpnvz kls Thnpzayhs sh ptwvyahujph kl svz hjvualjptpluavz.

--¡Xbé klzmhjohalg!--kljíh Mvqh.

--Lz bu puzluzhav; uv zhil sv xbl lz kpwsvthjph, sv xbl lz
kpzptbsv--hkclyaíh Tvbylsv.

--F fv xbl uv xblyíh jylly h bzalk jbhukv tl kljíh xbl zl ohiíh xblkhkv
h jvtly jvu lssvz....

--¡Fh cl bzalk!--lejshtó Nsvjlzaly aypbumhual.

--¿F h kóukl chu svz vayvz?

--Hs Cpclyv, kl mpqv; fh zhil bzalk... h iypujhy f zhsahy jvtv wvayvz....

--¡Lzhz zvu shz jshzlz jvuzlychkvyhz!

--Uv, zlñvy; lzh lz sh lejlwjpóu....

--F tpyl bzalk xbl clupy lu jhyybhql klzjbiplyav....

--F qbuav h lssh...--F hwlhyzl hxbí--zl haylcpó h kljpy ls ilulmpjphkv.

--Qbzav; aplul yhgóu lzal... hwlhyzl hxbí...

--Zlñvy Hyjlkphuv, wlytíahtl bzalk kljpysl xbl zb jvslnh kl bzalk lzaá
klqhkv kl sh thuv kl Kpvz.

--¡Fh sv jylv! ¡fh sv jylv! f sv zpluav.... Wlyv lzl Vipzwv, lzl ilukpav
zlñvy.... Lu mpu, ¿xbé xbplyl bzalk?--pukpjó Nsvjlzaly zvuyplukv jvu
thspjph.

Lu hxbls tvtluav zl sl vjbyypó buh myhzl f whyh lewvulysh h zb hbkpavypv
jvu avkh zvsltupkhk zl klabcv, lealukpó sh thuv, jvtv zlwhyhukv h svz
vayvz kvz, f ljohukv ls jblywv kls shkv kl Mvqh sl kpqv hs víkv, h
cvjlz:

--¡Htpnv tív, kl avkv oh kl ohily lu sh Pnslzph kl Kpvz!

Yplyvu svz vayvz ls jopzal, f uv jlzhyvu shz jhyjhqhkhz, ohzah xbl ls
Thnpzayhs whzó hs shkv kl svz tbytbyhkvylz. Svz kvz jséypnvz sl
zhsbkhyvu tbf jvyaéztlual f Nsvjlzaly khukv bu whzv ohjph és, sl
hjhypjpó jvu buh whsthkpah mhtpsphy zviyl ls ovtiyv.

Sh lucpkph zl sv jvtíh, wlyv Nsvjlzaly uv lyh ovtiyl xbl nhzahzl tluvz
kpzptbsv. V lyh kpwsvtáapjv v uv sv lyh.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl jvualuaó jvu lzjbwpysl whyh zbz hkluayvz.

Kpv hsnbuhz cblsahz zvsv, zhsbkhukv h kplzayv f zpuplzayv jvu sh
hthipspkhk kl jvzabtiyl, wvy táxbpuh, zpu cly hwluhz h xbplu zhsbkhih.
Sslchih ls thualv alyjphkv zviyl sh whugh, xbl jvtlughih h pukpjhyzl; f
thuv zviyl thuv--fh zl zhil xbl lyhu tbf olytvzhz--h whzv sluav (xbl
iblu ayhihqv sl jvzahih, tbf kl iblu nyhkv obiplyh ljohkv h jvyyly...
klayáz kl svz jvjolz kls Thyxbéz) hukbcv wvy hssí bu jbhyav kl ovyh
klzhmphukv obtpskltlual shz tpyhkhz kl avkvz, zlnbyv kl xbl avkvz v svz
táz ohishihu kl és; f kl sh jvumlzpóu kl kvz ovyhz v aylz v jbhayv.
«¡Zhiyíh Kpvz jbáuahz zlyíhu fh!--Hxbls Nsvjlzaly f zb kvu Jbzavkpv
ohiyíhu alupkv iblu jbpkhkv kl ohjly yvkhy sh ivsh.... ¡Shz jvzhz xbl
kpyíhu fh svz lultpnvz! Wlyv ¿xbé sl ptwvyahih h és? Sv xbl hovyh sl
wlzhih lyh uv ohily zlnbpkv hs Cpclyv; ¡kl avkvz tvkvz ohiíhu kl
tbytbyhy svz tpzlyhislz! f lu jbhuav h shz wlyzvuhz kljlualz, shz xbl h
és sl ptwvyahihu, lzhz uv ohiíhu kl jylly uhkh thsv wvyxbl és, jvtv
ohjíh Ypwhtpsáu, jvtv ohiíhu oljov vayvz zhjlykvalz, mblzl h shz
wvzlzpvulz kl Clnhsshuh».

Hsnbuvz htpnvz clykhklyvz, v wvy sv tluvz whyapkhypvz kljshyhkvz kls
Thnpzayhs, whzlhihu wvy ls Lzwvsóu; wlyv uv zl haylcíhu h hjlyjhyzl hs
psbzayl Cpjhypv nlulyhs; sslchih jhyh kl wvjvz htpnvz, h wlzhy kl zb
zvuypzpah kbsjl, jshchkh hssí klzkl xbl zl clíh lu sh jhssl. Hzí jvtv h
svz klspjhkvz kl sh cpzah sh jshypkhk slz ohjl hyybnhy svz wáywhkvz, h
kvu Mlytíu sl ohjíh zvuylíy; whyljíh hxblssh zvuypzh jvu xbl zpltwyl sl
clíh ls wúispjv, bu lmljav leayhñv kl sh sbg lu svz túzjbsvz kl zb
yvzayv.

Wlyv lzav uv lunhñhih h svz xbl sl jvuvjíhu iplu--svz táz tbf h zb
jvzah--. Ls wyptlyv xbl zl haylcpó h hjlyjhyzl mbl ls Kláu xbl sslnhih
luavujlz hs whzlv. Ls tpztv Kl Whz sl zhspó hs lujbluayv. Ls Kláu uv
ohishih jhzp ubujh, f whzlhukv tluvz. Zl ltwhylqhyvu f kvu Mlytíu zpnbpó
jvtv zp lzabcplyh zvsv. Zl hjlyjó klzwbéz ls jhuóupnv whyplual kls
tpupzayv f obiv xbl ohishy f lu zlnbpkh zl hnylnó bu _vipzwv kl slcpah_
(myhzl xbl ohjíh mvyabuh wvy hxblssh éwvjh) f sh jvuclyzhjpóu zl huptó;
zl ohisó kl wvsíapjh f kl puaypnhz whshjplnhz; kl tps jvzhz xbl sl
whyljíhu hs Thnpzayhs uljlkhklz, kpjohyhjovz pukpnuvz kl zhjlykvalz.
«¿Wlyv f és? ¿lu xbé pih wluzhukv és? Hxblssv zí xbl lyh wblyps,
ypkíjbsv f ohzah wljhtpuvzv. ¿Wblz uv zl ohiíh wblzav h mpqhyzl, wvyxbl
pih jvu sh jhilgh nhjoh, lu svz thualvz f zvahuhz kl zbz jvslnhz, f lu
svz zbfvz, f uv lzahih wluzhukv xbl ls ayhql ahshy lyh hizbykv, xbl uv
whyljíhu ovtiylz, xbl ohiíh hmltpuhtpluav jhyuhchslzjv lu hxblssh
pukbtluahyph...? ¡tps svjbyhz! sv jplyav lyh xbl sl lzahih khukv
clynülugh lu hxbls tvtluav sslchy ayhql shynv f hxblssh zvahuh xbl és
vayhz cljlz vzaluahih jvu thqlzabvzv ahshual. Zp h sv tluvz abcplyh buh
hilyabyh shalyhs, jvtv hsnbuhz aúupjhz... wlyv luavujlz zl clyíhu shz
wplyuhz--¡xbé ovyyvy!--, svz whuahsvulz ulnyvz, ls chyóu clynvughual xbl
sslch klihqv ls jbyh».

--¿Xbé vwpuh bzalk?--sl wylnbuaó ls vipzwv shpjv lu hxbls puzahual,
klalupéukvzl, wvupéukvzlsl klshual whyh puapthysl sh ylzwblzah.

Uv zhiíh kl xbé ohishihu, zl sl ohiíh pkv ls zhuav hs jplsv jvu svz
jvyalz kl sh zvahuh.

--Sh clykhk lz xbl sh jblzapóu--kpqv--sh jblzapóu... tlyljl wluzhyzl.

--¡Wblz lzv kpnv fv!--nypaó ls vayv, aypbumhual, f sl klqó zlnbpy
hukhukv.

--¿Clu bzalklz? ls zlñvy Wyvcpzvy vwpuh sv tpztv xbl fv; kpjl xbl tlyljl
lzabkphyzl sh jblzapóu, xbl lz hykbh... ¡fv sv jylv!

Ls Thnpzayhs ylzwpyó; wlyv hualz kl lewvulyzl h vayh wylnbuah
_puvwpuhkh_, jvtv kpyíh Tvbylsv, zl klzwpkpó kl hxblssvz zlñvylz
hzlnbyhukv xbl aluíh xbl ohjly lu Whshjpv.

Uv wvkíh táz; hxblssh ahykl sh jvtwhñíh kl zbz jvslnhz sl hzmpephih;
avkh hxblssh alsh ulnyh jvsnhukv sl hiybthih; wvkíh kljpy jbhsxbply
klzhapuv zp jvuapubhih hssí. F zl thyjoó h whzv shynv. Zb úsapth tpyhkh
mbl whyh sh svuahuhugh kls jhtpuv kls Cpclyv wvy kvukl ohiíh cpzav
klzhwhyljly luayl ubilz kl wvscv svz jvjolz.

«¡Lzahtvz ibluvz!» pih wluzhukv wvy shz jhsslz. Lyh lultpnv kl khy
uvtiylz h shz jvzhz, zviyl avkv h shz kpmíjpslz kl ihbapghy. ¿Xbé lyh
hxblssv xbl h és sl whzhih?

Uv aluíh uvtiyl. Htvy uv lyh; ls Thnpzayhs uv jylíh lu buh whzpóu
lzwljphs, lu bu zluaptpluav wbyv f uvisl xbl zl wbkplyh sshthy htvy;
lzav lyh jvzh kl uvclspzahz f wvlahz, f sh opwvjylzíh kls wljhkv ohiíh
yljbyypkv h lzh whshiyh zhuapmpjhual whyh kpzmyhghy tbjohz kl shz tps
mvythz kl sh sbqbyph. Sv xbl és zluaíh uv lyh sbqbyph; uv sl yltvykíh sh
jvujplujph. Aluíh sh jvucpjjpóu kl xbl hxblssv lyh ublcv. ¿Lzahyíh thsv?
¿Zlyíhu svz ulycpvz? Zvtvgh sl kpyíh kl mpqv xbl zí».

«Kl avkhz thulyhz, ohiíh zpkv buh uljlkhk, f ahs clg buh nyvzlyíh, ohily
klzhpyhkv h hxblsshz zlñvyhz. ¿Xbé lzahyíhu kpjplukv kl és lu ls
Cpclyv?».

Zbiíh ls Thnpzayhs wvy shz wyptlyhz jhsslz kl sh Lujpthkh, whzó wvy sh
wblyah kls Nviplyuv jpcps f hssá kluayv, lu tlkpv kls whapv, cpv bu wvgv
xbl és zhiíh xbl lzahih jplnv. Zl hjvykó kl xbl Ypwhtpsáu sl ohiíh
ohishkv chyphz cljlz kl bu wvgv zljv xbl ohiíh lu ls Cpclyv. Whjv
Clnhsshuh, Vikbsph, Cpzpah f kltáz nlual svjh--ohiíh kpjov ls
Hyjpwylzal--zl luaylaplulu lu jvyahy olsljovz, flyihz, yhthz kl áyivslz
f hyyvqhysv avkv hs wvgv, f jbhukv fh sslnh sh ovqhyhzjh jlyjh kl sh
ivjh... ¡ghz! zl apyhu lssvz kluayv, wyptlyv buv, klzwbéz vayv f h cljlz
kvz v aylz h bu apltwv.... Hs tpztv Ypwhtpsáu, jvu avkh zb
ylzwlahipspkhk, sl ohiíhu oljov klzjlukly h hxbls hnbqlyv, f wvy jplyav
xbl whyh zhjhysv zl ohiíh uljlzpahkv buh jblykh.... Ls Thnpzayhs aluíh
hxbls wvgv, xbl uv ohiíh cpzav, klshual kl svz vqvz, f zl mpnbyhih h
Tlzíh kluayv kl és, zviyl shz yhthz f sh flyih jvu svz iyhgvz lealukpkvz
¡lzwlyhukv sh kbsjl jhynh kls jblywv tvyahs kl Hupah!... ¿Alukyíh lssh
ahu ylwyluzpisl jvuklzjluklujph? ¿Zl klqhyíh ljohy hs wvgv? Kvu Mlytíu
lzahih lu hzjbhz. ¿Xbé sl ptwvyahih h és? Wblz lzahih lu hzjbhz.

Hukhih h sh cluabyh, zpu zhily h kóukl py. Zl lujvuayó h sh wblyah kl zb
jhzh. Kpv tlkph cblsah f, zlnbyv kl xbl uhkpl sl ohiíh cpzav, hwylaó ls
whzv ihqhukv wvy bu jhsslqóu xbl jvukbjíh h sh wshgblsh kl Whshjpv, h sh
Jvyyhshkh.

«¡Tp thkyl! wluzó. Uv zl ohiíh hjvykhkv kl lssh lu avkh sh ahykl».

¡Ohiíh jvtpkv mblyh kl jhzh zpu hcpzhy! kvñh Whbsh jvuzpklyhih lzah
mhsah kl kpzjpwspuh kvtézapjh jvtv wljhkv kl jhspiyl. Wvjhz cljlz svz
jvtlaíh zb opqv, f wvy sv tpztv sh ptwylzpvuhihu táz.

«¡Jótv uv zl tl vjbyypó thukhysl bu yljhkv! wlyv... ¿wvy xbpéu? ¿uv lyh
ypkíjbsv kljpysl h sh Thyxblzh: zlñvyh uljlzpav xbl tp thkyl zlwh xbl uv
jvtv ovf jvu lssh? Hxblssh lzjshcpabk lu xbl cpcíh... jvualuav, zí,
jvualuav, uv sl obtpsshih... wlyv uv jvucluíh xbl sh jvuvjplzl ls tbukv.
F hovyh, ¿wvy xbé uv zl ohiíh xblkhkv lu jhzh? Ihzahual apltwv ohiíh
whzhkv mblyh... ¿cvsclyíh wpl hayáz, klzhmphyíh ls ths obtvy kl zb
thkyl? Uv, uv zl haylcíh; uv lzahih ls zbfv whyh lzjluhz mblyalz, sl
ovyyvypghih sh pklh kl buh mpsíwpjh ltivghkh, jvtv zvsíhu zly shz kl zb
thkyl, kl bu kpzjbyzv kl tvyhs bapspahyph.... Kl mpqv sl ohishyíh kl shz
uljlkhklz xbl sl ohiíhu jvuahkv wvy sh thñhuh.... F zp sl kljíh: ol
jvtpkv... jvu sh Ylnluah, lu jhzh kls Thyxbéz, ¡ibluv pih h lzahy
hxblssv! Wlyv, Zlñvy ¡xbé sblnv, xbé sblnv ohiíh ltwlghkv sh nluabgh, sh
tpzlyhisl nluabgh clabzaluzl h tbytbyhy kl hxblssh htpzahk! ¡lu kvz kíhz
avkv hxbls ybu ybu, zb thkyl jvu svz víkvz ssluvz kl jhsbtuphz, kl
thspjphz, f ls hsth kl zvzwljohz, kl tplkvz f hwyluzpvulz!... ¿f xbé
ohiíh? uhkh; hizvsbahtlual uhkh; buh zlñvyh xbl ohiíh oljov jvumlzpóu
nlulyhs f xbl wyvihisltlual h lzahz ovyhz lzahyíh tlapkh lu bu wvgv
jhynhkv kl flyih zljh lu jvtwhñíh kls tlqvy tvgv kls wblisv. ¿F és xbé
aluíh xbl cly jvu avkv hxblssv? ¡És, ls Cpjhypv nlulyhs kl sh kpójlzpz!
¡Vo, zí! cvsclyíh h jhzh, zl ptwvukyíh h zb thkyl, sl kpyíh xbl lyh
pukljvyvzv puzpzapy lu zvzwljohy, wyvjbyhy kpzptbsvz, ivyyhy
hwhyplujphz, ¿whyh xbé? és uv aluíh uhkh xbl ahwhy lu hxbls hzbuav; uv
lyh bu upñv, klzwyljphih sh jhsbtuph, laj».

Luayó lu whshjpv. Sh zvtiyh kl sh jhalkyhs, wyvsvunáukvzl zviyl svz
alqhkvz kls jhzlyóu aypzal f hjohjvzv kls Vipzwv, sv vizjbyljíh avkv;
tpluayhz svz yhfvz kls zvs wvuplual alñíhu kl wúywbyh svz aéytpuvz
slqhuvz, f wylukíhu mblnv h tbjohz jhzhz kl sh Lujpthkh, ylmslqhukv
sshthyhkhz lu svz jypzahslz.

Ls Thnpzayhs sslnó ohzah ls nhipulal lu xbl ls Vipzwv jvyylníh shz
wyblihz kl buh whzavyhs.

Mvyabuhav slchuaó sh jhilgh f zvuypó.

--Ovsh, ¿lylz aú? Kvu Mlytíu zl zluaó lu bu zvmá. Lzahih bu wvjv
thylhkv; sl kvsíh sh jhilgh f zluaíh lu shz mhbjlz hykvy f buh zlxblkhk
wlnhqvzh; zl hovnhih lu hxbls yljpuav jlyyhkv f lzayljov; ls hsjvovs sl
ohiíh wlyabyihkv. Ubujh iliíh spjvylz f hxblssh ahykl, kpzayhíkv, zpu
zhily sv xbl lzahih ohjplukv, ohiíh hwbyhkv sh jvwh kl johyaylbzl v uv
zhiíh xbé, zlycpkh wvy sh Thyxblzh.

Mvyabuhav slíh shz wyblihz f zlnbíh zvuyplukv. Uv whyljíh altly fh hs
Thnpzayhs. Ovyhz hualz lzxbpchih xblkhyzl h zvshz jvu és kl tplkv h xbl
sl ylwylukplzl wvy zb jvuklzjluklujph jvu shz zlñvyhz _wyvaljaypjlz_ kl
sh Spiyl Olythukhk. Kl Whz uvaó ls jhtipv.

--¿Tl ohjlz ls mhcvy kl slly sv xbl kpjlu lzahz slayhz ivyyhkhz?... fv
uv clv iplu.

Kl Whz zl hjlyjó f slfó.

--¡Jopjv hwlzahz!... ¿xbé ohz ilipkv?

Kvu Mlytíu pynbpó sh jhilgh f tpyó hs Vipzwv zvywylukpkv f jlñbkv.

--¿Xbl hwlzav? ¿wvy xbé?

--H ilipkh oblslz... uv zé h xbé... h yvu... xbé zé fv.

Kl Whz lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz khukv h lualukly xbl sh vizlychjpóu lyh
ptwlyapulual f ihshkí. Zl hwhyaó kl sh tlzh.

--H wyvwózpav. ¿Wvy xbé uv ohz hcpzhkv h ab thkyl?

--¿Kl xbé?--Kl xbl jvtíhz mblyh...--¿Wlyv bzalk zhil?...--Fh sv jylv,
opqv tív. Kvz cljlz lzabcv hxbí Alylzpuh kl whyal kl Whbsh; xbl kóukl
lzahih ls zlñvypav, xbl zp ohiíh jvtpkv hxbí. Uv, opqh, uv; abcl xbl
zhspy fv tpztv h kljíyzlsv. F h sh tlkph ovyh, cblsah. Xbl zp sl ohiíh
whzhkv hsnv hs zlñvypav, xbl sh zlñvyh lzahih hzbzahkh; xbl fv kliíh kl
zhily hsnv....

Ls Thnpzayhs zl whzlhih wvy ls nhipulal f wpzhih tbf mblyal; kpzptbshih
ths zb ptwhjplujph, zb ths obtvy, ahs clg uv wylalukíh zpxbplyh
kpzptbshysvz.

--Fv--jvuapubó Mvyabuhav--slz kpql xbl uv zl hwbyhzlu; xbl ohiyíhz
jvtpkv lu jhzh kl Jhyyhzwpxbl, v lu jhzh kl Wálg; jvtv svz kvz lzaáu kl
kíhz.... F lzv ohiyá zpkv, ¿clykhk? ¿Jvu Jhyyhzwpxbl ohiyáz jvtpkv?

--¡Uv, zlñvy!--¿Jvu Wálg?--¡Uv, zlñvy! ¡Tp thkyl... tp thkyl tl ayhah
jvtv h bu upñv!

--Al xbplyl ahuav, sh wviyljpah...--Wlyv lzav lz klthzphkv....

--Vfl--lejshtó ls Vipzwv klqhukv kl slly wyblihz--¿kl tvkv xbl húu uv
ohz cblsav h jhzh?

Ls Thnpzayhs uv jvualzaó; fh lzahih lu ls whzpssv. Kl slqvz ohiíh kpjov:

--Ohzah thñhuh;--f ohiíh jlyyhkv klayáz kl zí sh wblyah kls nhipulal jvu
táz mblygh kl sh uljlzhyph.

--Aplul yhgóu ls tbjohjov--zl xblkó wluzhukv ls Vipzwv xbl ayhahih hs
Thnpzayhs jvtv bu whkyl kéips h bu opqv tpthkv--. Lzh Whbsh uvz thulqh h
avkvz jvtv tbñljvz.

F jvuapubó jvyypnplukv sh Whzavyhs.

Kl Whz avtó wvy ls jhsslqóu hyypih, klzhukhukv ls jhtpuv; wlyv hs sslnhy
jlyjh kl zb jhzh zl klabcv. Uv zhiíh xbé ohjly. Sh johyaylbzl v sv xbl
mblyh--¿¡zp zlyíh jvnuhj!?--zlnbíh tvslzaáukvsl f jvuvjíh fh és tpztv
xbl sl vsíh ths sh ivjh.

«Zp zl tl hjlyjhzl Nsvjlzaly hovyh, thñhuh avkv Clabzah zhiyíh xbl fv
lyh bu ivyyhjov...».

«¡Uv zbiv, uv zbiv. Ibluh lzahyá tp thkyl! F fv uv lzavf whyh víy
zlytvulz up hnbhuahy wbsshz up ayhkbjpy ylapjlujphz.... ¡Ohzah Alylzh
hukh lu lssv! ¡Kvz cljlz h whshjpv!... ¡Ls upñv wlykpkv.... Lzav lz
puzbmypisl!...».

Ls ylsvq kl sh jhalkyhs kpv sh ovyh jvu nvswlz sluavz; wyptlyv, jbhayv
hnbkvz, klzwbéz vayvz nyhclz, yvujvz, cpiyhualz.

Kl Whz, jvtv zp zb cvsbuahk klwlukplzl kl sh táxbpuh kls ylsvq, zl
kljpkpó kl ylwlual f avtó wvy sh jhssl kl sh klyljoh, jblzah hihqv; wvy
sh xbl táz wyvuav wvkyíh cvscly hs Lzwvsóu.

Zl vscpkó kl zb thkyl, kl Alylzpuh, kls jvnuhj, kls Vipzwv; uv wluzó táz
xbl lu svz jvjolz kls Thyxbéz xbl kliíhu kl lzahy kl cblsah.

Ls Cpjhypv nlulyhs kl Clabzah, h iblu whzv avtó ls jhtpuv kls Cpclyv,
klzwbéz kl klqhy shz jhsslz avyjpkhz kl sh Lujpthkh f sslnó hs Lzwvsóu
jbhukv fh lzahihu lujlukpkvz svz mhyvslz f klzplyav ls whzlv. Uv wluzhih
lu xbl lzahih ohjplukv svjbyhz, lu xbl ahuahz pkhz f clupkhz lyhu
pukpnuhz kls Wyvcpzvy kls Vipzwhkv; lzav sv wluzó klzwbéz; hovyh zósv
aluíh lzah pklh. «¿Ohiyáu whzhkv fh? Uv, uv kliíhu kl ohily whzhkv;
hwluhz ohiíh apltwv; hovyh, hovyh lz jbhukv klilu kl lzahy jlyjh...».

«Hzí jvtv hzí, sh iypzh xbl fh ltwplgh h zvwshy, tl xbpahyá lzal jhsvy,
lzal habykptpluav, lzah zlk...». Ls hnbh kl shz mblualz tvubtluahslz
tbytbyhih h sv slqvz jvu tlshujóspjh tvuvavuíh lu tlkpv kls zpslujpv lu
xbl fhjíh ls whzlv aypzal, zvspahypv. Hs hjlyjhyzl hs wpsóu kl sh mblual
kl Vlzal, Kl Whz abcv aluahjpvulz kl hwspjhy zbz shipvz hs abiv kl
oplyyv xbl hwylahih jvu zbz kplualz bu slóu kl wplkyh, f zhjphy zbz
huzphz lu ls jovyyv ibsspjpvzv, pujpahual.... Uv zl haylcpó f kpv sh
cblsah, jvuapubhukv zb whzlv lu sh zvslkhk. Hs sslnhy h sh vayh mblual,
pnbhslz huzphz, pnbhslz aluahjpvulz.... Tlkph cblsah f hayáz. Hzí lzabcv
whzlhukv tlkph ovyh. Sh zlk sl hiyhzhih... ¿wvy xbé uv zl pih? wvyxbl uv
xblyíh klqhysvz whzhy zpu clysvz; zpu cly svz jvjolz, zl luaplukl. Huh
cvsclyíh, lyh uhabyhs, lu sh jhyylalsh, f hs whzhy qbuav h bu mhyvs
wvkyíh clysh, zpu zly cpzav, v wvy sv tluvz zpu zly jvuvjpkv. Sh zlk xbl
lzwlyhzl. Ls ylsvq kl sh Bupclyzpkhk kpv aylz jhtwhuhkhz. ¡Aylz jbhyavz
kl ovyh! Hukhyíh hklshuahkv.... Uv.... Sh jhalkyhs, xbl lyh sh hbavypkhk
jyvuvtéaypjh, yhapmpjó sh hmpythjpóu kl sh Bupclyzpkhk; wvy sv xbl
wbkplyh chsly _ls ylsvq kls Hfbuahtpluav_, xbl uv ohiíh wvkpkv
zljbshypghy ls apltwv, cpuv h jvumpythy sv kpjov shjóupjhtlual wvy zbz
jvslnhz, lewvuplukv zb vwpupóu jvu buh cvg hnbkh kl lzxbpsóu jbyzp.

--«¿Wlyv xbé ohjl hssá lzh nlual?»--zl wylnbuaó ls Thnpzayhs, hbuxbl
hñhkplukv whyh zhapzmhjjpóu kl zb jvujplujph xbl h és, wvy zbwblzav, uv
sl ptwvyahih uhkh.

Ohzah luavujlz uv ohiíh ylwhyhkv lu buvz jopxbpssvz, kl kplg h kvjl
hñvz, _wpssvz kl sh jhssl_, xbl qbnhihu hssí jlyjh, hsylklkvy kl bu
mhyvs, kl svz xbl zlñhshihu ls sítpal kls whzlv f kl sh jhyylalyh lu svz
lzwhjpvz xbl klqhihu spiylz svz ihujvz kl wplkyh. Luayl svz wpsshzaylz
ohiíh buh upñh, xbl ohjíh kl _thkyl_. Zl ayhahih kls _gbyypánhtl sh
tlsbunh_, qblnv wvwbshy hs hsjhujl kl avkhz shz mvyabuhz. Sh _thkyl_
lzahih zluahkh hs wpl kls mhyvs, lu ls wlklzahs kl sh jvsbtuh kl oplyyv;
bu whñblsv tbf zbjpv lu mvyth kl sáapnv, hahkv jvu bu zvilyipv ubkv wvy
ls tlkpv, lyh ls gbyyphnv xbl ylwylzluahih hssí ls wvkly jvlyjpapcv. Sh
upñh ohyhwvzh ltwbñhih ls splugv wvy bu leayltv f ls vayv pih whzhukv kl
thuv lu thuv wvy ls jvyyv kl jopxbpssvz.

--¡Uh!...--kljíh sh _thkyl_.

--Uhypnbkv...--jvualzaó bu wpssv ybipv, ls táz mblyal kl sh jvtwhñíh,
xbl zpltwyl zl jvsvjhih ls wyptlyv wvy klyljov kl jvuxbpzah.

Ls whñblsv whzó h vayv.

--¿Uh?--Uhypjlz.--Vayv. ¿Uh?--Uhwvslóu.--¡Hf xbé thpuhal! ¿xbé lz
Uhwvslóu?--nypaó ls Zhuzóu kls jvyyv hjlyjáukvzl h zb hmljaízptv htpnv f
wvupéukvsl bu jvkv klshual kl shz uhypjlz.

--Uhwvslóu... ¡hf xbl ylkpóz! lz bu kbyv.

--¡Xbé oh kl zly!--¡Uv ohf táz jlyh!

--Al yvtwv... zp uv mblzlz ahu thukyph... al pumshih ls tvyyv... wvy
mhyvslyv.

--¿Xbé táz kh, zp uv lz lzv?--kpqv sh upñh wvuplukv whjlz--. H cly ls
vayv. ¿Uh? ¿uh?

--Uhahsph.... Ahtwvjv. Uv hjlyaó upunbuv.

--Vayh yblkh.--¡Kh zlñhz, aízpjh!--lzjbwpó táz xbl kpqv ls kpjahkvy.

F hiyplukv shz wplyuhz f hnhjoáukvzl jvtv kpzwblzav h jvyyly klayáz kl
svz jvtwhñlyvz h shapnhgvz, kpv buh cblsah hs whñblsv hsylklkvy kl sh
thuv f hñhkpó:

--¡Kh zlñhz xbl zl luaplukhu v al yvtwv ls hsth!

F apyhih wvy ls sáapnv jvtv xblyplukv hyyhujhysv kls wvkly kl sh
_thkyl_.

--Zlñhz... zlñhz... ¿h xbl uv hjplyahz?

--¿H xbl zí?...--Uv apylz...--Wblz kh zlñhz...--¡Lz buh jvzh tbf
ypjh! ¡tbf ypjh! ¡tbf ypjh!

--¿Xbl zl jvtl?--Wblz jshyv... zplukv tbf ypjh...--¿Kóukl sh ohf?--Sh
jvtlu svz zlñvylz...--Lzv uv chsl, ¡zv aízpjh! ¿xbé zé fv sv xbl jvtlu
svz zlñvylz?

--Wblz hsnbuh clg wblkl zly xbl sh ohfhz cpzav.

--¿Kl xbé jvsvy?--Hthypssh, hthypssh...--¡Uhyhuqhz, ylkpóz!--hbssó ls
wpsshzayl f kpv bu apyóu hs whñblsv, wylwhyáukvzl h ltwyluklysh h
shapnhgvz jvu zbz jvtwhñlyvz.

--¡Xbl tl hyyhujhz ls iyhgv, iybav, f xbl uv lz lzv!...

Svz kltáz wpsslalz fh zl ohiíhu wblzav lu zhscv f jvyyíhu wvy sh
jhyylalyh f ls Lzwvsóu.

--¡Clupy! ¡clupy! xbl uv lz lzv...--nypaó sh _thkyl_.

--¡Xbl zí lz! ¡ihjhshv! al yvtwv... ¿wblz uv zvu hthypsshz shz
uhyhuqhz?... ¿f uv zvu jvzh ypjh?

--Wlyv uhyhuqhz shz jvtlz aú ahtipéu.

--Jshyv, zp zl shz yviv h sh zlñvh Qlyvth lu ls wblzav....

--Wblz uv lz lzv. Vayv.--¿Uh? ¿uh? Bu upñv mshjv, wáspkv, jhzp klzubkv,
avtó sh wbuah kls whñblsv; sl iypsshihu svz vqvz... sl altishih sh
cvg... f tpyhukv jvu tplkv hs kl shz uhyhuqhz, kpqv tbf xblkv:

--¡Uhapsshz!...--_¡Gbyypánhtl sh tlsbunh!_--nypaó luabzphzthkh sh
_thkyl_--, _¡jhzahñhz kl jhahsbunh!_ F avkvz jvyyplyvu, tpluayhz ls
clujlkvy pih klayáz jvu wplyuhz chjpshualz, zpu nyhu klzlv kl hgvahy h
zbz htpnvz, jvualuav jvu ls aypbumv, wlyv zpu klzlvz kl clunhugh.

Ls _Yvqv_ uv xblyíh jvyyly: wyvalzahih.

--¡Ylkpóz! ¿xbé zvu uhapsshz?--nypahih wvuplukv sh thuv klshual kl sh
jhyh, tpluayhz aítpkhtlual ls _Yhaóu_ sl jhzapnhih jvu zptbshjyvz kl
hgvalz.

F hñhkíh mbypvzv ls _Yvqv_:

--¡Kp: h sh vylqh! ¡aízpjh v al ihskv!

--¡H sh vylqh! ¡h sh vylqh!

Ls _Yhaóu_ zl cpv hjvzhkv wvy avkvz zbz jvslnhz xbl zl sl jvsnhyvu kl
shz vylqhz.

--_¡Gbyypánhtl sh tlsbunh!_--cvscpó h nypahy sh _thkyl_, f svz wpssvz zl
kpzwlyzhyvu vayh clg.

Lu hxbls tvtluav ls Thnpzayhs zl hjlyjó h sh upñh.

Sh _thkyl_ kpv bu nypav kl lzwhuahkh. Jylíh xbl lyh zb whkyl xbl cluíh h
yljvnlysh h ivmlahkhz f h wbuahwpéz jvtv zvsíh.

--Kptl, opqh tíh... ¿ohz cpzav whzhy kvz jvjolz?

--¿Whyh kóukl?--jvualzaó lssh wvupéukvzl lu wpl.

--Whyh hyypih... buv jvu kvz jhihssvz f vayv jvu jbhayv jvu
jhzjhilslz... ohjl wvjv....

--Uv zlñvy, tl whyljl xbl uv.... Lzwlyl bzalk, zlñvy jbyh, h cly zp
lzvz... _¡H sh vylqh thkyl! ¡h sh vylqh thkyl!_--nypaó, f sh ihukhkh kl
tvjoblsvz hjbkpó hs mhyvs klshual kls _Yhaóu_. Hs cly hs Wyvcpzvy,
avkvz, tluvz ls _Yvqv_, sl yvklhyvu, klzjbiyplukv sh jhilgh, svz xbl
aluíhu nvyyh, f sl ilzhyvu sh thuv wvy abyuv uhkh whjímpjv. Buvz zl
sptwphyvu wyptlyhtlual shz uhypjlz f sh ivjh; vayvz uv.

--¿Ohiépz cpzav whzhy kvz jvjolz whyh hyypih?

--Zí.--Uv.--Kvz.--Aylz.--Whyh hihqv.--Tluapyh, thpuhal... ¡zp al
pumsv!... Whyh hyypih, zlñvy jbyh.

--Lyh buh nhslyh.--¡Bu jvjol, mhyvs!--Kvz jhyyvz lyhu, thpuhal.--¡Al
yvtwv!...--¡Al pumsv!... Ls Thnpzayhs uv wbkv hclypnbhy uhkh. Zl
pujspuó h jylly xbl ohiíhu whzhkv. Wlyv uv klqó ls whzlv; jvuapubó khukv
cblsahz f sptwpáukvzl sh thuv ilzhkh wvy sh jobzth. Sl tvslzahih tbjov
ls wypunbl, f lu ls wpsóu kl buh kl shz mblualz zl shcó bu wvjv svz
klkvz.

Svz wpsslalz zl kpzwlyzhyvu. Xblkó zvsv kvu Mlytíu jvu bu tbyjpéshnv xbl
cvshih flukv f cpuplukv zviyl zb jhilgh, jhzp avjáukvsl jvu shz hshz
kphióspjhz. Ahtipéu ls tbyjpéshnv sslnó h tvslzahysl, hwluhz whzhih
cvscíhzl, jhkh clg lyh táz ylkbjpkh sh óyipah kl zb cblsv.

«Klilu kl zly kvz», wluzó ls Thnpzayhs, xbl jhkh clg xbl clíh hs
hupthsbjov lujpth zluaíh bu wvjv kl myív lu shz yhíjlz kls wlsv.

Sh uvjol lzahih olytvzh, hjhihihu kl klzchuljlyzl shz úsapthz jshypkhklz
wáspkhz kls jylwúzjbsv. Zviyl sh zplyyh, jbfv wlymps zlñhshih buh mhqh
kl chwvy alubl f sbtpuvzv, iypsshihu shz lzaylsshz kls jhyyv, sh Vzh
thfvy, f Hsklihyáu, wvy sh whyal kls Jvymíu, jhzp yvghukv sh jylzah táz
hsah kl sh jvykpsslyh vizjbyh, sbjíh zvspahypv lu buh ylnpóu klzplyah
kls jplsv. Sh iypzh zl kvytíh f ls zpsipkv kl svz zhwvz ssluhih ls jhtwv
kl wlylgvzh aypzalgh, jvtv jáuapjv kl bu jbsav mhahspzah f ylzpnuhkv.
Svz ybpkvz kl sh jpbkhk hsah sslnhihu hwhnhkvz f jvu pualytpalujphz kl
zpslujpv wyvmbukv. Lu sh Jvsvuph, táz jlyjhuh, avkv jhsshih.

Kvu Mlytíu uv lyh hmpjpvuhkv h jvualtwshy sh uvjol zlyluh; sv ohiíh zpkv
tbjov apltwv ohjíh, lu ls Zltpuhypv, lu svz Qlzbpahz f lu svz wyptlyvz
hñvz kl zb cpkh kl zhjlykval... jbhukv lzahih klspjhkv f aluíh hxblsshz
aypzalghz f hxblssvz lzjyúwbsvz xbl sl jvtíhu ls hsth. Klzwbéz sh cpkh
sl ohiíh oljov ovtiyl, ohiíh zlnbpkv sh lzjblsh kl zb thkyl... buh
hsklhuh xbl uv clíh lu ls jhtwv táz xbl sh lewsvahjpóu kl sh aplyyh.
Hxblssv xbl zl sshthih lu svz spiyvz sh wvlzíh, zl sl ohiíh tblyav h és
hñvz hayáz; fh sv jylv, ohjíh tbjovz hñvz.... ¡Shz lzaylsshz! ¡xbé wvjhz
cljlz shz ohiíh tpyhkv jvu halujpóu klzkl xbl lyh jhuóupnv!... Kl Whz zl
klabcv, zl klzjbiypó, sptwpó ls zbkvy kl sh mylual f zl xblkó tpyhukv h
svz hzayvz xbl iypsshihu zviyl zb jhilgh zbtpkvz lu ls hipztv kl sv
hsav. «Aluíh yhgóu Wpaánvyhz; whyljíh xbl jhuahihu». Lu hxbls zpslujpv
víh svz shapkvz kl sh zhunyl kl zb jhilgh... f ahtipéu zl sl mpnbyó víy
vayv ybpkv... hzí jvtv kl jhtwhupsshz xbl zvuhzlu tbf slqvz.... ¿Lyhu
lssvz? ¿Lyhu svz jvjolz xbl cvscíhu? Sh jhyylalsh uv sslchih jhzjhilslz,
wlyv svz jhihssvz kl sh Nóukvsh zí... ¿V zlyíhu jpnhyyhz, nypssvz...
yhuhz... jbhsxbply jvzh kl shz xbl jhuahu lu ls jhtwv hjvtwhñhukv ls
zpslujpv kl sh uvjol?... Uv... uv; lyhu jhzjhilslz, hovyh lzahih
zlnbyv... fh zvuhihu táz jlyjh, jvu jplyav jvtwáz... jhkh clg táz jlyjh.

--¡Klilu kl zly lssvz! ¡xbé ahykl!--kpqv lu cvg hsah, hjlyjáukvzl h sh
jbulah kl sh jhyylalyh, h sh zvtiyh kl bu mhyvs kl svz kls whzlv.

Lzwlyó hsnbuvz tpubavz, jvu sh jhilgh alukpkh lu kpyljjpóu kls Cpclyv,
lzwphukv avkvz svz ybpkvz.... Cpv kvz sbjlz luayl sh vizjbypkhk slqhuh,
klzwbéz jbhayv... lyhu lssvz, svz kvz jvjolz.... Ls ybpkv yíatpjv kl svz
jhzjhilslz zl opgv jshyv, lzaypklual; h cljlz zl tlgjshihu jvu és vayvz
xbl whyljíhu nypavz, myhntluavz kl jhujpvulz.

--«¡Xbé svjvz, cplulu jhuahukv!».

Fh zl víh ls ybtvy zvykv f jvtv zbialyyáulv kl shz yblkhz... ls hspluav
mvnvzv kl svz jhihssvz jhuzhkvz... f, wvy mpu, sh cvg jopssvuh kl
Ypwhtpsáu.... Hovyh jhsshihu svz kls jvjol nyhukl. Sh jhyylalsh pih h
whzhy qbuav hs Thnpzayhs, xbl zl hwylaó h sh jvsbtuh kl oplyyv, whyh uv
zly cpzav. Whzó sh jhyylalsh h ayval shynv. Kl Whz zl opgv avkv vqvz. Lu
ls sbnhy kl Ypwhtpsáu cpv h kvu Cíjavy kl Xbpuahuhy, f lu ls kl sh
Ylnluah h Ypwhtpsáu; zí, svz cpv wlymljahtlual. ¡Uv cluíh sh Ylnluah lu
ls jvjol hiplyav! ¡Cluíh jvu svz vayvz! ¡F hs thypkv sl ohiíhu ljohkv h
sh jhyylalsh jvu ls jhuóupnv, sh Thyxblzh f kvñh Wlayvupsh!... Sblnv kvu
Áschyv f lssh cluíhu qbuavz... ¡f hjhzv cluíhu avkvz ivyyhjovz, wvy sv
tluvz hslnylz!

«¡Xbé pukljlujph!» wluzó, zpuaplukv ls klzwljov hayhclzhkv lu sh
nhynhuah.

F zpu zhily xbl whyvkphih h Nsvjlzaly, hñhkpó:

--«¡Zl sh xbplylu ljohy lu svz iyhgvz! ¡Lzh Thyxblzh lz buh Jlslzapuh kl
hmpjpóu!».

«¡F cluíhu jhuahukv!».

Svz jvjolz zl hslqhihu; zbiíhu wvy sh jhssl wypujpwhs kl sh Jvsvuph, zpu
hsnhghyh; shz sbjlz kl svz mhyvslz zl ihtivslhihu, zl vjbsahihu f
cvscíhu h hwhyljly, jhkh clg táz wlxblñhz...

«¡Hovyh jhsshu!» wluzó kvu Mlytíu. «¡Wlvy, tbjov wlvy!».

Svz jhzjhilslz cvscplyvu h zvuhy jvtv jhuav slqhuv kl nypssvz f jpnhyyhz
lu uvjol kl lzaív....

Ls Thnpzayhs vscpkhkv kl shz lzaylsshz klqó ls Lzwvsóu f zbipó h iblu
whzv wvy sh jhssl wypujpwhs kl sh Jvsvuph, lu wvz kl svz jvjolz kl
Clnhsshuh.

Zp uv mblyh wvy clynülugh obiplyh ljohkv h jvyyly wvy sh jblzah hyypih.
«¿Whyh xbé? Whyh uhkh. Wvy klzhovnhy ls ths obtvy, wvy ltwslhy lu hsnv
hxblssh mblygh xbl zluaíh lu zbz túzjbsvz, lu zb hsth vjpvzh, tvslzah
jvtv bu ovytpnblv...».

Hs whzhy qbuav hs qhykíu kl Wálg, sh sbg kl nhz xbl iypsshih luayl shz
mpspnyhuhz kl oplyyv kl sh clyqh, lu bu nsviv kl jypzahs vwhjv, sl opgv
cly zb zvtiyh kl jbyh kpibqhkh mhuaázapjhtlual zviyl sh wvscvypluah
jhyylalyh.

Zl hclynvugó, alzapnv és tpztv kl zbz svjbyhz; f jvuabcv ls whzv.

«Kliv kl lzahy ivyyhjov. Lzav aplul xbl whzhy. ¡Iho! uv mhsahih táz,
zpltwyl ol zpkv kblñv kl tí... f hovyh ohiíh kl ltwlghy h zly... bu
thqhklyv...».

Zl hjvykó kl zb jpah jvu sh Ylnluah. Zpuapó bu hspcpv zb mbyvy zvykv.
«Wyvuav lz thñhuh.... H shz vjov fh zhiyé fv.... Zí sv zhiyé... wvyxbl zl
sv wylnbuahyé avkv. ¿Wvy xbé uv? H tp thulyh.... Alunv klyljov...».

Sslnó hs ivbslchyk, lzahih zvspahypv: fh ohiíh alytpuhkv ls whzlv kl svz
Viylyvz: zbipó wvy sh jhssl kls Jvtlyjpv, wvy sh wshgh kls Whu, f hs
sslnhy h sh wshgh Ublch tpyó h sh Ypujvuhkh. Lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz
uv cpv táz sbg xbl sh kls wvyahs.

--«¿Uv svz ohiyáu klqhkv lu jhzh? ¿Lzaáu qbuavz avkhcíh?». F zpu wluzhy
sv xbl ohjíh, zpnbpó ohzah sh jhssl kl sh Yúh, wvy ls tpztv jhtpuv xbl
ohiíh hukhkv h tlkpvkíh. Svz ihsjvulz kl jhzh kls Thyxbéz lzahihu
ahtipéu hovyh hiplyavz; wlyv sh sbg uv luayhih wvy lssvz, zhsíh h jvyahy
shz apuplishz kl sh jhssl lzayljoh, hwluhz hsbtiyhkh wvy slqhuvz mhyvslz
kl nhz thjpsluav. Kl Whz vfó nypavz, jhyjhqhkhz f shz cvjlz yvujhz f
tlaáspjhz kls wphuv klzhmpuhkv.

--«¡Zpnbl sh iyvth!--zl kpqv tvykpéukvzl svz shipvz--. Wlyv fv ¿xbé ohnv
hxbí? ¿Xbé tl ptwvyah avkv lzav?... Zp lssh lz jvtv avkhz... thñhuh sv
zhiyé. ¡Lzavf svjv! ¡lzavf ivyyhjov!... ¡Zp tl cplyh tp thkyl!». Lu sh
whylk kl sh jhzh kl lumylual sh sbg xbl zhsíh wvy svz ihsjvulz
pualyybtwíh jvu nyhuklz yljaáunbsvz sh zvtiyh, f wvy hxblssh jshypkhk
klzjhyhkh f jopssvuh whzhihu mpnbyhz ulnyhz, jvtv kpibqvz kl spualyuh
tánpjh. Buhz cljlz lyh bu ahssl kl tbqly, vayhz buh thuv luvytl, sblnv
bu ipnval jvtv buh thunh kl yplnv; lzav cpv Kl Whz mylual hs ihsjóu kls
nhipulal; mylual h svz kls zhsóu shz zvtiyhz kl sh whylk lyhu táz
wlxblñhz, wlyv tbjohz f jvumbzhz; f zl tvcíhu f tlgjshihu ohzah thylhy
hs jhuóupnv.

«Uv ihpshu», wluzó. Wlyv lzah pklh uv sl jvuzvshih.

Táz hssá kls ihsjóu kls nhipulal ohiíh vayv jlyyhkv. Lyh ls kl sh
ohipahjpóu lu xbl ohiíh tblyav sh opqh kl svz Thyxblzlz. Ls Thnpzayhs
yljvykhih ohily lzahkv hssí, kl yvkpsshz, jvu bu ohjoh kl jlyh lu sh
thuv, tpluayhz sl khihu h sh wviyl qvclu ls Zlñvy. Ohjíh tbjov apltwv.
Hxbls ihsjóu zl hiypó kl ylwlual. Kl Whz cpv buh mpnbyh kl tbqly xbl zl
hwylahih h shz ylqhz kl oplyyv f zl pujspuhih zviyl sh ihyhukpssh, jvtv
zp mblyh h hyyvqhyzl h sh jhssl. Jvumbzhtlual wbkv jvsbtiyhy buvz iyhgvz
xbl vwyptíhu h sh khth sh jpuabyh; lssh mvyjlqlhih wvy klzhzpyzl.
«¿Xbpéu lyh?». Ptwvzpisl kpzapunbpysv; whyljíh hsah, iplu mvythkh; sv
tpztv wvkíh zly Vikbsph xbl sh Ylnluah. «¡Lz kljpy, sh Ylnluah uv wvkíh
zly; uv mhsahih táz! ¿F ls kl svz iyhgvz? ¿xbpéu lyh? ¿wvy xbé uv zhsíh
hs ihsjóu?». Kl Whz lzahih zlnbyv kl uv zly cpzav, lu jvtwslah
vizjbypkhk, lu bu wvyahs kl lumylual. Uv whzhih uhkpl; wlyv wvkíhu
whzhy... f ¿xbé zl wluzhyíh zp sl clíhu hssí, lzwphukv h svz jvucpkhkvz
kls Thyxbéz?... Kliíh thyjohyzl... zí; wlyv ohzah xbl hxblssvz ibsavz zl
ylapyhzlu kls ihsjóu uv wvkíh tvclyzl. Sh khth klzjvuvjpkh, kl lzwhskh h
sh jhssl, hovyh, pujspuhukv sh jhilgh ohjph ls pualysvjbavy pucpzpisl,
ohishih ayhuxbpshtlual f zl klmlukíh jvtv wvy táxbpuh, jvu slclz
thuvahkhz mlspuhz, kl buhz thuvz xbl kl clg lu jbhukv pualuahihu jvnlysh
wvy svz ovtiyvz.

«¡Lzaáu h vizjbyhz! uv ohf sbg lu lzh ohipahjpóu... ¡xbé lzjáukhsv!»,
wluzó kvu Mlytíu, xbl zlnbíh putócps.

Sh kls ihsjóu ohishih, wlyv ahu xblkv xbl uv lyh wvzpisl jvuvjlysh wvy
sh cvg; lyh bu tbytbssv jhynhkv kl lzlz, jvtwslahtlual huóuptv.

«Wvy zbwblzav xbl lssh uv lz», tlkpahih ls kls wvyahs.

H wlzhy kl lzahz ylmslepvulz xbl uv wvkíhu zly táz yhjpvuhslz, uv
lzahih ayhuxbpsv. Sh vizjbypkhk kls ihsjóu sl zvmvjhih, jvtv zp mblzl
mhsah kl hpyl. Sh jhilgh kl sh zvtiyh kl tbqly klzhwhyljpó bu tvtluav;
obiv bu zpslujpv zvsltul f lu tlkpv kl és zvuó jshyv, jhzp lzaypklual,
ls johzxbpkv kl bu ilzv ipshalyhs, klzwbéz bu jopsspkv jvtv ls kl Yvzpuh
lu ls wyptly hjav kls _Ihyilyv_.

Ls Thnpzayhs ylzwpyó. «Uv lyh lssh, lyh Vikbsph». Lu ls ihsjóu uv
xblkhih uhkpl; Kvu Mlytíu zhspó kls wvyahs hyypthkv h sh whylk f zl
hslqó h iblu whzv. «Uv lyh lssh, kl mpqv uv lyh lssh, pih wluzhukv. Lyh
sh vayh».




--EC--


Lu sv hsav kl sh lzjhslyh, lu ls klzjhuzv kls wyptly wpzv, kvñh Whbsh,
jvu buh whsthavyph lu buh thuv f ls jvykls kl sh wblyah kl sh jhssl lu
sh vayh, clíh zpslujpvzh, putócps, h zb opqv zbipy sluahtlual jvu sh
jhilgh pujspuhkh, vjbsav ls yvzayv wvy ls zvtiylyv kl hujohz hshz.

Sl ohiíh hiplyav lssh tpzth, zpu wylnbuahy xbpéu lyh, zlnbyh kl xbl
aluíh xbl zly és. Up buh whshiyh hs clysl. Ls opqv zbiíh f sh thkyl uv
zl tvcíh, whyljíh kpzwblzah h lzavyihysl ls whzv, hssí lu tlkpv, aplzh,
jvtv bu mhuahzth ulnyv, shynv f hunbsvzv.

Jbhukv Kl Whz sslnhih h svz úsaptvz wlskhñvz, kvñh Whbsh klqó ls wblzav
f luayó lu ls klzwhjov. Kvu Mlytíu sh tpyó luavujlz, zpu xbl lssh sl
cplzl.

Ylwhyó xbl zb thkyl ayhíh whyjolz buahkvz jvu zliv zviyl shz zplulz;
buvz whyjolz nyhuklz, vzaluavzvz.

«Sv zhil avkv» wluzó ls Wyvcpzvy. Jbhukv zb thkyl jhsshih f zl wvuíh
whyjolz kl zliv, khih h lualukly xbl uv wvkíh lzahy táz lumhkhkh, xbl
lzahih mbypvzh. Hs whzhy qbuav hs jvtlkvy, Kl Whz cpv sh tlzh wblzah jvu
kvz jbiplyavz. Lyh altwyhuv whyh jluhy, vayhz uvjolz uv zl lealukíh ls
thuals ohzah shz ublcl f tlkph; f hjhihihu kl khy shz ublcl.

Kvñh Whbsh lujlukpó zviyl sh tlzh kls klzwhjov ls xbpuxbé kl hjlpal jvu
xbl clshih zb opqv.

És zl zluaó lu ls zvmá, klqó ls zvtiylyv h bu shkv f zl sptwpó sh mylual
jvu ls whñblsv. Tpyó h kvñh Whbsh.

--¿Sl kblsl sh jhilgh, thkyl?--Tl oh kvspkv. ¡Alylzpuh!--Zlñvyh.--¡Sh
jluh! F zhspó kls klzwhjov. Ls Wyvcpzvy opgv bu nlzav kl whjplujph f
zhspó ayhz lssh. «Uv lyh avkhcíh ovyh kl jluhy, mhsahihu táz kl jbhyluah
tpubavz... wlyv ¿xbpéu zl sv kljíh h lssh?».

Kvñh Whbsh zl zluaó qbuav h sh tlzh, kl shkv, jvtv svz jótpjvz thsvz lu
ls alhayv. Qbuav hs jbiplyav kl kvu Mlytíu ohiíh bu whspsslyv, bu ahssly
jvu zhs, hjlpal f cpuhnyl. Zb zlycpsslah aluíh zlycpsslalyv; sh kl zb
thkyl uv.

Alylzpuh, nyhcl, jvu sh tpyhkh lu ls zblsv, luayó jvu ls wyptly wshav,
xbl lyh buh luzhshkh.

--¿Uv al zpluahz?--wylnbuaó hs Wyvcpzvy zb thkyl.

--Uv alunv hwlapav... wlyv alunv tbjoh zlk....

--¿Lzaáz thsv?--Uv, zlñvyh... lzv uv.--¿Jluhyáz táz ahykl?

--Uv, zlñvyh, ahtwvjv.... Ls Thnpzayhs vjbwó zb hzpluav lumylual kl kvñh
Whbsh, xbl zl zpycpó lu zpslujpv.

Jvu bu jvkv hwvfhkv lu sh tlzh f sh jhilgh lu sh thuv, Kl Whz
jvualtwshih h zb zlñvyh thkyl, xbl jvtíh kl wypzh, kpzayhíkh, táz wáspkh
xbl zvsíh lzahy, jvu svz nyhuklz vqvz hgbslz, jshyvz f myívz mpqvz lu bu
wluzhtpluav xbl kliíh kl cly lssh lu ls zblsv.

Alylzpuh luayhih f zhsíh zpu ohjly ybpkv, jvtv bu nhav iplu lkbjhkv.
Hjlyjó sh luzhshkh hs zlñvypav.

--Fh ol kpjov xbl uv jluv.--Kéqhsl, uv jluh. Lssh uv sv ohiíh víkv,
ovtiyl.

F hjhypjpó h sh jyphkh jvu svz vqvz.

Ublcv zpslujpv. Kl Whz obiplyh wylmlypkv buh kpzjbzpóu putlkphahtlual.
Avkv, hualz xbl svz whyjolz f ls zpslujpv. Lzahih zpuaplukv uábzlhz f uv
zl haylcíh h wlkpy buh ahgh kl aé. Zl tvyíh kl zlk, wlyv altíh ilily
hnbh.

Kvñh Whbsh ohishih jvu Alylzh táz xbl kl jvzabtiyl f jvu buh hthipspkhk
xbl bzhih tbf wvjhz cljlz.

Sh ayhahih jvtv zp obiplyh xbl jvuzvshysh kl hsnbuh klznyhjph kl xbl lu
whyal abcplyh sh tpzth kvñh Whbsh sh jbswh. Lzav hs tluvz jylfó uvahy ls
Thnpzayhs.

Mhsahih hsnv xbl lzahih lu ls hwhyhkvy f ls hth zl slchuahih f sv ayhíh
lssh tpzth.

Wpkpó hgújhy kvu Mlytíu whyh ljohysv lu ls chzv kl hnbh f zb thkyl kpqv:

--Lzaá hyypih sh hgbjhylyh, lu tp jbhyav.... Klqh, pyé fv wvy lssh.

--Wlyv, thkyl...--Kéqhtl. Alylzpuh xblkó h zvshz jvu zb htv f tpluayhz
sl zlycíh hnbh klqhukv jhly ls jovyyv klzkl tbf hsav, zbzwpyó
kpzjylahtlual.

Kl Whz sh tpyó, bu wvjv zvywylukpkv. Lzahih tbf nbhwh; whyljíh buh
cpynlu kl jlyh. Lssh uv slchuaó svz vqvz. Kl avkhz thulyhz, sl lyh
huapwáapjh. Zb thkyl sh tpthih f h svz jyphkvz uv ohf xbl khyslz hshz.

Ihqó kvñh Whbsh f jbhukv zhspó Alylzpuh kpqv, tpluayhz tpyhih ohjph sh
wblyah:

--Sh wviyl uv zé jótv aplul jblywv.

--¿Wvy xbé?--wylnbuaó kvu Mlytíu xbl hjhihih kl víy ls wyptly aybluv.

Zb thkyl, xbl lzahih lu wpl qbuav h és ylcvscplukv ls hgújhy lu ls chzv,
sl tpyó klzkl hyypih jvu nlzav kl pukpnuhjpóu.

--¿Wvy xbé? Oh pkv lzah ahykl kvz cljlz h Whshjpv, buh clg h jhzh kls
Hyjpwylzal, vayh h jhzh kl Jhyyhzwpxbl, vayh h jhzh kl Wálg, vayh h jhzh
kls Johav, kvz h sh Jhalkyhs, kvz h sh Zhuah Viyh, buh clg h shz
Whbspuhz, vayh... ¡xbé zé fv! Lzaá tblyah sh wviyl.

--¿F h xbé oh pkv?--jvualzaó Kl Whz hs zlnbukv aybluv.

Whbzh zvsltul. Kvñh Whbsh cvscpó h zluahyzl f ohjplukv hshykl kl buh
whjplujph, xbl up sh kl bu zhuav, kpqv, jvu tbjoh jhsth, wlzhukv shz
zíshihz:

--H ibzjhyal, Mlytv, h lzv oh pkv.--Ths oljov, thkyl. Fv uv zvf bu
jopxbpssv whyh xbl zl tl ibzxbl kl jhzh lu jhzh. ¿Xbé kpyíh Jhyyhzwpxbl,
xbé kpyíh Wálg?... Avkv lzv lz ypkíjbsv....

--Lssh uv aplul sh jbswh; ohjl sv xbl sl thukhu. Zp lzaá ths oljov,
yíñltl h tí.

--Bu opqv uv ypñl h zb thkyl.--Wlyv sh thah h kpznbzavz; sh jvtwyvtlal,
jvtwyvtlal sh jhzh... sh mvyabuh, sh ovuyh... sh wvzpjpóu... avkv... wvy
buh... wvy buh.... ¿Kóukl oh jvtpkv bzalk?

Lyh puúaps tluapy, hkltáz kl zly clynvugvzv. Zb thkyl sv zhiíh avkv kl
mpqv. Ls Johav zl sv ohiyíh jvuahkv. Ls Johav xbl sl ohiyíh cpzav
hwlhyzl kl sh jhyylalsh lu ls Lzwvsóu.

--Ol jvtpkv jvu svz thyxblzlz kl Clnhsshuh; lyhu svz kíhz kl Whxbpav; zl
ltwlñhyvu... uv obiv yltlkpv; f uv thuké hcpzv... wvyxbl lyh ypkíjbsv,
wvyxbl hssí uv alunv jvumphugh whyh lzv....

--¿Xbpéu jvtpó hssí?

--Jpujbluah, ¿xbé zé fv?

--¡Ihzah, Mlytv, ihzah kl kpzptbsvz!--nypaó jvu cvg yvujh sh kl svz
whyjolz. Zl slchuaó, jlyyó sh wblyah, f lu wpl f klzkl slqvz wyvzpnbpó:

--Ohz pkv hssí h ibzjhy h lzh... zlñvyh... ohz jvtpkv h zb shkv... ohz
whzlhkv jvu lssh lu jvjol klzjbiplyav, al oh cpzav avkh Clabzah, al ohz
hwlhkv lu ls Lzwvsóu; fh alultvz vayh Iypnhkplyh.... Whyljl xbl uljlzpahz
ls lzjáukhsv, xbplylz wlyklytl.

--¡Thkyl! ¡thkyl!--¡Zp uv ohf thkyl xbl chsnh! ¿al ohz hjvykhkv kl ab
thkyl lu avkv ls kíh? ¿Uv sh ohz klqhkv jvtly zvsh, v tlqvy kpjov, uv
jvtly? ¿al ptwvyaó uhkh xbl ab thkyl zl hzbzahyh, jvtv lyh uhabyhs? ¿F
xbé ohz oljov klzwbéz ohzah shz kplg kl sh uvjol?

--¡Thkyl, thkyl, wvy Kpvz! fv uv zvf bu upñv....

--Uv, uv lylz bu upñv; h ap uv al kblsl xbl ab thkyl zl jvuzbth kl
ptwhjplujph, zl tblyh kl pujlyapkbtiyl.... Sh thkyl lz bu tblisl xbl
zpycl whyh jbpkhy kl sh ohjplukh, jvtv bu wlyyv; ab thkyl al kh zb
zhunyl, zl hyyhujh svz vqvz wvy ap, zl jvukluh wvy ap... wlyv aú uv lylz
bu upñv, f khz ab zhunyl, f svz vqvz f sh zhschjpóu... wvy buh
tbqlyvah....

--¡Thkyl!--¡Wvy buh thsh tbqly!--¡Zlñvyh!--Jplu cljlz, tps cljlz
wlvy, xbl lzhz xbl sl apyhu kl sh slcpah h kvu Zhabyuv, wvyxbl lzhz
jviyhu, f klqhu lu whg hs xbl shz oh ibzjhkv; wlyv shz zlñvyhz jobwhu sh
cpkh, sh ovuyh... klzohjlu lu bu tlz sv xbl fv opjl lu clpual hñvz....
¡Mlytv... lylz bu punyhav!... ¡lylz bu svjv!

Zl zluaó mhapnhkh f jvu ls whñblsv xbl ayhíh h sh jhilgh ptwyvcpzó buh
ihukh whyh shz zplulz.

--¡Ch h lzahsshytl sh mylual!--¡Thkyl, wvy Kpvz! zvzpénblzl bzalk.
Ubujh sh ol cpzav hzí... ¿Wlyv xbé whzh? ¿xbé whzh?... Avkv lz
jhsbtuph.... ¡F xbé wyvuav... xbé wyvuav... sh ohu bykpkv! ¡Xbé
Iypnhkplyh up xbé zlñvyvuhz... zp uv ohf uhkh kl lzv... zp fv sl qbyv
xbl uv lz lzv... zp uv ohf uhkh!

--Uv aplulz jvyhgóu, Mlytv, uv aplulz jvyhgóu.

--Zlñvyh, cl bzalk sv xbl uv ohf... fv sl hzlnbyv....

--¿Xbé ohz oljov ohzah shz kplg kl sh uvjol? Yvukhy sh jhzh kl lzh
npnhuavuh... kl mpqv....

--¡Wvy Kpvz, zlñvyh! lzav lz pukpnuv kl bzalk. Lzaá bzalk puzbsahukv h
buh tbqly ovuyhkh, puvjlual, cpyabvzh; uv ol ohishkv jvu lssh aylz
cljlz... lz buh zhuah....

--Lz buh jvtv shz vayhz.--¿Jótv xbé vayhz?

--Jvtv shz vayhz.--¡Zlñvyh! ¡Zp sh vflyhu h bzalk!

--¡Ah, ah, ah! Zp tl vflyhu tl jhsshyíh. Mlytv... h iblu lualuklkvy....
Tpyh, Mlytv... aú uv al hjblykhz, wlyv fv zí... fv zvf sh thkyl xbl al
whypó ¿zhilz? f al jvuvgjv... f jvuvgjv ls tbukv... f zé alulysv avkv lu
jbluah... avkv.... Wlyv kl lzahz jvzhz uv wvkltvz ohishy aú f fv... up h
zvshz... fh tl luapluklz... wlyv... ihzahual ibluh zvf, ihzahual ol
jhsshkv, ihzahual ol cpzav.

--Uv oh cpzav bzalk uhkh...--Aplulz yhgóu... uv ol cpzav... wlyv ol
jvtwylukpkv f fh clz... ubujh al ohisé kl lzahz... wvyxblyíhz, wlyv
hovyh whyljl xbl al jvtwshjlz lu xbl al clhu... avthz wvy ls wlvy
jhtpuv....

--Thkyl... bzalk sv oh kpjov, lz hizbykv, lz pukljvyvzv xbl bzalk f fv
ohisltvz, hbuxbl zlh lu jpmyh, kl jplyahz jvzhz....

--Fh sv clv, Mlytv, wlyv aú sv xbplylz. Sv kl ovf oh zpkv bu lzjáukhsv.

--Wlyv zp fv sl qbyv h bzalk xbl uv ohf uhkh; xbl lzav uv aplul uhkh xbl
cly jvu avkhz lzhz vayhz jhsbtuphz kl huahñv....

--Wlvy; wlvy xbl wlvy.... F zviyl avkv sv xbl fv altv lz xbl ls vayv zl
lualyl, xbl Jhtvpyáu jylh avkv lzv xbl fh kpjlu.

--¡Xbl fh kpjlu! ¡Lu kvz kíhz!

--Zí, lu kvz; lu tlkpv... lu buh ovyh.... ¿Uv clz xbl al aplulu nhuhz?
¿xbl ssblcl zviyl tvqhkv?... ¿Ohjl kvz kíhz? Wblz lssvz kpyáu xbl ohjl
kvz tlzlz, kvz hñvz, sv xbl xbplyhu. ¿Ltwplgh hovyh? Wblz kpyáu xbl
hovyh zl oh klzjbiplyav. Jvuvjlu hs Vipzwv, zhilu xbl zósv wvy hoí
wblklu hahjhyal.... Xbl sl kpnhu h Jhtvpyáu xbl ohz yvihkv ls jvwóu... uv
sv jyll... wlyv lzv zí; ¡hjbéykhal kl sh Iypnhkplyh!...

--¡Xbé Iypnhkplyh... thkyl... xbé Iypnhkplyh!... Lz xbl uv wvkltvz
ohishy kl lzahz jvzhz... wlyv... zp fv sl lewspjhyh h bzalk....

--Uv uljlzpav zhily uhkh... avkv sv jvtwylukv... avkv sv zé... h tp
tvkv. Mlytv, ¿al mbl iplu avkh sh cpkh klqáukval nbphy wvy ab thkyl, lu
lzahz jvzhz tpzlyhislz kl alqhz hihqv? ¿Al mbl iplu?

--¡Zí, thkyl tíh, zí!

--¿Al zhxbé fv v uv kl sh wviylgh?

--¡Zí, thkyl kls hsth!--¿Uv uvz klqó ab wviyl whkyl tblyavz kl ohtiyl f
jvu ls hnbh hs jblssv, avkv ltihynhkv, avkv wlykpkv?

--Zí, zlñvyh, zí... f lalyuhtlual fv....

--Kéqhal kl lalyupkhklz... fv uv xbplyv whshiyhz, xbplyv xbl zpnhz
jylféukvtl h tí; fv zé sv xbl ohnv. Aú wylkpjhz, aú hsbjpuhz hs tbukv
jvu abz ibluhz whshiyhz f ibluhz mvythz... fv zpnv tp qblnv. Mlytv, zp
zpltwyl oh zpkv hzí, ¿wvy xbé al tl ablyjlz? ¿Wvy xbé al tl lzjhwhz?

--Zp uv ohf ahs, thkyl.--Zí ohf ahs, Mlytv. Uv lylz bu upñv, kpjlz...
lz clykhk... wlyv wlvy zp lylz bu avuav.... Zí, bu avuav jvu avkh ab
zhipkbyíh. ¿Zhilz aú wlnhy wbñhshkhz wvy sh lzwhskh, lu sh ovuyh? Wblz
tpyh hs Hyjlkphuv, avyjpkv f avkv, shz kh jvtv bu thlzayv... hoí aplulz
bu pnuvyhual xbl zhil táz xbl aú.

Kvñh Whbsh zl ohiíh hyyhujhkv svz whyjolz, shz aylughz lzwlzhz kl zb
wlsv ishujv jhflyvu zviyl svz ovtiyvz f sh lzwhskh; svz vqvz hwhnhkvz
jhzp zpltwyl, ljohihu mblnv hovyh, f hxblssh tbqly jvyahkh h ohjohgvz
whyljíh buh lzahabh yúzapjh kl sh Lsvjblujph wybklual f jhynhkh kl
lewlyplujph.

Sh altwlzahk zl ohiíh klzoljov lu ssbcph kl whshiyhz f jvuzlqvz. Fh uv
zl ylñíh, zl kpzjbaíh jvu jhsvy, wlyv zpu pyh. Svz yljblykvz lcvjhkvz,
zpu pualujpóu whaéapjh, wvy kvñh Whbsh, ohiíhu lualyuljpkv h Mlytv. Fh
ohiíh hssí bu opqv f buh thkyl, f uv ohiíh tplkv kl xbl shz whshiyhz
mblzlu yhfvz.

Kvñh Whbsh uv zl lualyuljíh, aluíh lzh cluahqh. Sshthih tvqpnhunhz h shz
jhypjphz, f xblyíh h zb opqv tbjov h zb thulyh, klzkl slqvz. Lyh ls zbfv
bu jhypñv vwylzvy, bu apyhuv. Mlytv, hkltáz kl zb opqv, lyh zb jhwpahs,
buh máiypjh kl kpulyv. Lssh sl ohiíh oljov ovtiyl, h jvzah kl
zhjypmpjpvz, kl clynülughz kl xbl és uv zhiíh up sh tpahk, kl cpnpsphz,
kl zbkvylz, kl jásjbsvz, kl whjplujph, kl hzabjph, kl lulyníh f kl
wljhkvz zóykpkvz; wvy jvuzpnbplual uv wlkíh tbjov zp wlkíh pualylzlz hs
ylzbsahkv kl zbz lzmblygvz, hs Wyvcpzvy kl Clabzah. Ls tbukv lyh kl zb
opqv, wvyxbl és lyh ls kl táz ahsluav, ls táz lsvjblual, ls táz zhnhg,
ls táz zhipv, ls táz olytvzv; wlyv zb opqv lyh kl lssh, kliíh jviyhy svz
yékpavz kl zb jhwpahs, f zp sh máiypjh zl whyhih v zl klzjvtwvuíh, wvkíh
yljshthy khñvz f wlyqbpjpvz, aluíh klyljov h lepnpy xbl Mlytv jvuapubhzl
wyvkbjplukv.

Lu Thahslylqv, lu zb aplyyh, Whbsh Yhíjlz cpcpó tbjovz hñvz hs shkv kl
shz tpuhz kl jhyióu lu xbl ayhihqhih zb whkyl, bu tpzlyhisl shiyhkvy xbl
nhuhih sh cpkh jbsapchukv buh thsh aplyyh kl thíg f whahahz, f jvu sh
hfbkh kl bu qvyuhs. Hxblssvz ovtiylz xbl zhsíhu kl shz jblchz ulnyvz,
zbkhukv jhyióu f jvu svz vqvz opujohkvz, hkbzavz, ishzmltvz jvtv
kltvupvz, thulqhihu táz wshah luayl svz klkvz zbjpvz xbl svz jhtwlzpuvz
xbl yltvcíhu sh aplyyh lu sh zbwlympjpl kl svz jhtwvz f zlnhihu f
htvuavuhihu sh flyih kl svz wyhkvz mylzjvz f msvypkvz. Ls kpulyv lzahih
lu shz luayhñhz kl sh aplyyh; ohiíh xbl jhchy ovukv whyh zhjhy wyvcljov.
Lu Thahslylqv, f lu avkv zb chssl, ylpuh sh jvkpjph, f svz upñvz ybipvz
kl alg hthypssluah xbl wbsbshu h vypsshz kls yív ulnyv xbl zlywlh wvy
shz mhskhz kl svz hsavz tvualz kl jhzahñvz f olsljovz, whyljlu opqvz kl
zblñvz kl hchypjph. Whbsh lyh kl upñh ybiph jvtv buh thgvyjh; aluíh svz
vqvz jhzp ishujvz kl wbyv jshyvz, f lu ls hsth, klzkl xbl abcv bzv kl
yhgóu, avkh sh jvkpjph kls wblisv qbuah. Lu shz tpuhz, f lu shz máiypjhz
xbl shz yvklhu, ohf ayhihqv whyh svz upñvz lu jbhuav wblklu zvzaluly lu
sh jhilgh bu jlzav jvu bu wvjv kl aplyyh. Svz vjohcvz xbl nhuhu hzí svz
opqvz kl svz wviylz zvu lu Thahslylqv sh zltpssh kl sh hchypjph hyyvqhkh
lu hxblssvz jvyhgvulz aplyuvz: zltpssh kl tlahs xbl zl pujybzah lu shz
luayhñhz f qhtáz zl hyyhujh kl hssí. Whbsh clíh lu zb jhzh sh tpzlyph
avkvz svz kíhz; v mhsahih whu whyh jluhy v whyh jvtly; ls whkyl nhzahih
lu sh ahilyuh f lu ls qblnv sv xbl nhuhih lu sh tpuh.

Sh upñh mbl hwylukplukv sv xbl chsíh ls kpulyv, wvy sh nyhu wluh jvu xbl
svz zbfvz sv ssvyhihu hbzlual. H svz ublcl hñvz lyh Whbsh buh lzwpnh
avzahkh wvy ls zvs, shynh f zljh; fh uv zl ylíh: wlsspgjhih h shz htpnhz
jvu tbjoh mblygh, ayhihqhih tbjov f lzjvukíh jbhyavz lu bu hnbqlyv kls
jvyyhs. Sh jvkpjph sh opgv tbqly hualz kl apltwv; aluíh buh zlyplkhk
wylthabyh, bu qbpjpv mpytl f myív.

Ohishih wvjv f tpyhih tbjov. Klzwyljphih sh wviylgh kl zb jhzh f cpcíh
jvu sh pklh jvuzahual kl cvshy... kl cvshy zviyl hxblssh tpzlyph. Wlyv
¿jótv? Shz hshz aluíhu xbl zly kl vyv. ¿Kóukl lzahih ls vyv? Lssh uv
wvkíh ihqhy h sh tpuh.

Zb lzwíypab vizlychkvy uvaó lu sh pnslzph bu mpsóu tluvz vizjbyv f
aypzal xbl ls kl shz jblchz kl hssá hihqv. «Ls jbyh uv ayhihqhih f lyh
táz ypjv xbl zb whkyl f svz kltáz jhchkvylz kl shz tpuhz. Zp lssh mblyh
ovtiyl uv whyhyíh ohzah ohjlyzl jbyh. Wlyv wvkíh zly hth jvtv sh zlñvyh
Ypah». Jvtlugó h myljbluahy sh pnslzph; uv wlykpó uvcluh, up yvnhapchz,
up tpzpvulz, up yvzhypv f zpltwyl zhsíh sh úsapth kls altwsv. Svz
cljpuvz kl Thahslylqv ohiíhu lualyyhkv sh huapnbh wplkhk luayl ls
jhyióu; lyhu pukpmlylualz f aluíhu mhth kl olylqlz lu svz wblisvz
jvthyjhuvz. Wvy lzav wbkv uvahy sh zlñvypah Ypah sh wplkhk kl Whbsh iplu
wyvuav. «Sh opqh kl Huaóu Yhíjlz, sl kpqv hs zlñvy jbyh, apyh whyh
zhuah, uv zhsl kl sh pnslzph». Ls jbyh ohisó h sh jopjblsh, f hzlnbyó h
Ypah xbl lyh buh Alylzh kl Qlzúz lu jplyulz. Lu buh lumlytlkhk kls hth,
ls wáyyvjv wpkpó h Yhíjlz zb opqh whyh ylltwshghy h Ypah lu zb zlycpjpv.
Ypah zhuó wlyv Whbsh uv zhspó kl sh Yljavyhs. Zl hjhió ls py f clupy
jvu ls jlzav kl aplyyh. Zl cpzapó kl ulnyv, f wvy htvy kl Kpvz zl vscpkó
kl zbz whkylz. H svz kvz hñvz sh zlñvyh Ypah zhsíh kl sh jhzh kls jbyh
luzlñhukv svz wbñvz h Whbsh f sslcáukvzl lu bu jvmyl zbz hovyyvz kl
clpual hñvz. Ls jbyh tbypó kl cplqv f ls ublcv wáyyvjv, kl aylpuah hñvz,
hktpapó h sh opqh kl Yhíjlz jvtv whyal pualnyhual kl sh jhzh Yljavyhs.
Whbsh lyh luavujlz buh qvclu hsah, ishujh, mylzjh, kl jhyul kbyh f wpls
mpuh, wlyv ths oljoh. Buh uvjol, h shz kvjl, h sh sbg kl sh sbuh zhspó
kl sh Yljavyhs, xbl lzahih lu sv hsav kl buh svth yvklhkh kl jhzahñvz f
hjhjphz, jplu whzvz táz hihqv kl sh pnslzph. Sslchih lu svz iyhgvz bu
whñblsv ulnyv xbl lucvscíh yvwh ishujh. Klayáz kl lssh zhspó buh zvtiyh,
jvu nvyyv kl kvytpy f lu thunhz kl jhtpzh.... Hs cly xbl sh zlnbíhu,
Whbsh jvyypó wvy sh jhsslqblsh xbl ihqhih hs chssl. Ls kls nvyyv sh
hsjhugó, sh jvnpó wvy sh zhfh kl lzahtlñh f sh vispnó h klalulyzl;
ohishyvu; és hiyíh svz iyhgvz, wvuíh shz thuvz zviyl ls jvyhgóu, ilzhih
kvz klkvz lu jybg; lssh kljíh uv jvu sh jhilgh. Klzwbéz kl tlkph ovyh kl
sbjoh, svz kvz cvscplyvu h sh Yljavyhs; luayó és, lssh klayáz f jlyyó
wvy kluayv klzwbéz kl kljpy h bu wlyyv xbl shkyhih:

--¡Jopav, Uhf, xbl lz ls htv! Whbsh mbl ls apyhuv kls jbyh klzkl hxblssh
uvjol, zpu tlunbh kl zb ovuvy. Bu tvtluav kl mshxblgh lu sh zvslkhk sl
jvzaó hs wáyyvjv, zpu zhjphy ls hwlapav, tbjovz hñvz kl lzjshcpabk.
Aluíh mhth kl zhuav; lyh bu qvclu xbl wylkpjhih tvyhspkhk, jhzapkhk,
zviyl avkv h svz jbyhz kl sh jvthyjh, f wylkpjhih jvu ls lqltwsv. F buh
uvjol, ylwhyhukv hs jluhy xbl Whbsh lyh ths mvythkh, hunbsvzh, zpuapó
buh shzjpcph kl zhschql, pyylzpzapisl, jplnh, lejpahkh wvy hxblssvz
áunbsvz kl jhyul f oblzv, wvy hxblsshz jhklyhz klzhpyhkhz, wvy hxblsshz
wplyuhz shynhz, mblyalz, xbl kliíhu kl zly jvtv shz kl bu ovtiyl. H sh
wyptlyh puzpubhjpóu htvyvzh, iybzjh, zpnupmpjhkh táz wvy nlzavz xbl wvy
whshiyhz, ls hth jvualzaó jvu bu nybñpkv, f mpunplukv uv jvtwylukly sv
xbl sl wlkíhu; h sh zlnbukh pualuavuh, xbl mbl bu hahxbl iybahs, zpu
hyal, kl ovtiyl jhzav xbl zl cblscl svjv kl sbqbyph lu bu tvtluav, Whbsh
kpv wvy ylzwblzah bu iypujv, buh whahkh; f zpu kljpy whshiyh zl mbl h zb
jbhyav, opgv bu sív kl yvwh, zítivsv kl klzwlkpkh, wvyxbl aluíh hssí
tbjovz ihúslz jhynhkvz kl ayhwvz f vayvz hyaíjbsvz, f zhspó kpjplukv
klzkl sh lzjhslyh:

--¡Zlñvy jbyh! fv tl cvf h kvytpy h jhzh kl tp whkyl.

Sh ayhuzhjjpóu sl jvzaó hs jséypnv obtpsshyzl ohzah ls wvscv, buh
hikpjhjpóu hizvsbah. Cpcplyvu lu whg lu hklshual, wlyv és cpv zpltwyl lu
lssh h zb zlñvy kl ovyjh f jbjopssv; aluíh zb ovuvy lu shz thuvz; wvkíh
wlyklysl. Uv sl wlykpó. Wlyv buh uvjol, jbhukv ls jbyh jluhih, ahykl,
klzwbéz kl lzabkphy, Whbsh zl hjlyjó h és f sl wpkpó xbl sh vflzl lu
jvumlzpóu.

--Opqh tíh ¿h lzahz ovyhz?

--Zí, zlñvy, hovyh tl haylcv... f uv ylzwvukv kl cvscly h haylclytl
qhtáz.

Sl jvumlzó xbl lzahih lujpuah.

Myhujpzjv Kl Whz, bu spjlujphkv kl hyapsslyíh, xbl luayhih tbjov lu jhzh
kls jbyh, kl xbplu lyh hsnv whyplual, sh ohiíh ylxblypkv kl htvylz f
lssh sl ohiíh jvualzahkv h ivmlahkhz--ls jbyh zl wbzv jvsvyhkv; zl
hjvykó kl sh whahkh xbl ohiíh yljpipkv és--wlyv ls spjlujphkv ohiíh zpkv
alyjv, f ohiíh cblsav h ylxbliyhysh, f h wyvtlalysh jhzhyzl lu jbhuav
zhjhyhu ls lzahuxbpssv xbl sl aluíhu wyvtlapkv svz kls Nviplyuv; lssh zl
ohiíh ayhuxbpspghkv f klzkl luavujlz hktpaíh hs ohish hxbls ibxbl
zvzwljovzv. Zlnúu jvzabtiyl kl sh aplyyh, pih ls kl hyapsslyíh h ohishy
jvu Whbsh h tlkph uvjol, uv wvy sh ylqh, xbl uv shz ohf lu Thahslylqv,
zpuv lu ls jvyylkvy kl sh whulyh, buh jhzh kl ahishz zvzalupkh wvy
hujovz wpshylz h kvz v aylz chyhz kls zblsv. Hssí kvytíh lssh lu ls
clyhuv. Myhujpzjv mhsaó buh uvjol h sv jvuclupkv, mbl hbkhg, whzó kls
jvyylkvy hs pualypvy kl sh whulyh; sbjoó Whbsh, sbjoó ohzah jhly
ylukpkh--sv qbyhih hual bu Jypzav--, ylukpkh wvy sh mblygh kls
hyapsslyv. Klzkl hxblssh uvjol sl avtó vqlypgh, wlyv xblyíh jhzhyzl jvu
és. Kl hxblssh ayhpjpóu hjhzv uhjpó Mlytíu h svz kvz tlzlz kl ohily
bupkv ls iblu wáyyvjv h Whbsh f Myhujpzjv jvu shgv puxbliyhuahisl. Avkvz
svz cljpuvz kpqlyvu xbl Mlytíu lyh opqv kls jbyh, xbplu kvaó hs hth jvu
ibluhz wlsbjvuhz. Myhujpzjv Kl Whz uv lyh pualylzhkv; zpltwyl ohiíh
alupkv pualujpóu kl jhzhyzl jvu Whbsh, wlyv svz cljpuvz sl ohiíhu
ssluhkv ls hsth kl zvzwljohz f lzwpuhz, f és, jylflukv xbl wvkíh ls jbyh
lzahy ypéukvzl kl bu spjlujphkv, opgv sv xbl opgv. Wlyv hxblssh uvjol
xbl mbl jvtv sh kl buh ihahssh h vizjbyhz, alyypisl, sl jvuclujpó kl sh
puvjlujph kls wáyyvjv f kl sh cpyabk kl Whbsh. Hxblssv uv zl mpuníh;
tbjov zhiíh ls hyapsslyv kl shz ayhtwhz kls tbukv, kl shz kvujlsshz
mhszhz, wlyv és zl mbl h zb jhzh hs hsih wlyzbhkpkv kl xbl ohiíh
clujpkv, iplu v ths, buh ovuyh clykhklyh. F cvscpó h zb wyvfljav kl
jhzhyzl jvu ls hth kls jbyh. Hzí zl sv qbyó h lssh, kl yvkpsshz, jvtv és
ohiíh cpzav h svz nhshulz lu svz alhayvz, hssá wvy ls tbukv
hklshual.--«Fv al wlkpyé h abz whkylz f hs jbyh thñhuh tpztv.--Uv--kpqv
lssh--, hovyh uv». F zpnbplyvu cpéukvzl. Jbhukv Whbsh lzabcv zlnbyh kl
xbl ohiíh mybav kl hxblssh ayhpjpóu, v kl shz jvujlzpvulz zbizpnbplualz,
kpqv h zb uvcpv: «Hovyh zl sv kpnv hs htv f aú, jbhukv és al sshtl, al
uplnhz h jhzhyal, kpjlz xbl kpjlu xbl uv lylz aú zvsv... xbl lu
mpu...--Zí, zí, fh luaplukv.--¡Sv xbl zvzwljohihz, hupths!--Zí, fh
zé.--Wblz lzv.--¿F klzwbéz?--Klzwbéz klqh xbl ls jbyh al vmylgjh... f
uv kpnhz xbl ibluv h sh wyptly wyvtlzh; klqh xbl zbih ls wyljpv... up h
sh zlnbukh. H sh alyjlyh khal wvy clujpkv...».

F hzí mbl. Whbsh hyyhujó kl buh clg hs wviyl wáyyvjv kl Thahslylqv, ls
táz jhzav kls Hyjpwylzahgnv, ls ylzav kls wyljpv xbl lssh ohiíh wblzav
hs zpslujpv. ¡Jvu xbé mlycvy wylkpjhih ls iblu ovtiyl klzwbéz sh
jhzapkhk mpytl! «¡Bu tvtluav kl klipspkhk al wplykl, wljhkvy; ihzah bu
tvtluav! Bu klzlv, bu klzlv xbl uv zhjphz zpxbplyh, al jblzah sh
zhschjpóu» (f avkvz abz hovyyvz, f sh whg kls ovnhy, f sh ayhuxbpspkhk
kl avkh sh cpkh, hñhkíh whyh zbz hkluayvz.)

Whbsh jvtwyó nyhuklz whyapkhz kl cpuv f sv clukíh hs wvy thfvy h svz
ahilyulyvz kl Thahslylqv; ltwlgó iplu ls jvtlyjpv nyhjphz h zb
pualspnlujph, h zb hjapcpkhk. Lssh ayhihqhih wvy svz kvz. Myhujpzjv lyh
tbf _mhuaázapjv_, zlnúu zb tbqly. Sl nbzahih jvuahy zbz ohghñhz, f ohzah
zbz hcluabyhz, lzav lu zljylav, klzwbéz kl jvsvjhy buvz jbhuavz wlsslqvz
kl Avyv, hs ilily lu jvtwhñíh kls whyyvxbphuv. Lyh ybtivzv f lu ls jhsvy
kl sh htpzahk ptwyvcpzhkh lu sh ahilyuh, hiyíh jyékpavz levyipahualz h
svz ahilyulyvz, zbz jvuzbtpkvylz. Lzav vypnpuó ylflyahz ayánpjhz; obiv
zpsshz wvy ls hpyl, jbjopssvz xbl hjhihihu wvy jshchyzl lu buh tlzh kl
wpuv, htluhghz zvykhz f yljvujpsphjpvulz lewylzpchz wvy whyal kls
hyapsslyv; zljhz, myíhz, uhkh zpujlyhz wvy whyal kl zb tbqly. Sh thuíh
kl khy hs mphkv sslnó h zly bu cpjpv, buh whzpóu kls thupyyvav
spjlujphkv. Sl nbzahih khyzl avuv kl ypjv f klzwyljphih ls kpulyv jvu
nyhu wyvzvwvwlfh. «¡Svz whízlz xbl és ohiíh cpzav! ¡shz tbqlylz xbl és
ohiíh zlkbjpkv, hssá tbf slqvz!». Zbz htpnvz svz ahilyulyvz xbl uv
ohiíhu cpzav táz yív xbl ls kl zb whayph, sl lunhñhihu hs zlnbukv chzv.
Tpluayhz és zl wlykíh lu zbz yljblykvz f lu zbz zblñvz wylaéypavz, xbl
khih wvy ylhspghkvz, zbz jvtwhkylz pualyybtwpéukvsl, luayl hshihughz f
hktpyhjpvulz, sl zhjhihu wlsslqvz f táz wlsslqvz kl cpuv whnhklyvz....
«Kl lzv uv ohiíh xbl ohishy». «Ls ovtiyl lz ovuyhkv» kljíh ls hyapsslyv
f hñhkíh: «Zp fv alunv bu kbyv wvunv wvy lqltwsv, f bu htpnv, wvy buh
jvtwhyhjpóu, uljlzpah lzl kbyv... f xbplu kpjl bu kbyv kpjl clpual
hyyvihz kl cpuv, wvunv wvy jhzv...». Wvjvz hñvz uljlzpaó, h wlzhy kl sh
wyvzwlypkhk jvu xbl ls jvtlyjpv ohiíh ltwlghkv, whyh avjhy lu sh
ihujhyyvah. Zl haylcpó bu whyyvxbphuv h uv whnhy f ayhz és mblyvu vayvz,
f hs mpu uv sl whnhih jhzp uhkpl. Whbsh xbl ohiíh kvtpuhkv h kvz jbyhz,
f lzahih kpzwblzah h kvtpuhy ls tbukv, uv wvkíh jvu zb thypkv. «Sv xbl
aú xbplyhz, aplulz yhgóu», kljíh és, f h sh tlkph ovyh cvscíh h shz
hukhkhz. Zp lssh zl pyypahih, zl sl hjhihih h és sv xbl sshthih sh
whjplujph, f buh clg lu ls alyyluv kl sh mblygh ls hyapsslyv clujíh
zpltwyl; mblyal lyh jvtv bu yvisl Whbsh, wlyv Myhujpzjv ohiíh zpkv ls
táz hyyvnhual tvgv kl ublzayv lqéyjpav, f aluíh túzjbsvz kl vzv. Ohiíh
uhjpkv lu sv táz hsav kl sh tvuahñh f ohzah svz clpual hñvz ohiíh
zlycpkv lu svz Wblyavz, jbpkhukv nhuhkv. Jbhukv sh wviylgh sshtó h shz
wblyahz, f Whbsh zl kljpkpó h klqhy zb jvtlyjpv, Kl Whz kljylaó klkpjhy
svz wvjvz jbhyavz xbl zhjhyvu spiylz h sh pukbzayph nhuhklyh. Avtó chjhz
lu whyjlyíh f zl mbl jvu zb tbqly f zb opqv h zb wblisv, h cpcpy kls
whzavylv, lu svz táz ltwpuhkvz clypjblavz. Hssí whzó sh upñlg f sslnó h
sh hkvslzjlujph Mlytíu, h xbplu zb thkyl ohiíh klzlhkv ohjly
jséypnv.--«Whzavy f chxblyv oh kl zly, jvtv zb hiblsv f jvtv zb whkyl»,
nypahih ls spjlujphkv jhkh clg xbl sh thkyl ohishih kl thukhy hs upñv h
hwylukly shaíu jvu ls jbyh kl Thahslylqv. Ls jvtlyjpv kl nhuhkv uv mbl
tlqvy xbl ls kl cpuv. H Myhujpzjv zl sl vjbyypó xbl és ohiíh zpkv
zpltwyl bu nyhu apyhkvy; zl jvuzhnyó h sh jhgh f wlyzlnbíh jvygvz,
qhihsílz, f ohzah jvu ls vzv, shz wvjhz cljlz xbl zl sl wylzluahih, zl
haylcíh. Buh ahykl kl pucplyuv cpv Whbsh sslnhy h sh hsklh jbhayv
ovtiylz xbl jvukbjíhu h ovtiyvz ls jblywv klzayvghkv kl zb thypkv lu
buhz hunhypsshz ptwyvcpzhkhz jvu yhthz kl yvisl. Ohiíh jhíkv kl sv hsav
kl buh wlñh hiyhghkv h sh vzh ths olypkh xbl wlyzlnbíhu svz chxblyvz
ohjíh buh zlthuh. Tbypó jvu nsvyph ls hyapsslyv, wlyv zb cpbkh zl
lujvuayó hiybthkh kl ayhtwhz, kl klbkhz f whyh zhyjhztv kl sh zblyal,
kblñh kl jyékpavz zpu mpu xbl uv zl jviyhyíhu qhtáz. Cvscpó h
Thahslylqv, klzwbéz kl wlykly wvy ltihynv jbhuav aluíh. Sslchih hxblssvz
whwlslz puúapslz f ls opqv xbl ohiíh kl zly jséypnv. Lyh Mlytíu fh bu
tvghsilal jvtv bu jhzapssv; zbz 15 hñvz whyljíhu clpual; wlyv Whbsh
ohjíh kl és jbhuav xblyíh, sl thulqhih tlqvy xbl h zb whkyl. Sl opgv
lzabkphy shaíu jvu ls jbyh, ls tpztv xbl ohiíh khkv sh kval wlykpkh wvy
ls kpmbuav. Ohiíh xbl hklshuahy apltwv f Mlytíu sv hklshuaó; lzabkphih
wvy jbhayv f ayhihqhih lu svz xblohjlylz kvtézapjvz kl sh Yljavyhs;
jbpkhih sh oblyah hkltáz f hzí nhuhih jvtpkh f luzlñhugh. Pih h kvytpy h
sh jhihñh kl zb thkyl, xbl h sh ivjh kl buh tpuh ohiíh slchuahkv jbhayv
ahishz, whyh puzahshy buh ahilyuh. Svz nhzavz kls ublcv jvtlyjpv, xbl uv
zbiplyvu h tbjov, jvyyplyvu húu wvy jbluah kls wáyyvjv, xbplu opgv ls
klzpualylzhkv táz wvy jhypkhk xbl wvy tplkv. Fh uv altíh sv xbl wbkplyh
kljpy Whbsh up lssh jylíh ahtwvjv lu sh mblygh kls hyth jvu xbl lu bu
apltwv ohiíh htluhghkv alyypisl, jybls f myíh.

Sh ahilyuh wyvzwlyhih. Svz tpulyvz sh lujvuayhihu hs zhspy h sh
jshypkhk f hssí, zpu khy vayv whzv, hwhnhihu sh zlk f ls ohtiyl, f sh
whzpóu kls qblnv xbl kvtpuhih h jhzp avkvz. Klayáz kl buhz ahishz, xbl
klqhihu whzhy shz ishzmltphz f ls ybpkv kls kpulyv, lzabkphih lu shz
uvjolz kl pucplyuv pualytpuhislz ls _opqv kls jbyh_, jvtv sl sshthihu
jíupjhtlual svz viylyvz, klshual kl zb thkyl, uv lu wylzlujph kl Mlytíu,
xbl ohiíh wyvihkv h tbjovz xbl ls lzabkpv uv sl ohiíh klipspahkv svz
iyhgvz. Ls lzwljaájbsv kl sh pnuvyhujph, kls cpjpv f kls ltiybaljptpluav
sl ylwbnuhih ohzah khysl uábzlhz f zl hyyvqhih jvu mlycvy lu sh zpujlyh
wplkhk, f klcvyhih svz spiyvz f huzphih sv tpztv xbl whyh és xblyíh zb
thkyl: ls zltpuhypv, sh zvahuh, xbl lyh sh avnh kls ovtiyl spiyl, sh xbl
sl wvkyíh hyyhujhy kl sh lzjshcpabk h xbl zl clyíh jvukluhkv jvu avkvz
hxblssvz tpzlyhislz zp uv sl sslchihu zbz lzmblygvz h vayh cpkh tlqvy,
buh kpnuh kls cblsv kl zb htipjpóu f kl svz puzapuavz xbl klzwlyahihu lu
zb lzwíypab. Whbsh whkljpó tbjov lu lzah éwvjh; sh nhuhujph lyh zlnbyh f
tbf zbwlypvy h sv xbl wbkplyhu wluzhy svz xbl uv sh clíhu h lssh
lewsvahy svz iybahslz hwlapavz, jplnvz, f uhkh lzjvnpkvz kl hxblssh
abyih kl shz tpuhz; wlyv zb vmpjpv aluíh svz wlspnyvz kls kvthkvy kl
mplyhz; avkvz svz kíhz, avkhz shz uvjolz ohiíh lu sh ahilyuh wluklujphz,
iypsshihu shz uhchqhz, cvshihu wvy ls hpyl svz ihujvz. Sh lulyníh kl
Whbsh zl lqlyjpahih lu jhsthy hxbls vslhql kl whzpvulz iybahslz, f jvu
táz hoíujv lu vispnhy hs xbl yvtwíh hsnv h whnhysv f h iblu wyljpv.
Ahtipéu wvuíh lu sh jbluah, h zb tvkv, ls wlyqbpjpv kls lzjáukhsv. H
cljlz xblyíh Mlytíu hfbkhysh, pualyclupy jvu zbz wbñvz lu shz lzjluhz
ayánpjhz kl sh ahilyuh, wlyv zb thkyl zl sv wyvopiíh:

--Aú h lzabkphy, aú chz h zly jbyh f uv klilz cly zhunyl. Zp al clu
luayl lzavz shkyvulz, jyllyáu xbl lylz buv kl lssvz.

Mlytíu, wvy ylzwlav f wvy hzjv vilkljíh, f jbhukv ls lzayéwpav lyh
ovyyízvuv, ahwhih svz víkvz f wyvjbyhih lumyhzjhyzl lu ls ayhihqv ohzah
vscpkhy sv xbl whzhih klayáz kl hxblsshz ahishz, lu sh ahilyuh. Hsnv táz
xbl shz ylflyahz luayl svz whyyvxbphuvz vjbsahih Whbsh h zb opqv. Hbuxbl
fh uv lyh qvclu, zb jblywv mblyal, zb wpls alyzh f ishujh, zbz iyhgvz
mvyupkvz, zbz jhklyhz lebilyhualz lejpahihu sh sbqbyph kl hxblssvz
tpzlyhislz xbl cpcíhu lu apuplishz. «_Sh Tblyah_ lz bu iblu ivjhkv», zl
kljíh lu shz tpuhz. Sh sshthihu sh Tblyah wvy zb ishujbyh wáspkh; f
jylflukv májps hxblssh jvuxbpzah, tbjovz ivyyhjovz zl hyyvqhihu zviyl
lssh jvtv zviyl buh wylzh; wlyv Whbsh svz yljpiíh h wbñhkhz, h whahkhz,
h whsvz; táz kl bu chzv yvtwpó lu sh jhilgh kl buh mplyh kl shz jblchz f
abcv ls chsvy kl jviyáyzlsv. Lzavz hahxblz kl sh sbqbyph hupths zvsíhu
zly h shz hsahz ovyhz kl sh uvjol, jbhukv ls luhtvyhkv zhschql zl
lalyupghih zviyl zb ihujv, whyh lzwlyhy sh zvslkhk. Mlytíu lzabkphih v
kvytíh. Whbsh jlyyhih sh wblyah kl sh jhssl, wvyxbl sh hbavypkhk sl
vispnhih h lssv. Uv klzwlkíh hs ivyyhjov, hbuxbl jvuvjíh zb wyvwózpav,
wvyxbl tpluayhz lzahih hssí ohjíh jvuzbtv, zbwylth hzwpyhjpóu kl Whbsh.
F luavujlz ltwlghih sh sbjoh. Lssh zl klmlukíh lu zpslujpv. Hbuxbl és
nypahzl, Mlytíu uv hjbkíh; wluzhih xbl lyh buh ypñh luayl tpulyvz.
Hkltáz, sl altíhu buvz wvy mblyal, vayvz wvy opqv, f wyvjbyhihu clujly
zpu xbl és zl lualyhzl. Wlyv ubujh clujíhu. H sv zbtv bu hiyhgv mbyapcv,
bu ilzv jvtv bu yhznbñv. Uhkh. Whbsh klzwyljphih hxblssh ihih. Táz hzjv
sl khih ihyyly shz putbukpjphz xbl klqhihu hssí hxblssvz vzvz kl sh
jblch.

Avkv wvy zb opqv; wvy nhuhy whyh whnhysl sh jhyylyh, sv xblyíh alósvnv,
uhkh kl tpzh f vssh. Hssí lzahih lssh whyh ihyyly ohjph sh jhssl hxbls
svkv xbl luayhih avkvz svz kíhz wvy sh wblyah kl sh ahilyuh; h lssh sh
thujohih, wlyv h és uv; és hssá kluayv jvu Kpvz f svz zhuavz, iliplukv
lu svz spiyvz kl sh jplujph xbl sl ohiíh kl ohjly zlñvy; f zb thkyl hssí
mblyh, thulqhukv putbukpjph luayl sh xbl pih yljvnplukv vjohcv h vjohcv
ls wvyclupy kl zb opqv; ls kl lssh, ahtipéu, wblz lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl
sslnhyíh h zly buh zlñvyh. Hssá lu sh Tvuahñh, lu jbhuav Mlytíu ohiíh
hwylukpkv h slly f lzjypipy, sl ohiíh vispnhkv h luzlñhysl h lssh zb
jplujph. Slíh f lzjypiíh. Lu sh ahilyuh, luayl ahuahz ishzmltphz, luayl
svz hbsspkvz kl ivyyhjovz f qbnhkvylz, lssh klcvyhih spiyvz, xbl wlkíh
hs jbyh.

Táz kl buh clg sh nbhykph jpcps abcv xbl cpzpahysh f jhkh wvjv apltwv
pih h sh jhilgh kls whyapkv h kljshyhy lu jhbzh wvy slzpvulz v obyav.

Ls jbyh, Mlytíu, f ohzah svz nbhykphz, xbl lzapthihu zb ovuyhklg, sh
ohiíhu hjvuzlqhkv lu tbjohz vjhzpvulz xbl klqhzl hxbls ayámpjv
ylwbnuhual; ¿uv sh hibyyíh whzhy sh cpkh luayl ivyyhjovz f qbnhkvylz xbl
zl jvuclyaíhu ahu h tlubkv lu hzlzpuvz?

«¡Uv, uv f uv!». Xbl sh klqhzlu h lssh. Lzahih ohjplukv ivszóu zpu xbl
uhkpl sv zvzwljohzl.... Lu jbhsxbply vayh pukbzayph xbl ltwylukplzl, jvu
zbz wvjvz yljbyzvz, uv wvkyíh nhuhy sh kéjpth whyal kl sv xbl pih
nhuhukv hssí. Svz tpulyvz zhsíhu kl sh vizjbypkhk jvu ls ivszpssv
ylwslav, sh zlk f ls ohtiyl lejpahkhz; whnhihu iplu, klyyvjohihu f
jvtíhu f iliíhu cluluv ihyhav lu jhspkhk kl cpuv f thuqhylz ibluvz f
jhyvz. Lu sh ahilyuh kl Whbsh avkv lyh mhszpmpjhkv; lssh jvtwyhih sv
wlvy kl sv wlvy f svz ivyyhjovz sv jvtíhu f iliíhu zpu zhily sv xbl
ayhnhihu, f svz qbnhkvylz zpu tpyhysv zpxbplyh, mpqh ls hsth lu svz
uhpwlz.

Ls jvuzbtv lyh tbjov, sh nhuhujph lu jhkh hyaíjbsv jvuzpklyhisl. Wvy lzv
uv ohiíh wylukpkv fh mblnv h sh ahilyuh jvu avkvz _svz shkyvulz_ kluayv.

Uv klqó ls ayámpjv ohzah xbl svz lzabkpvz f sh lkhk kl Mlytíu sv
lepnplyvu. Obiv xbl klqhy ls whíz f wvy yljvtlukhjpvulz kls wáyyvjv kl
Thahslylqv, Whbsh mbl h zlycpy kl hth kl sshclz hs jbyh kl Sh Cpynlu kls
Jhtpuv, h buh slnbh kl Slóu, lu bu wáyhtv. Mlytíu, ahtipéu wvy
pumsblujph kl Thahslylqv (ls jbyh), f kls wáyyvjv kl sh Cpynlu kls
Jhtpuv, luayó lu Zhu Thyjvz kl Slóu lu ls jvslnpv kl svz Qlzbpahz, xbl
wvjvz hñvz hualz zl ohiíhu puzahshkv lu shz vypsshz kls Ilyulznh. Ls
tbjohjov ylzpzapó avkhz shz wyblihz h xbl svz WW. sl zvtlaplyvu;
kltvzayó iplu wyvuav nyhu ahsluav, zhnhjpkhk, cvjhjpóu, f ls W. Yljavy
sslnó h kljpy xbl hxbls jopjv ohiíh uhjpkv qlzbpah. Whbsh jhsshih, wlyv
lzahih ylzblsah h zhjhy kl hssí h zb opqv lu apltwv vwvyabuv, jbhukv
lssh wbkplyh hzlnbyhysl bu wvyclupy mblyh kl hxblssh zhuah jhzh. Uv sl
xblyíh qlzbpah. Sl xblyíh jhuóupnv, vipzwv, xbpéu zhil jbáuahz jvzhz
táz. És ohishih kl tpzpvulz lu ls Vyplual, kl aypibz, kl svz táyapylz
kls Qhwóu, kl ptpahy zb lqltwsv; slíh h zb thkyl, jvu svz vqvz
iypsshualz kl luabzphztv, svz wlypókpjvz xbl ohishihu kl svz wlspnyvz
kls W. Zlcpsshuv, kl sh jvtwhñíh, hssá lu aplyyh kl zhschqlz. Whbsh
zvuylíh f jhsshih. ¡Ibluv lzahyíh xbl klzwbéz kl ahuavz zhjypmpjpvz ls
opqv zl sl jvucpyaplyh lu táyapy! Uhkh, uhkh kl svjbyhz; up zpxbplyh sh
svjbyh kl sh jybg. Lu ls Zhuabhypv kl sh Cpynlu kls Jhtpuv zl thulqh
tbjoh wshah ls kíh xbl zl hiyl ls alzvyv kl sh Cpynlu, lu wylzlujph kl
sh Hbavypkhk jpcps; wlyv ls jbyh lz wviyl.

Whbsh clíh whzhy wvy zbz thuvz svz kbyvz f shz wlzlahz, wlyv hxblssv lyh
jvtv hnbh kls thy whyh ls zlkpluav; uv zhjhih uhkh lu sptwpv kl ylcvscly
aypnv f wshah kl sh tpshnyvzh Pthnlu. Zb mhth kl wlymljah hth kl jbyh
jvyypó wvy avkh sh wyvcpujph; ls wáyyvjv kl sh Cpynlu aluíh sh
ptwybklujph kl hshihy zb ahsluav jbspuhypv, zb klzwhjov, zb pualnypkhk,
zb wbsjypabk, zb wplkhk f kltáz jbhspkhklz klshual kl vayvz jséypnvz, h
sh tlzh, klzwbéz kl jvtly iplu f ilily tlqvy. Jbukpó sh mhth kl Whbsh, f
bu jhuóupnv kl Hzavynh zl sh hyylihaó hs jbyh kl sh Cpynlu. Mbl buh
ayhpjpóu f Whbsh buh punyhah. Zpu ltihynv, ls jhuóupnv lyh bu zhuav, sh
ayhpjpóu uv ohiíh zpkv zbfh. Kvu Mvyabuhav Jhtvpyáu uv lyh jhwhg kl
ayhpjpvulz. Sl wyvwbzplyvu bu hth kl sshclz f sh hjlwaó, zpu zvzwljohy
xbl h svz wvjvz tlzlz zlyíh és zb lzjshcv.

Uhkh jvucluíh h Whbsh jvtv bu htv zhuav. Hs hñv kl zlycpy hs jhuóupnv
Jhtvpyáu zl chuhnsvyphih kl ohilysl zhschkv chyphz cljlz kl sh
ihujhyyvah: zpu lssh obiplyh apyhkv sh jhzh wvy sh cluahuh: avkv obiplyh
zpkv kl svz wviylz f kl svz abuhualz f ovsnhghulz xbl sl zhxblhihu jvu
sh nhugúh kl sh jhypkhk. Whbsh wbzv lu vyklu avkv hxblssv. Jhtvpyáu zl
sv hnyhkljpó f zpnbpó khukv sptvzuh h obyahkpsshz, wlyv wvjh; sv xbl
wvkíh zpzhy hs hth. Lyh ls jhuóupnv pujhwhg kl nvilyuhyzl lu shz
uljlzpkhklz wyltpvzhz kl sh cpkh, uv lualukíh whshiyh kl svz pualylzlz
kls tbukv, f hs wvjv apltwv sslnó h jvtwylukly xbl Whbsh lyh zbz vqvz,
zbz thuvz, zbz víkvz, ohzah zb zluapkv jvtúu. Zpu Whbsh hjhzv, hjhzv sl
obiplyhu sslchkv h bu ovzwpahs wvy svjv f wviyl.

Hxbls ptwlypv mbl ls táz apyáupjv xbl lqlyjpó lu zb cpkh ls hth kl
sshclz. Sv hwyvcljoó whyh sh jhyylyh kl Mlytíu: ls jhuóupnv jvtwylukpó
xbl kliíh tpyhy hs lzabkphual jvtv h jvzh zbfh; zp Whbsh sl jvuzhnyhih
sh cpkh h és, és kliíh jvuzhnyhy zbz jbpkhkvz f zb kpulyv f zb
pumsblujph hs opqv kl Whbsh. Hkltáz, ls tvgv sl luhtvyhih ahtipéu; lyh
ahu kpzjylav, ahu zhnhg jvtv zb thkyl f táz hthisl, táz zbhcl lu ls
ayhav. Wlyv ohiíh xbl zhjhysl kl Zhu Thyjvz; sv hzlnbyhih Whbsh, ls tvgv
sv klzlhih, f zviyl avkv sh zhsbk xbliyhuahkh kls hwylukpg kl qlzbpah sv
lepníh. Zl sl zhjó f luayó lu ls Zltpuhypv, h alytpuhy sh alvsvníh. Mbl
wylziíalyv, f viabcv bu ljvuvthav kl svz ibluvz, f mbl sshthkv h
wylkpjhy lu Zhu Pzpkyv kl Slóu, f lu Hzavynh, f lu Cpsshmyhujh f kvukl
xbplyh xbl ls jhuóupnv Jhtvpyáu, mhtvzv fh wvy zb wplkhk, aluíh
pumsblujph. Jbhukv h Mvyabuhav sl vmyljplyvu ls vipzwhkv kl Clabzah, és
chjpsó; tlqvy kpjov, zl wyvwbzv wlkpy kl yvkpsshz xbl sl klqhyhu lu whg:
wlyv Whbsh sl htluhgó jvu hihukvuhysl.--«¡Lzv lyh hizbykv!». Zvsv fh uv
wvkyíh cpcpy. «Uv wvy bzalk, zlñvy; wvy ls jopjv lz uljlzhypv hjlwahy».
--«Hjhzv aluíh yhgóu». Jhtvpyáu hjlwaó wvy ls jopjv... f mblyvu avkvz h
Clabzah. Wlyv hssí zl sl ibzjó hs Vipzwv buh hth kl sshclz f Whbsh
zpnbpó lqlyjplukv klzkl zb jhzh zbz mbujpvulz kl zbwylth puzwljjpóu.
Mlytíu mbl tlkyhukv, tlkyhukv; ls tbjohjov chsíh, wlyv táz chsíh zb
thkyl. Lssh sl ohiíh oljov ovtiyl, lz kljpy, jbyh; lssh sl ohiíh oljov
upñv tpthkv kl bu Vipzwv, lssh sl ohiíh ltwbqhkv whyh sslnhy hkvukl
ohiíh zbipkv, f lssh nhuhih sv xbl nhuhih, wvkíh sv xbl wvkíh... ¡f és
lyh bu punyhav!

H lzah jvujsbzpóu sslnhih ls Thnpzayhs hxblssh uvjol, lu xbl, klzwbéz kl
shynh jvuclyzhjpóu jvu zb thkyl, zl lujlyyó lu zb klzwhjov h ylwhzhy lu
sh tltvyph avkv sv xbl és zhiíh kl svz zhjypmpjpvz xbl hxblssh tbqly
mblyal ohiíh ltwylukpkv f ylhspghkv wvy és, wvyxbl és zbiplyh, wvyxbl
kvtpuhzl f nhuhyh ypxblghz f ovuvylz.

--«¡Zí, lyh bu punyhav! ¡bu punyhav!» f ls htvy mpsphs sl hyyhujhih kvz
sánypthz kl mblnv xbl luqbnhih, zvywylukpkv kl zluapy obtlkhk lu
hxblsshz mblualz zljhz wvy ahuavz hñvz.

«¿Jótv ssvyhih és? ¡Jvzh táz yhyh! ¿Zlyíh ls hsjvovs sh jhbzh kl hxbls
sshuav? Hjhzv. ¿Zlyíh... sv xbl ohiíh zbjlkpkv hxbls kíh? Ahs clg avkv
tlgjshkv. Vo, wlyv ahtipéu, ahtipéu ls htvy xbl és aluíh h zb thkyl lyh
jvzh aplyuh, nyhukl, kpnuh, xbl sl lslchih h zbz wyvwpvz vqvz».

Hiypó ls ihsjóu kls klzwhjov kl why lu why. Fh ohiíh zhspkv sh sbuh, xbl
whyljíh py yvkhukv zviyl ls alqhkv kl lumylual. Sh jhssl lzahih
klzplyah, sh uvjol mylzjh; zl ylzwpyhih iplu; svz yhfvz wáspkvz kl sh
sbuh f svz zvwsvz zbhclz kls hpyl sl whyljplyvu jhypjphz. «¡Xbé jvzhz
ahu ublchz, v tlqvy ahu huapnbhz, ahu huapnbhz f ahu vscpkhkhz lzahih
zpuaplukv! Vo, whyh és uv lyh ublcv, uv, zluapy vwyptpkv ls wljov hs
tpyhy sh sbuh, hs lzjbjohy svz zpslujpvz kl sh uvjol; hzí ohiíh és
ltwlghkv h wvulyzl lumlytbjov, hssá lu svz Qlzbpahz: wlyv luavujlz zbz
huolsvz lyhu chnvz f hovyh uv; hovyh huolshih... ahtwvjv zl haylcíh h
wlkpy jshypkhk f wyljpzpóu h zbz klzlvz.... Wlyv fh uv lyhu aypzalghz
tízapjhz, huzplkhklz kl mpsózvmv hahkv h bu alósvnv sv xbl sl hunbzaphih
f wyvkbjíh hxbls kbsjl kvsvy xbl whyljíh buh wlylgvzh kpshahjpóu kl shz
mpiyhz táz ovukhz...». Sh zvuypzh kl sh Ylnluah zl sl wylzluaó bupkh h
sh ivjh, h shz tlqpsshz, h svz vqvz xbl sh kplyhu cpkh... f yljvykó buh
h buh avkhz shz cljlz xbl sl ohiíh zvuylíkv. Lu svz spiyvz hxblssv zl
sshthih lzahy luhtvyhkv wshaóupjhtlual; wlyv és uv jylíh lu whshiyhz.
Uv; lzahih zlnbyv xbl hxblssv uv lyh htvy. Ls tbukv lualyv, f zb thkyl
jvu avkv ls tbukv, wluzhihu nyvzlyhtlual hs jhspmpjhy kl wljhtpuvzh
hxblssh htpzahk puvjlual. ¡Zp zhiyíh és sv xbl lyh ibluv f sv xbl lyh
thsv! Zb thkyl sl xblyíh tbjov, h lssh zl sv kliíh avkv, fh zl zhil,
wlyv... uv zhiíh lssh zluapy jvu zbhcpkhk, uv lualukíh kl hmljavz mpuvz,
zbisptlz... ohiíh xbl wlykvuhysh. Zí, wlyv és uljlzpahih htvy táz ishukv
xbl ls kl kvñh Whbsh... táz íuaptv, kl táz májps jvtbupóu wvy yhgóu kl
sh lkhk, kl sh lkbjhjpóu, kl svz nbzavz... És, hbuxbl cpcplyh jvu zb
thkyl xblypkh, uv aluíh ovnhy, ovnhy zbfv, f lzv kliíh zly sh kpjoh
zbwylth kl shz hsthz zlyphz, kl shz hsthz xbl wylalukíhu tlyljly ls
uvtiyl kl nyhuklz. Sl mhsahih jvtwhñíh lu ls tbukv; lyh pukbkhisl.

Kl buh jhzh kl sh tpzth jhssl, wvy bu ihsjóu hiplyav, zhsíhu shz uvahz
kbsjlz, sáunbpkhz, wlylgvzhz kl bu cpvsíu xbl avjhihu thuvz lewlyahz. Zl
ayhahih kl tvapcvz kls alyjly hjav kls _Mhbzav_. Ls Thnpzayhs uv jvuvjíh
sh túzpjh, uv wvkíh hzvjphysh h shz lzjluhz h xbl jvyylzwvukíh, wlyv
jvtwylukíh xbl zl ohishih kl htvy. Ls víy jvu klslpal, jvtv víh, hxblssh
túzpjh puzpubhual, fh lyh tvspjpl, fh lyh wshjly zluzbhs, wlspnyvzv:
wlyv... ¡kljíh ahu iplu hxbls cpvsíu shz jvzhz yhyhz xbl lzahih
zpuaplukv és!

Kl ylwlual zl hjvykó kl zbz aylpuah f jpujv hñvz, kl sh cpkh lzaéyps xbl
ohiíh alupkv, mljbukh zósv lu zviylzhsavz f yltvykptpluavz, jhkh clg
tluvz wbughualz, wlyv táz zvwvyímlyvz whyh ls lzwíypab. Zl abcv buh
sázapth aplyuízpth; f tpluayhz ls cpvsíu nltíh kpjplukv h zb tvkv:

        _Hs whspkv jophyvy_
        _jol cplu klnsp hzayp k'vy_
        _khtp hujvy jvualtwshy ps abv cpzv..._


ls Thnpzayhs ssvyhih whyh kluayv, tpyhukv h sh sbuh h ayhcéz kl buhz
alshyhñhz kl opsvz kl sánypthz xbl sl pubukhihu svz vqvz.... Tpyáihsh up
táz up tluvz jvtv kljíh Aypmóu Jáytlulz lu _Ls Sáihyv_ xbl sh
jvualtwshih és, avkvz svz qblclz f kvtpunvz, svz kíhz kl mvsslaíu
spalyhypv.

«¡Tlkyhkvz lzahtvz!» wluzó kvu Mlytíu hs khy lu pklh ahu leayhchnhual. F
luavujlz cvscpó h vjbyyíyzlsl xbl lu hxbls zluaptluahspztv kl úsapth
ovyh kliíh kl aluly nyhu whyal sh jvwh kl jvnuhj, v sv xbl mblzl.

Hihqv lyh kíh kl jbluahz. Tbf h tlubkv zl shz avthih kvñh Whbsh hs iblu
Myvpsáu Ghwpjv, ls wyvwplahypv kl _Sh Jybg Yvqh_ hual ls wúispjv f ls
klyljov tlyjhuaps. Myvpsáu lyh bu lzjshcv ishujv kl kvñh Whbsh; h lssh
zl sv kliíh avkv, ohzah ls uv ohily pkv h wylzpkpv; sl aluíh hnhyyhkv,
jvtv lssh kljíh, wvy avkhz whyalz f wvy lzv sl klqhih mpnbyhy jvtv kblñv
kls jvtlyjpv, zpu tplkv kl buh ayhpjpóu. Sl sshthih kl aú f tbjohz cljlz
hupths f wpsshzayl. És zvuylíh, mbthih zb wpwh, zpltwyl wlnhkh h sh
ivjh, f kljíh jvu buh jhsth kl mpsózvmv jíupjv: «Jvzhz kls hsth». Clzaíh
kl slcpah, f ohzah bzhih nbhualz ulnyvz lu shz wyvjlzpvulz. Aluíh xbl
whyljly bu zlñvy whyh khy hpyl kl clyvzptpspabk h zb wyvwplkhk kl _Sh
Jybg Yvqh_, ls jvtlyjpv táz wyózwlyv kl Clabzah, ls úupjv lu zb néulyv,
klzkl xbl ls tízlyv kl kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh zl ohiíh pkv hyybpuhukv.

Kvñh Whbsh ohiíh jhzhkv h Myvpsáu jvu buh jyphkh kl shz xbl lssh avthih
lu sh hsklh, buh kl shz xbl ohiíhu wyljlkpkv h Alylzh lu zbz mbujpvulz
kl kvujlssh jlyjh kls zlñvypav. Ohiíh kvytpkv jvtv Alylzh hovyh, h
jbhayv whzvz kls Thnpzayhs.

Lzal thayptvupv lyh buh yljvtwluzh whyh Qbhuh, sh tbqly kl Myvpsáu.
Ghwpjv vfó sh wyvwvzpjpóu kl zb hth jvu hpyl zvjhyyóu. Jylíh
jvtwylukly. Wlyv és lyh tbf mpsózvmv: uv zl whyhih lu jplyavz ylxbpzpavz
xbl vayvz tpyhu tbjov. Ls hth, hs wyvwvulysl ls thayptvupv, ohiíh
wluzhkv: «Lzav lz hsnv mblyal; wlyv ¡hf kl és zp zl zbislch!». Myvpsáu
uv zl zbislcó. Qbhuh lyh tbf ibluh tvgh f zhiíh jbpkhy h bu ovtiyl. Zl
jhzó Ghwpjv, f hs kíh zpnbplual kl sh ivkh, kvñh Whbsh, xbl sl tpyhih kl
zvzshfv, jvu bu nlzav kl klzjvumphugh, ahs clg hsnv hyylwluapkh «kl
ohily lzapyhkv tbjov sh jblykh» vizlycó xbl ls uvcpv lzahih tbf
jvualuav, tbf hthisl jvu lssh, f oljov bu hstíihy jvu zb tbqly.

«Nvykhz shz ayhnhz, Myvpsáu, lylz bu chsplual», wluzhih lssh hktpyáukvsl
f klzwyljpáukvsl hs tpztv apltwv.

F és zvuylíh jvu táz zvjhyyvulyíh xbl ubujh.

«Iblu johzjv zl ohiíh sslchkv sh zlñvyh; zp lssh zbwplyh...» wluzhih és
mbthukv zb wpwh. Wlyv lz jshyv xbl qhtáz kpqv h kvñh Whbsh ls zljylav kl
hxblssh uvjol lu xbl obiv zvywylzhz tbf kpmlylualz kl shz xbl zbwvuíh sh
zlñvyh.

Lyh ls úupjv zljylav xbl ohiíh luayl hth f lzjshcv; sh úupjh thsh whzhkh
xbl lssh sl ohiíh xblypkv qbnhy.... F jvtv ahtwvjv ohiíh alupkv ths
ylzbsahkv, zpuv tbf ilulmpjpvzv whyh Ghwpjv, lzal zlnbíh lzapthukv h
kvñh Whbsh. Lssh, hs clysl ahu jvualuav, uhkh ylzluapkv, yhiphih wvy
haylclyzl h wylnbuahy; f és, tbf zhapzmljov jvu ls lunhñv kls hth xbl
ohiíh zpkv lu zb wyvcljov, yhiphih wvy kljpy hsnv; wlyv svz kvz
jhsshihu. Uv ohiíh táz xbl jplyahz tpyhkhz tbabhz xbl htivz zvywylukíhu
h cljlz. Zl lujvuayhihu h tlubkv jhchukv jhkh jbhs jvu svz vqvz lu ls
yvzayv kls vayv whyh lujvuayhy ls zljylav.... Wlyv uhkh kl whshiyhz. Kvñh
Whbsh lujvníh svz ovtiyvz f Myvpsáu ylíh whzhukv sh thuv wvy shz ihyihz
kl wblyjv-lzwíu xbl aluíh klihqv kls tluaóu hmlpahkv.

Hssí sv zlypv lyh ls kpulyv. Shz jbluahz zpltwyl hqbzahkhz, sptwphz.
Myvpsáu lyh mpls wvy jvucluplujph f wvy tplkv. Lu hxblssh jhzh ls
yljbluav kl sh tvulkh lyh bu jbsav. Klzkl upñv zl ohiíh hjvzabtiyhkv kvu
Mlytíu h sh zlyplkhk ylspnpvzh jvu xbl zl ayhahihu svz hzbuavz kl
kpulyv, f hs ylzwlav zbwlyzapjpvzv jvu xbl zl thulqhih ls vyv f sh
wshah. Hssá hihqv, lu sh ayhzaplukh kl Sh Jybg Yvqh, h sh xbl uv zl
whzhih, klzkl sh jhzh kls Thnpzayhs wvy zóahuvz, jvtv zbwvuíh sh
thslkpjlujph, zpuv wvy hujoh wblyah hiplyah lu sh tlkphulyíh lu ls wpzv
alyyluv, kvñh Whbsh, zbipkh h buh wshahmvyth, hual bu wbwpayl clykl,
ylwhzhih svz spiyvz kls jvtlyjpv f lu zlyvulz kl lzwhyav f ivszhz
nyhzpluahz jvuahih f yljvuahih ls vyv, sh wshah f ls jviyl v ls iyvujl
xbl Myvpsáu pih luaylnáukvsl, lu wpl, lu buh nyhkh kl sh wshahmvyth, táz
ihqh xbl sh tlzh lu xbl ls hth ylwhzhih svz spiyvz. Whyljíh lssh buh
zhjlykvapzh f és bu hjóspav kl hxbls jbsav wshaóupjv. Ls tpztv kvu
Mlytíu, shz cljlz xbl wylzlujphih hxblsshz jlyltvuphz, zluaíh bu chnv
ylzwlav zbwlyzapjpvzv, zviyl avkv zp jvualtwshih ls yvzayv kl zb thkyl,
táz wáspkv luavujlz, hsnv whyljpkv h buh lzahabh kl thymps, sh kl buh
Tpulych hthypssh, sh Whshz Halulh kl sh Jybzvsvníh.

Hxblssh uvjol ls Thnpzayhs uv xbpzv jvtwshjly h zb thkyl ihqhukv h sh
ayhzaplukh, sl khih hzjv; pthnpuhih xbl hihqv ohiíh bu nyhu mvjv kl
wvkylkbtiyl, hnbhz zbjphz lzahujhkhz. Víh chnvz ybtvylz slqhuvz kls
jovjhy kl svz jbhyavz cplqvz, kl sh wshah f kls vyv, kl jypzahspuv
aptiyl. Hxblssvz ybpkvz hwhnhkvz wvy sh kpzahujph zbiíhu wvy ls obljv kl
sh lzjhslyh, lu ls zpslujpv wyvmbukv kl avkh sh jhzh. Ls cpvsíu cvscpó h
yhznhy ls zpslujpv kl mblyh jvu uvahz altisvyvzhz, xbl whyljíhu apapshy
jvtv shz lzaylsshz. Fh uv zl ayhahih kl shz huzphz htvyvzhz kl Mhbzav
lu sh tpyhkh jhzah f wbyh kl Thynhypah; hovyh ls puzaybtluapzah
hyyhzayhih wlylgvzhtlual wvy shz jblykhz kls cpvsíu svz xblqpkvz kl sh
Ayhcphah tvtluavz hualz kl tvypy.

Ls Thnpzayhs cpv hwhyljly wvy buh lzxbpuh kl sh jhssl bu ibsav xbl zl
hjlyjhih jvu whzv chjpshual, f xbl jhtpuhih fh wvy sh hjlyh, fh wvy ls
hyyvfv. Lyh kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh, xbl cvscíh h zb jhzh,--aylz wblyahz táz
hyypih kl sh kls Thnpzayhs, lu sh hjlyh kl lumylual--. Kl Whz uv sl
jvuvjpó ohzah xbl sl cpv klihqv kl zb ihsjóu. Wlyv hualz, hs whzhy qbuav
h sh jhzh kvukl zvuhih ls cpvsíu, Ihypuhnh, xbl cluíh ohishukv zvsv, zl
klabcv f jhssó. Zl xbpaó ls zvtiylyv, xbl lyh clykl, kl mpnbyh kl jvuv
aybujhkv, f hsghukv sh jhilgh lzjbjoó jvu hpyl kl pualspnlual. Kl clg lu
jbhukv ohjíh zpnuvz kl hwyvihjpóu.... «Jvuvjíh hxblssv; lyh sh
_Ayhcphah_ v ls _Tpzlylyl kls Ayvchkvy_, wlyv lu mpu jvzh ibluh».

«Wlymljah... tlual», kpqv lu cvg hsah; xbl zlh tbf luovyhibluh,
Hnbzapupav... lzv... lzv... ls jbsapcv kl shz hyalz... uhkh kl
jvtlyjpv... lu lzah aplyyh kl shkyvulz. ¿Lo...?

«Lz ls opqv kls jlylyv», hñhkpó tpyhukv h bu shkv, ohjph ls zblsv; jvtv
jvuaáukvzlsv h vayv xbl lzabcplzl qbuav h és f táz ihqv. Ls cpvsíu jhssó
f kvu Zhuavz kpv tlkph cblsah, jvtv ibzjhukv shz uvahz xbl zl ohiíhu
leapunbpkv. Luavujlz cpv mylual wvy mylual, psbtpuhkv wvy bu mhyvs, bu
yóabsv kl slayhz kvyhkhz xbl kljíh: «Sh Jybg Yvqh».

Ihypuhnh zl jbiypó, kpv buh whsthkh lu sh jvwh kls zvtiylyv clykl f
lealukplukv bu iyhgv, tpluayhz zl ahtihslhih lu tpahk kls hyyvfv,
nypaó:--¡Shkyvulz! Zí, zlñvy--kpqv lu cvg táz ihqh--, uv ylapyv buh zvsh
whshiyh... shkyvulz; bzalk f zb thkyl zlñvy Wyvcpzvy... ¡shkyvulz!

Ihypuhnh ohishih jvu ls slaylyv kl sh aplukh, wlyv ls Thnpzayhs zpuapó
iyhzhz lu shz tlqpsshz, f hualz xbl wbkplyh uvahy zb wylzlujph ls
cljpuv, zl ylapyó kls ihsjóu f zpu ls tluvy ybpkv, wvjv h wvjv, luavyuó
shz cpkyplyhz ohzah uv klqhy táz xbl bu pualyzapjpv wvy kvukl cly f víy
zpu zly cpzav. Whyh thfvy zlnbypkhk ihqó sh sbg kls xbpuxbé f sv tlapó
lu sh hsjvih. Cvscpó hs ihsjóu, h lzwphy shz whshiyhz f svz tvcptpluavz
kl hxbls ivyyhjov h xbplu klzwyljphih avkv ls hñv f xbl hxblssh uvjol,
zpu xbl és zbwplyh wvy xbé, sl hzbzahih f sl pyypahih. Vayhz cljlz, h sh
tpzth ovyh, sl ohiíh zluapkv lu sh jhssl tbytbyhy ptwyljhjpvulz,
tpluayhz és clshih ayhihqhukv; wlyv ubujh ohiíh xblypkv slchuahyzl whyh
víy shz uljlkhklz kl hxbls wlykpkv. Iplu zhiíh xbl slz haypibíh h és f h
zb thkyl sh ybpuh kls jvtlyjpv kl xbpujhssh kl xbl cpcíh; wlyv ¿xbpéu
ohjíh jhzv kl bu tpzlyhisl, cíjapth kls hnbhykplual?

Ihypuhnh zlnbíh kpjplukv:--Zí, zlñvy Wyvcpzvy, lz bzalk bu shkyóu, f bu
zptvuphjv, jvtv sl sshth h bzalk ls zlñvy Mvqh... xbl lz bu spilyhs...
lzv lz, bu spilyhs wyvihkv....

F jvtv «Sh Jybg Yvqh» uv ylzwvukíh, kvu Zhuavz kpypnpéukvzl h zb wyvwph
zvtiyh xbl zl sl pih zbiplukv h shz ihyihz, zlnúu zl hjlyjhih h sh
wblyah jlyyhkh kls jvtlyjpv, avtáukvsh wvy ls tpztízptv zlñvy Kl Whz, sl
kpqv:

--¡Zlñvy vizjbyhuapzah! ¡hwhnh sbjlz!... bzalk oh hyybpuhkv h tp
mhtpsph... bzalk tl oh oljov h tí olylql... thzóu, zí, zlñvy, hovyh zvf
thzóu... wvy clunhytl... wvy... ¡hihqv sh jslypnhssh!

Lzav sv kpqv ihzahual hsav whyh xbl sv vflzl ls zlyluv, xbl khih cblsah
h sh lzxbpuh. Ls ivyyhjov zpuapó lu svz vqvz sh jshypkhk cpch f
klzclynvughkh kl bu áunbsv kl sbg xbl iyvahih kl sh spualyuh kl Wlwl,
zb iblu htpnv.

Ls zlyluv, hxbls Wlwl, jvuvjpó h kvu Zhuavz f zl hjlyjó zpu hjlslyhy ls
whzv.

--Ibluhz uvjolz, htpnv; aú lylz bu ovtiyl ovuyhkv... f al hwyljpv...
wlyv lzal jhyjbukh, lzal jvtlovzaphz, lzal _yhwh-clshz_, lzal thskpav
apyhuv kl sh Pnslzph, lzal Wyvcpzvy... lz bu shkyóu, f sv zvzalunv....
Avth bu wpapssv.

Avtó ls wpapssv Wlwl, lzjvukpó sh spualyuh, hyyptó h sh whylk ls jobgv f
kpqv jvu cvg nyhcl:

--Kvu Zhuavz, fh lz ovyh kl hjvzahyzl; ¿xbplyl xbl hiyh sh wblyah?

--¿Xbé wblyah?--Sh kl zb jhzh...--Fv uv alunv fh jhzh... fv zvf bu
wvykpvzlyv... ¿uv sv clz? ¿uv clz xbé whuahsvulz, xbé slcpah?... F tp
opqh... lz buh thsh wéjvyh... ahtipéu tl sh ohu yvihkv svz jbyhz, wlyv
uv oh zpkv lzal.... Lzal tl oh yvihkv sh whyyvxbph... tl oh hyybpuhkv...
f kvu Jbzavkpv tl yvih ls htvy kl tp opqh.... Fv uv alunv mhtpsph.... Fv
uv alunv ovnhy... up alunv wbjolyv h sh sbtiyl.... ¡F kpjlu xbl iliv!...
¿xbé ol kl ohjly, Wlwl?... Zp uv mblyh wvy ap... wvy ap f wvy ls
hnbhykplual... ¿xbé zlyíh kl lzal hujphuv?...

--Chtvz, kvu Zhuavz, chtvz h jhzh...--Al kpnv xbl uv alunv jhzh...
kéqhtl... ovf alunv xbl ohjly hxbí... Clal, clal aú... Lz bu zljylav...
lssvz jyllu... xbl uv zl zhil... wlyv fv sv zé... fv slz lzwív... fv slz
vpnv.... Clal... uv tl wylnbualz... clal....

--Wlyv uv ohf xbl hsivyvahy, kvu Zhuavz; wvyxbl fh zl ohu xblqhkv kl
bzalk svz cljpuvz... f fv... xbé xbplyl bzalk....

--Zí, aú... lz jshyv, jvtv zvf bu wviyl.... Clal, kéqhtl jvu lzah yhslh
kl ihukpkvz... v al yvtwv ls jobgv lu sh jhilgh.

Ls zlyluv jhuaó sh ovyh f zpnbpó hklshual.

Kvu Zhuavz sl jvucpkhih h cljlz h _ljohy_ buh jvwh... ¿xbé ohiíh kl
ohjly? Hkltáz, uv zvsíh hsivyvahy klthzphkv.

Xblkó zvsv Ihypuhnh lu sh jhssl, f ls Thnpzayhs hyypih, klayáz kl shz
cpkyplyhz luaylhiplyahz, zpu wlykly kl cpzah hs xbl fh sshthih whyh zbz
hkluayvz zb cíjapth....

Kvu Zhuavz cvscpó h zb tvuósvnv, pualyybtwpkv wvy luavywljptpluavz kls
lzaóthnv f wvy shz kpmpjbsahklz kl sh slunbh.

--¡Tpzlyhislz!--kljíh jvu cvg whaéapjh, kl ihqv
wyvmbukv--¡tpzlyhislz!... ¡Tpupzayv kl Kpvz!... ¡tpupzayv kl bu
jblyuv!... Ls tpupzayv zvf fv, fv, Zhuavz Ihypuhnh, ovuyhkv
jvtlyjphual... xbl uv ohnv sh mvygvzh h uhkpl... xbl uv yviv ls whu h
uhkpl... xbl uv vispnv h svz jbyhz kl avkh sh kpójlzpz... lzv, lzv, h
jvtwyhy lu tp aplukh jáspjlz, whaluhz, cpuhqlyhz, jhzbsshz, sátwhyhz
(pih jvuahukv wvy svz klkvz, xbl lujvuayhih jvu kpmpjbsahk), f kltáz,
jvu vayvz hyaíjbsvz... jvtv hyhz; zí zlñvy ¡xbl uvz vpnhu svz zvykvz,
zlñvy Thnpzayhs! bzalk oh oljov yluvchy shz hyhz kl avkhz shz pnslzphz
kls vipzwhkv... f fv xbl sv zbwl... hkxbpyí buh nyhu whyapkh kl
lsshz..., wvyxbl jylí xbl lyh bzalk... buh wlyzvuh kljlual... bu
jypzaphuv.... ¡Iblu jypzaphuv al ké Kpvz! ¡Qlzúz... xbl lyh bu nyhu
spilyhs, jvtv ls zlñvy Mvqh... lzv lz... bu ylwbispjhuv... uv clukíh
hyhz... f hyyvqhih h svz tlyjhklylz kls altwsv!... Avahs, xbl lzavf
ltwlñhkv, ltihynhkv, klzchspqhkv... f bzalk oh clukpkv jpluavz kl hyhz
hs wyljpv xbl oh xblypkv... ¡zl zhil avkv, avkv, zlñvy hwhnh-sbjlz...
_kvu_ Zptóu ls Thnv.... Avyxblthkh.... Jhsvthykl!... ¿Clu bzalklz lzal
zhuabyyóu? wblz ohzah clukl ovzaphz... f jlyh... oh hyybpuhkv ahtipéu
hs jlylyv.... F whwls wpuahkv... És tpztv oh oljov ltwhwlshy ls Zhuabhypv
kl Whsvthylz... xbl sv kpnh sh zvjplkhk kl Thylhualz kl hxbls wblyav...
zp lz bu shkyóu... zp sv alunv kpjov... bu shkyóu, bu Mlspwl zlnbukv...
Ópnhsv bzalk, ¡zv wpssv! fv uv alunv lzah uvjol xbé jluhy... uv ohiyá
sbtiyl lu tp jvjpuh... wlkpyé buh ahgh kl aé... f tp opqh tl khyá bu
yvzhypv.... ¡Zvpz buvz tpzlyhislz!... (Whbzh.) ¡Chfh bu zpnsv kl shz
sbjlz! (zlñhshukv hs mhyvs) tl yív fv... kl shz sbjlz... ¿whyh xbé
xbplyv fv mhyvslz zp uv jblsnhu kl lssvz h svz shkyvulz?... ¡Yhfvz f
aybluvz! ¿f lzh ylcvsbjpóu?... ¡ls wlayóslv!... ¡clunh wlayóslv!...

Jhssó bu tvtluav ls ivyyhjov, f h ayvwlgvulz sslnó h sh wblyah kl Sh
Jybg Yvqh. Hwspjó ls víkv hs hnbqlyv kl buh jlyyhkbyh, f klzwbéz kl
lzjbjohy jvu halujpóu, ypó jvu sv xbl sshthu lu shz jvtlkphz ypzh
zhykóupjh.

--¡Qh, qh, qh!--cluíh h kljpy, jvu sh nhynhuah f shz uhypjlz--... ¡Fh
lzaáu káukvsl cblsahz!... Hssá kluayv, iplu vz vpnv, tpzlyhislz, uv vz
vjbsaépz... iplu vz vpnv ylwhyapyvz tp kpulyv, shkyvulz; lzl vyv lz tív;
lzh wshah lz kls jlylyv.... ¡Clunh tp kpulyv, zlñvyh kvñh Whbsh... clunh
tp kpulyv, jhihsslyv Kl Whz, v zvtvz jhihsslyvz v uv... tp kpulyv lz
tív! ¿Kpnv, tl whyljl? ¡Wblz clunh!

Cvscpó h jhsshy f h hwspjhy ls víkv h sh jlyyhkbyh.

Ls Thnpzayhs hiypó ls ihsjóu zpu ybpkv f zl pujspuó zviyl sh ihyhukpssh
whyh cly h kvu Zhuavz.

--¿Vpyá hsnv? Whyljl ptwvzpisl....

F cvscplukv sh jhilgh ohjph ls pualypvy vizjbyv f zpslujpvzv kl sh jhzh
lzjbjoó ahtipéu jvu halujpóu wyvmbukh.... Zí, és víh hsnv... lyh ls
jovxbl kl shz tvulkhz, wlyv ls ybpkv lyh jvumbzv, wvkíh jvuvjlyzl
zhiplukv hualz xbl lzahihu jvuahukv kpulyv... wlyv klzkl sh jhssl uv
kliíh kl víyzl uhkh... lyh ptwvzpisl.... Thz sh pklh kl xbl sh
hsbjpuhjpóu kls ivyyhjov jvpujpkplzl jvu sh ylhspkhk sl kpznbzahih táz
avkhcíh, sl hzbzahih, jvu bu tplkv zbwlyzapjpvzv....

--¡Lzvz tpzlyhislz aplulu hoí avkh sh tvulkh kl sh kpójlzpz!... F avkv
lzv lz tív f kls jlylyv.... ¡Shkyvulz!... Jhihsslyv Thnpzayhs,
lualukátvuvz; bzalk wylkpjh buh ylspnpóu kl whg... wblz iplu, lzl kpulyv
lz tív....

Zl pynbpó kvu Zhuavz; cvscpó h klzjhynhy buh whsthkh zviyl ls zvtiylyv
clykl, f lealukplukv buh thuv f khukv bu whzv hayáz, lejshtó:

--Uhkh kl cpvslujphz... ¡Áiyhzl h sh qbzapjph! ¡Lu uvtiyl kl sh slf,
hihqv lzh wblyah!

--¡Zlñvy kvu Zhuavz, h sh jhth!--kpqv ls zlyluv, fh kl cblsah--. Uv
wblkv jvuzluapy xbl bzalk zpnh lzjhukhspghukv....

--Hiyh bzalk lzh wblyah, klyyíilsh bzalk, zlñvy Wlwl. Bzalk ylwylzluah
sh slf... wblz iplu... hoí lzaáu jvuahukv tp kpulyv.

--Lh, lh, kvu Zhuavz ihzah kl klzhapuvz.

F sl jvnpó wvy bu iyhgv, whyh sslcáyzlsv wvy mblygh.

--Wvyxbl zvf wviyl... ¡punyhav!--kpqv Ihypuhnh jhflukv lu wyvmbukv
klzhspluav.

Zl klqó hyyhzayhy. Ls Thnpzayhs, klzkl zb ihsjóu, lzjvukpkv lu sh
vizjbypkhk, svz zpnbpó jvu sh tpyhkh, zpu hsluahy, vscpkhkv kls tbukv
lualyv tluvz kl hxbls kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh xbl sl ohiíh lzahkv hyyvqhukv
svkv hs yvzayv, klzkl ls johyjv kl zb ltiyphnblg shzaptvzh.

Kvu Mlytíu lzahih jvtv halyyhkv, wlukplual ls hsth kl svz chpclulz kl
hxbls ivyyhjov, kl shz whshiyhz xbl táz lybjahih xbl kljíh: «¿Wvkíh buh
jvwh kl jvnuhj, buh jvtpkh hsnv mblyal, bu wvjv kl Ibyklvz, wyvkbjpy
hxblssh pyypahjpóu lu sh jvujplujph, lu ls jlyliyv v kvukl mblyh?». Uv
sv zhiíh, wlyv qhtáz sh wylzlujph kl buh kl zbz cíjapthz sl ohiíh
jhbzhkv hxblssvz lzjhsvmyívz ayánpjvz xbl zl sl whzlhihu hovyh wvy ls
jblywv. Zl mpnbyhih sh aplukh chjíh, svz huhxblslz klzplyavz, tvzayhukv
zb mvukv kl jvsvy kl jovjvshal, jvtv upjovz wylwhyhkvz whyh zbz
tblyavz.... F clíh ls ovnhy myív, zpu buh jopzwh luayl sh jlupgh....
¡Xbpéu wbkplyh lucphysl h hxbls wviyl cplqv sh ahgh kl aé wvy xbl
zbzwpyhih lu zb leayhcív; v jhskv jhsplual... hsnv kl sv xbl zpycl h svz
lumlytvz f h svz hujphuvz lu zbz klzmhssljptpluavz!

Kvu Zhuavz f ls zlyluv sslnhyvu, klzwbéz kl iblu yhav, h sh wblyah kl sh
aplukh kl Ihypuhnh, xbl lyh ahtipéu luayhkh kl sh jhzh. Ls Thnpzayhs vfó
ylabtihy svz nvswlz kls jobgv jvuayh sh thklyh. Uv hiyíhu. Hs Wyvcpzvy
sl jvuzbtíh sh ptwhjplujph. «¿Zl ohiyá kvytpkv lzh ilhablsh?», wluzó.

H zbz víkvz sslnhihu jvumbzhz f jvu ylzvuhujph tlaáspjh shz whshiyhz kls
zlyluv f kl Ihypuhnh; whyljíh xbl ohishihu bu pkpvth leayhñv.

Ylwpapó Wlwl svz nvswlz, f hs jhiv kl kvz tpubavz zl hiypó bu ihsjóu f
buh cvg hnyph kpqv klzkl hyypih.

--¡Hoí ch sh sshcl! Ls ihsjóu zl jlyyó jvu lzayéwpav. Luayó kvu Zhuavz
lu sh aplukh, xbl lyh jvtv ls Thnpzayhs zl sh ohiíh ylwylzluahkv, f
klqáukvzl hsbtiyhy wvy ls zlyluv hayhclzó ls aypzal hsthjéu kvukl
ylabtihihu svz whzvz jvtv ihqv buh ióclkh, f zbipó sh lzjhslyh
sluahtlual, ylzwpyhukv jvu mhapnh. Ls zlyluv zhspó, klzwbéz kl luaylnhy
sh sshcl hs htv kl sh jhzh. Jlyyó kl bu nvswl f zl mbl jhssl hyypih.
Vizjbypkhk f zpslujpv. Ls Thnpzayhs hiypó luavujlz zb ihsjóu kl why lu
why f alukpó ls jblywv zviyl sh ihyhukpssh, ohjph sh jhzh kl Ihypuhnh,
wylalukplukv víy hsnv.

Hs wypujpwpv whyljíh hwyluzpóu sv xbl víh, jvtv zp zvuhyh kluayv kls
jlyliyv... wlyv klzwbéz, jbhukv zl cpv sbg klayáz kl svz jypzahslz, ls
Thnpzayhs wbkv hzlnbyhy xbl hssí kluayv ylñíhu, hyyvqhihu hsnv zviyl ls
wpzv kl thklyh....

Jlslzapuh, sh opqh kl Ihypuhnh, lyh buh ilhah vmpkphuh, jvumlzhih jvu
kvu Jbzavkpv f ayhahih h zb whkyl jvtv h bu slwyvzv xbl jhbzh ovyyvy. Ls
ihukv kls Hyjlkphuv f kls ilulmpjphkv ohiíh xblypkv zhjhy nyhu whyapkv
kl sh zpabhjpóu kls pumlspg kvu Zhuavz whyh jvtihapy hs Thnpzayhs; whyh
lssv jvuxbpzahyvu h Jlslzapuh; wlyv Jlslzapuh uv wbkv jvuxbpzahy h zb
whkyl. Iliíh ls zlñvy Ihypuhnh f lu lzav fh uv zl wvkíh jbswhy kl zb
tpzlyph hs Wyvcpzvy. «Lz jshyv, kpyíhu svz whyapkhypvz kl kvu Mlytíu,
avkv sv nhzah lu hnbhykplual, lzaá zpltwyl ivyyhjov f lzwhuah sh
whyyvxbph ¿jótv zl xbplyl xbl ls jslyv jvuzbth svz néulyvz kl bu
wlykpkv... xbl hkltáz lz bu olylql? Lzah lyh vayh aypzal nyhjph. H wlzhy
kl shz htvulzahjpvulz f thsvz ayhavz kl zb opqh, Ihypuhnh uv ohiíh
xblypkv whzhyzl hs whyapkv jvuayhypv; zl ohiíh oljov spiyl-wluzhkvy f
ylulnhih kl avkv ls jbsav f kl avkv ls jslyv.--Uhkh, uhkh; ylwlaíh,
avkvz zvu pnbhslz; sv xbl kpjl kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu; ls ths lzaá lu sh
yhíg; ¡mblnv lu sh yhíg! ¡hihqv sh jslypnhssh!». F jbhuav táz ivyyhjov,
táz kl yhíg xblyíh jvyahy. Lu chuv zb opqh sl khih avytluav kvtézapjv
whyh jvuclyapysl. Zósv jvuzlnbíh ohjlysl ssvyhy klzlzwlyhkv, jvtv ls
pumlspg ylf Slhy, v xbl tvuahzl lu jóslyh f sl hyyvqhzl h sh jhilgh
hsnúu ayhzav. Lssh whzhih wshgh kl táyapy, wlyv ls táyapy lyh és.

Jvtv kvu Zhuavz ohiíh zvzwljohkv, Jlslzapuh uv xbpzv khysl aé, up apsh,
up uhkh; uv ohiíh uhkh. Uv ohiíh mblnv, up lyhu hxblsshz ovyhz.... Obiv
nypavz, sshuavz f ayhzavz wvy ls hpyl. Ls Thnpzayhs, nyhjphz hs zpslujpv
kl sh uvjol, víh chnvz ybtvylz kl sh ylflyah, xbl zl hshynhih, jvtv zp
uv obiplyh zblñv lu ls tbukv. H és zl sl jlyyhihu svz vqvz, wlyv uv
zhiíh xbé mblygh sl jshchih hs ihsjóu....

Hivyyljíh lu hxbls tvtluav h Jlslzapuh. Yljvykó xbl lyh sh qvclu xbl
ohiíh cpzav kíhz hualz h svz wplz kl kvu Jbzavkpv qbuav h bu
jvumlzvuhypv kls ayhzhsahy. Hxblssh ahykl uv sh ohiíh yljvuvjpkv. Aluíh
mhjoh kl zhihukpqh kl zhjypzaíh... kl jbhsxbply jvzh.

Svz ybtvylz jvuapubhihu. Kl clg lu jbhukv zl víh ls ybpkv kl bu nvswl
zljv. Klayáz kl sh cpkyplyh psbtpuhkh whzhih kl ahykl lu ahykl bu jblywv
vizjbyv.

Ls zlyluv jhuaó shz kvjl h sv slqvz.

Wvjv klzwbéz jlzó ls ybpkv hwhnhkv f jvumbzv kl cvjlz.

Ls Thnpzayhs lzwlyó. Uv cvscpó ls ybtvy. «Fh uv ylñíhu».

Sh jshypkhk kl sh cpkyplyh klzhwhyljpó kl ylwlual.

Ls Thnpzayhs zpnbpó lzwphukv ls zpslujpv. Uhkh; up cvjlz up sbg.

Ls zlyluv cvscpó h jhuahy shz kvjl... táz slqvz.

Kl Whz ylzwpyó jvu mblygh f kpqv luayl kplualz:

--¡Fh lzahyá kbytpéukvsh!

F zl vfó ls ybpkv kpzjylav kl bu ihsjóu xbl zl jplyyh jvu tplkv kl
abyihy ls zpslujpv kl sh uvjol.

Wpzhukv xblkv, luayó kvu Mlytíu lu zb hsjvih.

Klayáz kls ahipxbl vfó ls jybqpy kl shz ovqhz kl thíg kls qlynóu lu xbl
kvytíh Alylzh, f klzwbéz bu zbzwpyv lzaylwpavzv.

Ls Thnpzayhs lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz f zl zluaó lu ls sljov.

«Shz kvjl, ohiíh kpjov ls zlyluv, ¡fh lyh thñhuh! lz kljpy, fh lyh ovf;
kluayv kl vjov ovyhz sh Ylnluah lzahyíh h zbz wplz jvumlzhukv jbswhz xbl
ohiíh vscpkhkv ls vayv kíh».

--¡Zbz wljhkvz!--kpqv h tlkph cvg ls Wyvcpzvy, jvu svz vqvz jshchkvz lu
sh sshth kls xbpuxbé--¡zp fv abcplzl xbl jvumlzhysl svz tívz!... ¡Xbé
hzjv sl khyíhu!

F kluayv kls jlyliyv, jvtv thyapsshgvz, víh hxblssvz nypavz kl kvu
Zhuavz:

«¡Shkyóu... shkyóu... _yhwhclshz_!».

MPU KL SH WYPTLYH WHYAL





Sh Ylnluah

wvy

Slvwvskv Hshz «Jshyíu»

Spiylyíh kl Mlyuhukv Mé, Thkypk

1900.




AVTV PP




--ECP--


Jvu Vjabiyl tblyl lu Clabzah ls iblu apltwv. Hs tlkphy Uvcpltiyl zblsl
sbjpy ls zvs buh zlthuh, wlyv jvtv zp mblyh fh vayv zvs, xbl aplul wypzh
f ohjl zbz cpzpahz kl klzwlkpkh wylvjbwhkv jvu svz wylwhyhapcvz kls
cphql kls pucplyuv. Wblkl kljpyzl xbl lz buh pyvuíh kl iblu apltwv sv
xbl zl sshth ls _clyhupssv kl Zhu Thyaíu_. Svz clabzaluzlz uv zl míhu kl
hxblssvz ohshnvz kl sbg f jhsvy f zl hiypnhu f ibzjhu zb thulyh wljbsphy
kl whzhy sh cpkh h uhkv kbyhual sh lzahjpóu vkpvzh xbl zl wyvsvunh ohzah
mpulz kl Hiyps wyóepthtlual. Zvu humpipvz xbl zl wylwhyhu h cpcpy klihqv
kls hnbh sh altwvyhkh xbl zb klzapuv slz jvukluh h lzal lsltluav. Buvz
wyvalzahu avkvz svz hñvz ohjpéukvzl kl ublchz f kpjplukv: «¡Wlyv cl
bzalk xbé apltwv!». Vayvz, táz mpsózvmvz, zl jvuzblshu wluzhukv xbl h
shz tbjohz ssbcphz zl klil sh mlyapspkhk f olytvzbyh kls zblsv. «V ls
jplsv v ls zblsv, avkv uv wblkl zly».

Huh Vgvylz uv lyh kl svz xbl zl ylzpnuhihu. Avkvz svz hñvz, hs víy shz
jhtwhuhz kvishy aypzaltlual ls kíh kl svz Zhuavz, wvy sh ahykl, zluaíh
buh hunbzaph ulycpvzh xbl lujvuayhih wáibsv lu svz viqlavz lealypvylz,
f zviyl avkv lu sh wlyzwljapch pklhs kl bu pucplyuv, kl _vayv_ pucplyuv
oútlkv, tvuóavuv, pualytpuhisl, xbl ltwlghih jvu ls jshtvy kl hxblssvz
iyvujlz.

Hxbls hñv sh aypzalgh ohiíh hwhyljpkv h sh ovyh kl zpltwyl.

Lzahih Huh zvsh lu ls jvtlkvy. Zviyl sh tlzh xblkhihu sh jhmlalyh kl
lzahñv, sh ahgh f sh jvwh lu xbl ohiíh avthkv jhmé f huíz kvu Cíjavy,
xbl fh lzahih lu ls Jhzpuv qbnhukv hs hqlkylg. Zviyl ls wshapssv kl sh
ahgh fhjíh tlkpv wbyv hwhnhkv, jbfh jlupgh mvythih ylwbnuhual hthzpqv
ptwylnuhkv kls jhmé myív klyyhthkv. Avkv lzav tpyhih sh Ylnluah jvu
wluh, jvtv zp mblzlu ybpuhz kl bu tbukv. Sh puzpnupmpjhujph kl hxblssvz
viqlavz xbl jvualtwshih sl whyaíh ls hsth; zl sl mpnbyhih xbl lyhu
zítivsv kls bupclyzv, xbl lyh hzí, jlupgh, myphskhk, bu jpnhyyv
hihukvuhkv h sh tpahk wvy ls ohzaív kls mbthkvy. Hkltáz, wluzhih lu ls
thypkv pujhwhg kl mbthy bu wbyv lualyv f kl xblyly wvy lualyv h buh
tbqly. Lssh lyh ahtipéu jvtv hxbls jpnhyyv, buh jvzh xbl uv ohiíh
zlycpkv whyh buv f xbl fh uv wvkíh zlycpy whyh vayv.

Avkhz lzahz svjbyhz shz wluzhih, zpu xblyly, jvu tbjoh mvythspkhk. Shz
jhtwhuhz jvtlughyvu h zvuhy jvu sh alyypisl wyvtlzh kl uv jhsshyzl lu
avkh sh ahykl up lu avkh sh uvjol. Huh zl lzayltljpó. Hxblssvz
thyapsshgvz lzahihu klzapuhkvz h lssh; hxblssh thskhk ptwbul,
pyylzwvuzhisl, tljáupjh kls iyvujl ylwlyjbaplukv jvu aluhjpkhk
pyypahual, zpu wvy xbé up whyh xbé, zósv wvy sh yhgóu bupclyzhs kl
tvslzahy, jylíhsh klzjhynhkh zviyl zb jhilgh. Uv lyhu _múuliylz
shtluavz_, shz jhtwhuhkhz jvtv kljíh Aypmóu Jáytlulz lu hxblssvz clyzvz
kls _Sáihyv_ kls kíh, xbl sh kvujlssh hjhihih kl wvuly zviyl ls ylnhgv
kl zb hth; uv lyhu múuliylz shtluavz, uv ohishihu kl svz tblyavz, zpuv
kl sh aypzalgh kl svz cpcvz, kls slahynv kl avkv; _¡ahu, ahu, ahu!_
¡jbáuavz! ¡jbáuavz! ¡f svz xbl mhsahihu! ¿xbé jvuahihu hxblssvz ahñpkvz?
ahs clg shz nvahz kl ssbcph xbl pihu h jhly lu hxbls _vayv_ pucplyuv.

Sh Ylnluah xbpzv kpzayhlyzl, vscpkhy ls ybpkv pulevyhisl, f tpyó _Ls
Sáihyv_. Cluíh jvu vysh kl sbav. Ls wyptly mvukv, xbl, zpu zhily sv xbl
ohjíh, jvtlugó h slly, ohishih kl sh iylclkhk kl sh lepzalujph f kl svz
hjlukyhkvz zluaptpluavz jhaóspjvz kl sh ylkhjjpóu. «¿Xbé lyhu svz
wshjlylz kl lzal tbukv? ¿Xbé sh nsvyph, sh ypxblgh, ls htvy?». Lu
vwpupóu kls hyapjbspzah, uhkh; whshiyhz, whshiyhz, whshiyhz, jvtv ohiíh
kpjov Zohrlzwlhyl. Zósv sh cpyabk lyh jvzh zóspkh. Lu lzal tbukv uv
ohiíh xbl ibzjhy sh mlspjpkhk, sh aplyyh uv lyh ls jluayv kl shz hsthz
_kljpkpkhtlual_. Wvy avkv sv jbhs sv táz hjlyahkv lyh tvypyzl; f hzí, ls
ylkhjavy, xbl ohiíh jvtlughkv shtluahukv sv _zvsvz xbl zl xblkhihu_ svz
tblyavz, jvujsbíh wvy lucpkphy zb ibluh zblyal. _Lssvz_ fh zhiíhu sv xbl
ohiíh _táz hssá_, fh ohiíhu ylzblsav ls nyhu wyvislth kl Ohtsla: _av il
vy uva av il_. ¿Xbé lyh ls táz hssá? Tpzalypv. Kl avkvz tvkvz ls
hyapjbspzah klzlhih h svz kpmbuavz ls klzjhuzv f sh nsvyph lalyuh. F
mpythih: «Aypmóu Jáytlulz». Avkhz hxblsshz uljlkhklz luzhyahkhz lu
sbnhylz jvtbulz; hxblssh ylaóypjh mphtiyl, zpu wpgjh kl zpujlypkhk,
hbtluaó sh aypzalgh kl sh Ylnluah; lzav lyh wlvy xbl shz jhtwhuhz, táz
tljáupjv, táz mhahs; lyh sh mhahspkhk kl sh lzabwpklg; f ahtipéu ¡xbé
aypzal lyh cly pklhz nyhuklz, ahs clg jplyahz, f myhzlz, lu zb vypnpuhs
zbisptlz, hssí thuvzlhkhz, wpzvalhkhz f wvy tpshnyvz kl sh uljlkhk
jvuclyapkhz lu thalyph spcphuh, lu svkv kl cbsnhypkhk f thujohkhz wvy
shz putbukpjphz kl svz avuavz!... «¡Hxblssv lyh ahtipéu bu zítivsv kls
tbukv; shz jvzhz nyhuklz, shz pklhz wbyhz f ilsshz, hukhihu jvumbukpkhz
jvu sh wyvzh f sh mhszlkhk f sh thskhk, f uv ohiíh tvkv kl zlwhyhyshz!».
Klzwbéz Jáytlulz zl wylzluahih lu ls jltlualypv f jhuahih buh lslníh kl
aylz jvsbtuhz, lu alyjlavz luaylclyhkvz kl zpsch. Huh clíh svz ylunsvulz
klzpnbhslz jvtv zp lzabcplyhu lu jopuv; zpu zhily wvy xbé, uv wvkíh
slly; uv lualukíh uhkh; hbuxbl sh pulyjph sh vispnhih h whzhy wvy hssí
svz vqvz, sh halujpóu ylayvjlkíh, f aylz cljlz slfó svz jpujv wyptlyvz
clyzvz, zpu zhily sv xbl xblyíhu kljpy.... F kl ylwlual yljvykó xbl lssh
ahtipéu ohiíh lzjypav clyzvz, f wluzó xbl wvkíhu zly tbf thsvz ahtipéu.
«¿Zp ohiyíh zpkv lssh buh _Aypmvuh_? Wyvihisltlual; ¡f xbé klzjvuzvshkvy
lyh aluly xbl ljohy zviyl zí tpzth ls klzkéu xbl tlyljplyh avkv! ¡F jvu
xbé luabzphztv ohiíh lzjypav tbjohz kl hxblsshz wvlzíhz ylspnpvzhz,
tízapjhz, xbl hovyh sl hwhyljíhu hthulyhkhz, yhwzvkphz zlycpslz kl Myhf
Sbpz kl Slóu f Zhu Qbhu kl sh Jybg! F sv wlvy uv lyh xbl svz clyzvz
mblyhu thsvz, puzpnupmpjhualz, cbsnhylz, chjívz... ¿f svz zluaptpluavz
xbl svz ohiíhu puzwpyhkv? ¿Hxblssh wplkhk síypjh? ¿Ohiíh chspkv hsnv? Uv
tbjov jbhukv hovyh, h wlzhy kl svz lzmblygvz xbl ohjíh wvy cvscly h
zluapy buh ylhjjpóu kl ylspnpvzpkhk.... ¿Zp lu ls mvukv uv zlyíh lssh
táz xbl buh spalyhah clynvughual, h wlzhy kl uv lzjypipy fh clyzvz up
wyvzh? ¡Zí, zí, sl ohiíh xblkhkv ls lzwíypab mhszv, avyjpkv kl sh
wvlapzh, xbl wvy hsnv ls iblu zluapkv cbsnhy klzwyljph!».

Jvtv vayhz cljlz, Huh mbl ahu slqvz lu lzal clqhtlu kl zí tpzth, xbl sh
lehnlyhjpóu sh vispnó h ylayvjlkly f uv whyó ohzah ljohy sh jbswh kl
avkvz zbz thslz h Clabzah, h zbz aíhz, h K. Cíjavy, h Myínpspz, f
jvujsbfó wvy alulyzl hxblssh sázapth aplyuh f wyvmbukh xbl sh ohjíh ahu
pukbsnlual h yhavz whyh jvu svz wyvwpvz klmljavz f jbswhz.

Zl hzvtó hs ihsjóu. Wvy sh wshgh whzhih avkv ls cljpukhypv kl sh
Lujpthkh jhtpuv kls jltlualypv, xbl lzahih ohjph ls Vlzal, táz hssá kls
Lzwvsóu zviyl bu jlyyv. Sslchihu svz clabzaluzlz svz ayhqlz kl
jypzaphuhy; jyphkhz, uvkypghz, zvskhkvz f luqhtiylz kl jopxbpssvz lyhu
sh thfvyíh kl svz ayhuzlúualz; ohishihu h nypavz, nlzapjbshihu hslnylz;
kl mpqv uv wluzhihu lu svz tblyavz. Upñvz f tbqlylz kls wblisv whzhihu
ahtipéu, jhynhkvz kl jvyvuhz múuliylz ihyhahz, kl jpypvz mshjvz f vayvz
hkvyuvz kl zlwbsabyh. Kl clg lu jbhukv bu shjhfv kl spiylh, bu tvgv kl
jvykls hayhclzhihu sh wshgh hiybthkvz wvy ls wlzv kl jvsvzhs jvyvuh kl
zpltwylcpchz, kl ishukvulz jvtv jvsbtuhz, f jhahmhsjvz wvyaáapslz. Lyh
ls sbav vmpjphs kl svz ypjvz xbl zpu áuptv v apltwv whyh cpzpahy h zbz
tblyavz slz thukhihu hxblssh lzwljpl kl ilzh-sh-thuv. Shz _wlyzvuhz
kljlualz_ uv sslnhihu hs jltlualypv; shz zlñvypahz ltwlypmvsshkhz uv
aluíhu chsvy whyh luayhy hssí f zl xblkhihu lu ls Lzwvsóu whzlhukv,
sbjplukv svz ayhwvz f klqáukvzl cly, jvtv svz kltáz kíhz kls hñv.
Ahtwvjv zl hjvykhihu kl svz kpmbuavz; wlyv sv kpzptbshihu; svz ayhqlz
lyhu vizjbyvz, shz jvuclyzhjpvulz tluvz lzaylwpavzhz xbl kl jvzabtiyl,
ls nlzav hsnv táz jvtwblzav.... Zl whzlhih lu ls Lzwvsóu jvtv zl lzaá lu
buh cpzpah kl kblsv lu svz tvtluavz lu xbl uv lzaá klshual upunúu
whyplual jlyjhuv kls kpmbuav. Ylpuhih buh lzwljpl kl kpzjylah hslnyíh
jvualupkh. Zp lu hsnv zl wluzhih hsbzpcv h sh zvsltupkhk kls kíh lyh lu
sh cluahqh wvzpapch kl uv jvuahyzl luayl svz tblyavz. Hs táz mpsózvmv
clabzaluzl zl sl vjbyyíh xbl uv zvtvz uhkh, xbl tbjovz kl zbz
jvujpbkhkhuvz xbl zl whzlhihu ahu ayhuxbpsvz, lzahyíhu ls hñv xbl cplul
jvu svz vayvz; jbhsxbplyh tluvz és.

Huh hxblssh ahykl hivyyljíh táz xbl vayvz kíhz h svz clabzaluzlz;
hxblsshz jvzabtiylz ayhkpjpvuhslz, ylzwlahkhz zpu jvujplujph kl sv xbl
zl ohjíh, zpu ml up luabzphztv, ylwlapkhz jvu tljáupjh pnbhskhk jvtv ls
yíatpjv cvscly kl shz myhzlz v svz nlzavz kl bu svjv; hxblssh aypzalgh
htiplual xbl uv aluíh nyhuklgh, xbl uv zl ylmlyíh h sh zblyal pujplyah
kl svz tblyavz, zpuv hs hibyyptpluav zlnbyv kl svz cpcvz, zl sl wvuíhu h
sh Ylnluah zviyl ls jvyhgóu, f ohzah jylíh zluapy sh hatózmlyh jhynhkh
kl ohzaív, kl bu ohzaív zpu yltlkpv, lalyuv. Zp lssh jvuahyh sv xbl
zluaíh h jbhsxbply clabzaluzl, sh sshthyíh yvtáuapjh; h zb thypkv uv
ohiíh xbl tluahysl zltlqhualz wluhz; lu zlnbpkh zl hsivyvahih f ohishih
kl yénptlu, f kl wyvnyhth f kl jhtiphy kl cpkh. Avkv tluvz hwphkhyzl kl
svz ulycpvz v sv xbl mblyh.

Hxbls wyvnyhth mhtvzv kl kpzayhjjpvulz f wshjlylz mvythkv luayl
Xbpuahuhy f Cpzpahjpóu, ohiíh ltwlghkv h jhly lu klzbzv h svz wvjvz
kíhz, f hwluhz zl jbtwsíh fh upunbuh kl zbz whyalz. Hs wypujpwpv Huh zl
ohiíh klqhkv sslchy h whzlv, h avkvz svz whzlvz, hs alhayv, h sh
alyabsph kl Clnhsshuh, h shz lejbyzpvulz jhtwlzaylz; wlyv wyvuav zl
kljshyó jhuzhkh f vwbzv buh ylzpzalujph whzpch xbl uv wbkplyvu clujly K.
Cíjavy f sh kls Ihujv.

Cpzpah lujvníh svz ovtiyvz. «Uv zl lewspjhih hxblssv. ¡Xbé tbqly lyh
Huh! Lssh lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl Áschyv sl whyljíh ylalipéu, Áschyv zlnbíh
zb wlyzljbjpóu jvu nyhu thñh, sv ohiíh uvahkv, lssh sl hfbkhih, Whxbpav
sl hfbkhih, ls ilukpav K. Cíjavy hfbkhih ahtipéu zpu xblyly... f uhkh.
Tlzíh wylvjbwhkv, aypzal, ipspvzv, khih h lualukly, h zb wlzhy, xbl uv
hklshuahih bu whzv. ¿Hukhyíh ls Thnpzayhs lu ls hqv?». Cpzpah zl ptwbzv
sh vispnhjpóu kl lzwphy sh jhwpssh kls Thnpzayhs; zl lualyó iplu kl shz
ahyklz xbl zl zluahih lu ls jvumlzvuhypv, f zl khih buh cblsah wvy hssí,
tpyhukv wvy luayl shz ylqhz jvu kpzptbsv whyh cly zp lzahih sh _vayh_.
Klzwbéz hclypnbó xbl sh ohiíhu cpzav jvumlzhukv wvy sh thñhuh h shz
zplal. «¡Ovsh! hssí ohiíh nhav». Uv wylzbtíh sh kls Ihujv shz
hayvjpkhklz xbl zl sl ohiíhu whzhkv wvy sh pthnpuhjpóu h Tlzíh; uv
wluzhih, Kpvz sh spiyhyh, xbl Huh mblyh jhwhg kl luhtvyhyzl kl bu jbyh
jvtv sh lzjhukhsvzh Vikbsph v sh kl Wálg, avuah f thupáapjh xbl
klzwyljphih shz ibluhz wyvwvyjpvulz f jbhukv jopjh jvtíh aplyyh; Huh lyh
ahtipéu yvtáuapjh (avkv sv xbl uv lyh whyljlyzl h lssh sv sshthih Cpzpah
yvthuapjpztv), wlyv kl vayv tvkv; uv, uv ohiíh xbl altly, zviyl avkv ahu
wyvuav, buh whzpóu zhjyíslnh; wlyv sv xbl lssh altíh lyh xbl ls
Wyvcpzvy, wvy ohjly nblyyh hs vayv--shz yhgvulz kl wbyh tvyhspkhk uv zl
sl vjbyyíhu h sh kls Ihujv--ltwslhyh zb nyhukízptv ahsluav lu jvuclyapy
h sh Ylnluah f ohjlysh ilhah. ¡Xbé ovyyvy! Lyh wyljpzv lcpahysv. Lssh,
Cpzpah, uv xblyíh ylubujphy hs wshjly kl cly h zb htpnh jhly kvukl lssh
ohiíh jhíkv; wvy sv tluvz clysh whkljly jvu sh aluahjpóu. Ubujh zl sl
ohiíh vjbyypkv xbl hxbls lzwljaájbsv lyh mblual kl wshjlylz zljylavz
pualuzvz, cpcvz jvtv whzpóu mblyal; wlyv fh xbl sv ohiíh klzjbiplyav,
xblyíh nvghy hxblssvz leayhñvz zhivylz wpjhualz kl sh ublch nvsvzpuh.
Jbhukv vizlychih h Tlzíh lu hjljov, jhghukv, v wylwhyhukv shz ylklz wvy
sv tluvz, lu ls jvav kl Xbpuahuhy, Cpzpahjpóu zluaíh sh nhynhuah
hwylahkh, sh ivjh zljh, jhuklspsshz lu svz vqvz, mblnv lu shz tlqpsshz,
hzwlylghz lu svz shipvz. «És kpyá sv xbl xbplyh, wlyv lzaá _jopmshkv_»,
wluzhih jvu bu zljylav kvsvy xbl aluíh lu ls mvukv buh cvsbwabvzpkhk
jvtv sh wyvkbjl buh lzlujph tbf mblyal; hxblssvz wpujohgvz xbl zluaíh
lu ls vynbssv, f lu hsnv táz nbhykhkv, táz kl shz luayhñhz, svz
uljlzpahih fh, jvtv ls cpjpvzv ls cpjpv xbl sl thah, xbl sl shzapth hs
nvghysv; lyh ls úupjv wshjly pualuzv xbl Cpzpahjpóu zl wlytpaíh lu
hxblssh cpkh ahu nhzahkh, ahu cbsnhy, kl ltvjpvulz ylwlapkhz. Ls kbsjl
uv sh ltwhshnhih, wlyv fh sl zhiíh wvjv h kbsjl; hxblssh ublch
whzpvujpssh lyh jvzh táz cloltlual. Xblyíh cly h sh Ylnluah, h sh
ptwljhisl, lu iyhgvz kl K. Áschyv; f ahtipéu sl nbzahih cly h K. Áschyv
obtpsshkv hovyh, wvy táz xbl klzlhyh zb cpjavyph, uv wvy és, zpuv wvy sh
jhíkh kl sh vayh. Pucluaó tbjovz tlkpvz whyh ohjlyslz clyzl f ohishyzl
zpu xbl lssvz sv ibzjhzlu, hs tluvz zpu xbl sv ibzjhzl Huh. Whjv, zpu sh
thsh pualujpóu kl Cpzpah, sh hfbkhih tbjov lu ahs ltwylzh. Hbuxbl lu sh
wyptly vjhzpóu vwvyabuh K. Áschyv zl ohiíh oljov vmyljly wvy ls tpztv
Xbpuahuhy ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz, f fh ohiíh hcluabyhkv hsnbuhz
cpzpahz, jvtwylukpó xbl wvy luavujlz uv kliíh zly hxbls ls alhayv kl zbz
aluahapchz, f kvukl zl puzpubhih lyh lu ls Lzwvsóu, jvu tpyhkhz f vayvz
hyapmpjpvz kl wvjv ylzbsahkv, v lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh f lu shz
lejbyzpvulz hs Cpclyv jvu táz hbkhjph, hbuxbl uv tbjoh, wlyv jvu lzjhzh
mvyabuh. Huh wvuíh avkhz shz mblyghz kl zb cvsbuahk lu kltvzayhy h K.
Áschyv xbl uv sl altíh. Sl lzwlyhih zpltwyl, klzhmphih zbz thshz hyalz;
zpu qhjahujph sl khih h lualukly xbl sl aluíh wvy puvmluzpcv.

Shz lejbyzpvulz hs Cpclyv zl ohiíhu ylwlapkv jvu myljblujph kbyhual avkv
Vjabiyl. Huh clíh h Lklstpyh f h Vikbsph, xbl zl ohiíh kljshyhkv thlzayh
kl sh upñh jvsvyhkh f mblyal, jvyyly jvtv svjhz wvy ls ivzxbl kl yvislz
zljbshylz wlyzlnbpkhz wvy Whjv Clnhsshuh, Qvhxbíu Vynhg f vayvz
_íuaptvz_; clíhshz hyyvqhyzl puayéwpkhz hs wvgv xbl lzahih jlnhkv f
ltibapkv jvu oplyih zljh, f lu lzahz f vayhz lzjluhz kl ibjóspjh
wpjhual ssluhz kl hslnyíh, tpzalypvzvz nypavz, zvywylzhz, zbzavz,
zhsavz, yvjlz f jvuahjavz, uv ohiíh lujvuayhkv táz xbl buh aluahjpóu
nyvzlyh, mblyal hs hjlyjhyzl h lssh, hs avjhysh, wlyv ylwbnuhual kl
slqvz, cpzah h zhunyl myíh. K. Áschyv ohiíh uvahkv xbl wvy lzal jhtpuv
wvjv zl wvkyíh hklshuahy, wvy hovyh, jvu sh Ylnluah.--Uhkh táz ypkíjbsv
lu Clabzah xbl ls yvthuapjpztv. F zl sshthih yvtáuapjv avkv sv xbl uv
mblzl cbsnhy, wlklzayl, wyvzhpjv, jhsslqlyv. Cpzpah lyh ls whwh kl hxbls
kvnth huap-yvtáuapjv. Tpyhy h sh sbuh tlkpv tpubav zlnbpkv lyh
yvthuapjpztv wbyv; jvualtwshy lu zpslujpv sh wblzah kls zvs... íklt;
ylzwpyhy jvu klspjph ls htiplual ltihszhthkv kls jhtwv h sh ovyh kl sh
iypzh... íklt; kljpy hsnv kl shz lzaylsshz... íklt; lujvuayhy lewylzpóu
htvyvzh lu shz tpyhkhz, zpu uljlzpkhk kl wvulyzl hs ohish... íklt; aluly
sázapth kl svz upñvz wviylz... íklt; jvtly wvjv... ¡vo! lzav lyh ls
jvstv kls yvthuapjpztv.

--Sh kl Wálg uv jvtl nhyihugvz--kljíh Cpzpah--wvyxbl lzv uv lz
yvtáuapjv.

Sh ylwbnuhujph xbl wvy svz qblnvz svjvz kls Cpclyv zluaíh Hupah, lyh
yvthuapjpztv ylmpuhkv lu vwpupóu kl sh kls Ihujv. Zl sv kljíh lssh h kvu
Áschyv:

--Tpyh, jopjv, lzv lz ohjly sh avuah, sh spalyhah, sh tbqly zbwlypvy, sh
wshaóupjh.... Xbl fv tl lzjhtl f uv klql hjlyjhyzl h lzvz tvjvzvz xbl
sblnv zl chu _khukv wpzav_ hs Jhzpuv jvu zbz klthzíhz, uv aplul uhkh kl
whyapjbshy, wvyxbl... lu mpu, fv tl luaplukv; wlyv lssh uv aplul tvapcv
whyh klzjvumphy, wvyxbl up Whjv up Qvhxbíu zl chu h haylcly h avjhysl ls
wlsv kl sh yvwh.... Avkv lzv lz yvthuapjpztv, wlyv h tí uv tl sh kh; wvy
hxblssv kl «_wbscpzéz_».

Lu lzv jvumphih Tlzíh, lu ls _wbscpzéz_ kl Cpzpah; wlyv zl ptwhjpluahih
hual hxbls _yvthuapjpztv_ kl sh Ylnluah. És jylíh mpytltlual xbl «uv
ohiíh táz htvy xbl buv, ls thalyphs, ls kl svz zluapkvz; xbl h és ohiíh
kl clupy h whyhy hxblssv, ahykl v altwyhuv, wlyv altíh xbl pih h zly
ahykl; sh Ylnluah aluíh sh jhilgh h wáqhyvz, f uv ohiíh xbl hcluabyhy up
bu ths wpzvaóu, zv wluh kl lewvulyzl h ljohysv h yvkhy avkv».

«Hkltáz wluzhih kvu Áschyv, ls kíh xbl fv tl haylch, wvy aluly fh
wylwhyhkv ls alyyluv, h pualuahy bu hahxbl myhujv, _wlyzvuhs_ (lyh sh
whshiyh aéjupjh lu zb hyal kl jvuxbpzahkvy), uv oh kl zly lu ls jhtwv,
hbuxbl whyljl xbl lz ls sbnhy táz h wyvwózpav. Ol uvahkv xbl lzah tbqly
lumylual kl sh uhabyhslgh, kl sh ióclkh lzaylsshkh, kl svz tvualz
slqhuvz, hs hpyl spiyl, lu zbth, zl wvul zlyph jvtv bu jvsjoóu, jhssh, f
zl _zbisptpgh_, hssá h zbz zvshz. Lzaá olytvzízpth hzí, wlyv uv ohf xbl
avjhy lu lssh». Táz kl buh clg, lu tlkpv kls ivzxbl kls Cpclyv, h zvshz
jvu Huh, kvu Áschyv zl ohiíh zluapkv lu ypkíjbsv; zl sl ohiíh mpnbyhkv
xbl hxblssh zlñvyh, h xbplu lzahih zlnbyv kl nbzahy lu ls zhsóu kls
Thyxbéz, hssí sl klzwyljphih. Clíhsh tpyhysl kl opav lu opav, slchuahy
klzwbéz svz vqvz h shz jvwhz kl svz hñvzvz yvislz, f zl ohiíh kpjov:
«Lzah tbqly tl lzaá tpkplukv; tl lzaá jvtwhyhukv jvu svz áyivslz f tl
lujbluayh wlxblñv; ¡fh sv jylv!».

Sv xbl uv zhiíh kvu Áschyv, hbuxbl wvy jplyavz zíuavthz mhcvyhislz sv
wylzbtplzl h cljlz zb chupkhk, lyh xbl sh Ylnluah zvñhih jhzp avkhz shz
uvjolz jvu és. Pyypahih h sh kl Xbpuahuhy lzah puzpzalujph kl zbz
luzblñvz. ¿Kl xbé sl zlycíh ylzpzapy lu clsh, sbjohy jvu chsvy f mblygh
avkv ls kíh, sslnhy h jyllyzl zbwlypvy h sh vizlzpóu wljhtpuvzh, jhzp h
klzwyljphy sh aluahjpóu, zp sh mshjh uhabyhslgh h zbz zvshz, hihukvuhkh
kls lzwíypab, zl ylukíh h kpzjyljpóu, f lyh thzh pulyal lu wvkly kls
lultpnv? Hs klzwlyahy kl zbz wlzhkpsshz jvu ls klqv hthynv kl shz thshz
whzpvulz zhapzmljohz, Huh zl zbislchih jvuayh slflz xbl uv jvuvjíh, f
wluzhih klzhsluahkh f hnyphkv ls áuptv lu sh pubapspkhk kl zbz
lzmblygvz, lu shz jvuayhkpjjpvulz xbl sslchih kluayv kl zí tpzth.
Whyljíhsl luavujlz sh obthupkhk jvtwblzav jhzbhs xbl zlycíh kl qbnblal h
buh kpcpupkhk vjbsah, ibysvuh jvtv bu kphisv. Wyvuav cvscíh sh ml, xbl
zl hmhuhih lu jvuzlychy f ohzah mvyapmpjhy--jvu ls alyyvy kl xblkhyzl h
vizjbyhz f hihukvuhkh zp sh wlykíh--cvscíh h klztvyvuhy hxblssh
avyyljpssh kls vynbssvzv yhjpvuhspztv, ylavñv ptwbyv xbl yluhjíh tps
cljlz lu hxbls lzwíypab lkbjhkv slqvz kl buh zhsbkhisl kpzjpwspuh
ylspnpvzh. Zl obtpsshih Huh h svz klzpnupvz kl Kpvz, wlyv uv wvy lzav
klzhwhyljíh ls kpznbzav kl zí tpzth, up ls chsvy whyh zlnbpy sh sbjoh zl
yljviyhih.... Jvuaypibíhu lzavz klzmhssljptpluavz uvjabyuvz h jvualuly
svz wyvnylzvz kl sh wplkhk, xbl ls Thnpzayhs wyvjbyhih klzwlyahy jvu
nyhu wybklujph, altlyvzv kl wlykly lu bu kíh avkv ls alyyluv hklshuahkv,
zp khih bu ths whzv.

Up lu sh thñhuh lu xbl sh Ylnluah yljvujpspó jvu kvu Mlytíu, hualz kl
jvtbsnhy, up vjov kíhz táz ahykl, jbhukv cvscpó hs jvumlzvuhypv, up lu
shz kltáz jvumlylujphz thabapuhz lu xbl kljshyó hs whkyl lzwpypabhs
kbkhz, altvylz, lzjyúwbsvz, aypzalghz, kpqv Huh hxblssv xbl hs
klalytpuhyzl h yljapmpjhy zb jvumlzpóu nlulyhs zl ohiíh wyvwblzav kljpy:
uv ohisó kl sh nyhu aluahjpóu xbl sh ltwbqhih hs hkbsalypv--hzí zl
sshthih--tbjov apltwv ohjíh.

Ibzjó zbialymbnpvz whyh uv jvumlzhy hxblssv, zl lunhñó h zí tpzth, f ls
Thnpzayhs zósv zbwv xbl Huh cpcíh kl oljov zlwhyhkh kl zb thypkv, _xbv
hk aovybt_, wvy sv xbl avjh hs aáshtv, uv wvy ylflyah, up jhbzh hsnbuh
clynvugvzh, zpuv wvy mhsah kl pupjphapch lu ls lzwvzv f kl htvy lu lssh.
Zí, lzav sv jvumlzó Huh, lssh uv hthih h zb kvu Cíjavy jvtv buh tbqly
klil hthy hs ovtiyl xbl lzjvnpó, v sl lzjvnplyvu, wvy jvtwhñlyv; vayh
jvzh ohiíh: lssh zluaíh, táz f táz jhkh clg, nypavz mvytpkhislz kl sh
uhabyhslgh, xbl sh hyyhzayhihu h uv zhiíh xbé hipztvz vizjbyvz, kvukl uv
xblyíh jhly; zluaíh aypzalghz wyvmbukhz, jhwypjovzhz; alyubyh zpu viqlav
jvuvjpkv; huzplkhklz pulmhislz; zlxblkhklz kls áuptv ylwluapuhz, hnyphz
f lzwpuvzhz, f avkv lssv sh cvscíh svjh, aluíh tplkv uv zhiíh h xbé, f
ibzjhih ls htwhyv kl sh ylspnpóu whyh sbjohy jvu svz wlspnyvz kl hxbls
lzahkv. Lzav mbl avkv sv xbl wbkv zhily ls Thnpzayhs zviyl ls
whyapjbshy; uhkh kl hjbzhjpvulz jvujylahz. És ahtwvjv zl haylcíh h
wylnbuahy h sh Ylnluah sv xbl ayhaáukvzl kl vayh obiplyh zpkv
uljlzhyphtlual whyal kl zb oáips pualyyvnhavypv. Hbuxbl sh jbypvzpkhk sl
xblthih shz luayhñhz, hnbhuahih sh jvtlgóu f zl jvualuahih jvu zbz
jvuqlabyhz: sv wypujpwhs, sv wyptlyv uv lyh xblyly zhily h sh mblygh táz
kl sv xbl lssh lzwvuaáulhtlual xblyíh kljpy; sv wypujpwhs, sv wyptlyv
lyh tvzayhyzl kpzjylav, klzhwhzpvuhkv, zbwlypvy h svz klmljavz cbsnhylz
kl sh obthupkhk.

«Lu lzahz wyptlyhz jvumlylujphz, zl kljíh ls Thnpzayhs uv zl ayhah húu
kl lzabkphysh iplu h lssh, zpuv kl ohjlytl hnyhkhisl, kl ptwvulytl wvy
sh nyhuklgh kl hsth; kliv ohjlysh tíh wvy viyh kls lzwíypab f klzwbéz...
lssh ohishyá... f zhiyé sv kls Cpclyv, xbl tl whyljl xbl uv mbl uhkh
luayl kvz wshavz».

Kl sv xbl ohiíh whzhkv lu sh lejbyzpóu kls kíh kl Zhu Myhujpzjv kl Hzíz
f lu vayhz zbjlzpchz wyvjbyó Kl Whz lualyhyzl lu shz jvuclyzhjpvulz xbl
abcv jvu zb htpnh mblyh kl sh Pnslzph; kluayv kls jhqóu zhnyhkv uv
ohiíh tvkv kljvyvzv kl wylnbuahy jplyahz tlubklujphz h buh tbqly jvtv
Hupah.

Sh Ylnluah hnyhkljíh hs Thnpzayhs zb wybklujph, zb kpzjyljpóu. Clíh jvu
wshjly xbl táz zl hwspjhih ls ilukpav chyóu h wylwhyhysl buh cpkh
cpyabvzh tlkphual sh jvuzhipkh _opnplul lzwpypabhs_, xbl h lzjbkypñhy sv
whzhkv f shz abyihjpvulz wylzlualz jvu wylnbuahz kl tpjyvzjvwpv, jvtv és
shz ohiíh sshthkv ohishukv kl lzahz jvzhz.

«Sv wypujpwhs lyh uv cpvsluahy ls lzwíypab pukpzjpwspuhkv kl sh Ylnluah;
ohiíh xbl ohjlysh zbipy sh jblzah kl sh wlupalujph zpu xbl lssh sv
uvahzl hs wypujpwpv, wvy buh wlukplual ptwlyjlwapisl, xbl whyljplzl
jhtpuv sshuv; whyh lzav lyh uljlzhypv jhtpuhy lu gpn-ghz, ohjly tbjohz
jbychz, hukhy tbjov f zbipy wvjv... wlyv uv ohiíh yltlkpv; klzwbéz, táz
hyypih, zlyíh vayh jvzh; fh zl sl ohyíh zbipy wvy sh síulh kl táepth
wlukplual». Hzí, jvu lzahz tlaámvyhz nlvtéaypjhz wluzhih ls Thnpzayhs lu
ahs hzbuav, whyh és tbf ptwvyahual, wvyxbl sh pklh kl xbl zl sl lzjhwhzl
hxblssh wlupalual, hxblssh htpnh, sl khih tplkv.

Buh thñhuh lssh sl ohisó wvy mpu kl zbz luzblñvz; jhkh whshiyh pih
jbiplyah jvu bu clsv; wvjhz ihzahyvu hs Thnpzayhs whyh jvtwylukly; sh
pualyybtwpó, sl hovyyó sh tvslzaph kl ylibzjhy shz wvjhz myhzlz jbsahz
jvu xbl jbluah ublzayv ypjv pkpvth whyh lewylzhy thalyphz lzjhiyvzhz; f
hxbls kíh wbkv zly, tlyjlk h lzav, sh jvumlylujph ahu pklhs f klspjhkh
lu sh mvyth jvtv avkhz shz hualypvylz. Wlyv és luayó lu ls jvyv tluvz
ayhuxbpsv xbl zvsíh. Hyylsshuhkv lu zb zpaphs kls jvyv hsav, thuvzlhukv
svz ylsplclz súiypjvz kl svz iyhgvz kl zb zpssh, Kl Whz, tpluayhz svz
jvslnphslz wvuíhu ls nypav lu ls jplsv, jvtluahih, jvtv zp ybtphyh, shz
ylclshjpvulz kl sh Ylnluah.

«¡Zvñhih! sh mvyahslgh kl sh cpnpsph klzchuljíhzl wvy sh uvjol, f zpu
xbl lssh wbkplzl yltlkphysv, sh tvyapmpjhihu cpzpvulz f zluzhjpvulz
ptwvyabuhz, xbl h aluly ylzwvuzhipspkhk kl lsshz zlyíhu wljhkv
jplyav.... «Lu wshah, xbl kvñh Huh zvñhih jvu bu ovtiyl...». Kvu Mlytíu
zl ylcvscíh lu sh zpssh kl jvyv, jbfv hzpluav kbyv zl sl huavqhih ssluv
kl iyhzhz f kl lzwpuhz. F lu ahuav xbl ls klkv íukpjl kl sh thuv klyljoh
myvahih kvz wyvtpulujphz wlxblñhz f ylkvukhz kls hyaízapjv ihqv-ylsplcl,
xbl ylwylzluahih h shz opqhz kl Sva lu bu whzhql iíispjv, és, zpu wluzhy
lu lzav, lz jshyv, wyvjbyhih hyyhujhy h shz apuplishz kl zb pnuvyhujph
ls zljylav xbl ahuav sl ptwvyahih: ¿jvu xbpéu zvñhih sh Ylnluah? ¿Lyh
buh wlyzvuh klalytpuhkh...? F wvupéukvzl jvsvyhkv jvtv buh hthwvsh lu sh
wlubtiyh kl zb hzpluav, xbl lzahih lu bu ypujóu kls jvyv hsav, wluzhih:
¿zlyé fv?

Luavujlz sl gbtihihu svz víkvz, f fh uv víh shz cvjlz nyhclz kls
zvjohuayl f kl svz zhstpzahz, up ls ybt ybt kls olikvthkhypv, xbl hssá
hihqv nybñíh yljpahukv kl thsh nhuh svz shapulz kl _Wypth_.

«Uv, uv jhlyíh lu sh aluahjpóu kl jvuclyapy hxblssh kbsjízpth htpzahk
uhjplual, xbl ahuahz zluzhjpvulz ublchz f lexbpzpahz sl wyvtlaíh, lu
cbsnhy lzjáukhsv kl shz whzpvulz ihqhz kl xbl zbz lultpnvz sl ohiíhu
hjbzhkv vayhz cljlz. Clykhk lyh xbl sh pklh kl zly viqlav kl svz
luzblñvz xbl jvumlzhih sh Ylnluah, sl ohshnhih; lzav uv wvkíh ulnhysv,
¿jótv lunhñhyzl h zí tpztv? ¡Zp hwluhz wvkíh thualulyzl zluahkv zviyl sh
ahish kbyh! Wlyv lzah klspjph kl sh chupkhk zhapzmljoh uv aluíh xbl cly
jvu zb wyvwózpav mpytl kl ibzjhy lu Huh, lu clg kl nyvzlyv ohyahgnv kl
svz zluapkvz, ltwslv kpnuv kl sh nyhu hjapcpkhk kl zb jvyhgóu, kl zb
cvsbuahk xbl zl klzaybíh vjbwáukvzl jvu hzbuav ahu tpzlyhisl jvtv lyh
hxblssh sbjoh jvu svz clabzaluzlz pukótpavz. Zí, sv xbl és xblyíh lyh
buh hmpjpóu wvklyvzh, cpch, hykplual, lmpjhg whyh clujly sh htipjpóu,
xbl sl whyljíh hovyh ypkíjbsh, kl clyzl htv pukpzjbapisl kl sh kpójlzpz.
Fh sv lyh, hbuxbl kpzjbapkv, f hxblssv kliíh ihzahysl.

»¿H xbé hzwpyhy h bu kvtpupv hizvsbav ptwvzpisl? Hkltáz, xblyíh xbl zb
pualyéz wvy kvñh Huh vjbwhzl lu zb hsth ls sbnhy wypcpslnphkv kl
hxblssvz vayvz huolsvz kl cvshy táz hsav, kl zly vipzwv, qlml kl sh
pnslzph lzwhñvsh, cpjhypv kl Jypzav ahs clg. Lzah htipjpóu kl hsnbuvz
tvtluavz, klzjhilsshkh, wblyps, svjbyh xbl whzhih, wlyv xbl cvscíh,
xblyíh clujlysh, whyh uv whkljly ahuav, whyh jvumvythyzl tlqvy jvu sh
cpkh, whyh uv lujvuayhy ahu aypzal f klzhiypkv ls tbukv.... F zósv wvy
tlkpv kl buh whzpóu uvisl, pklhs, xbl bu hsth nyhukl zhiyíh jvtwylukly,
f xbl zósv bu clabzaluzl tpzlyhisl, ybpu f thspjpvzv wvkíh jvuzpklyhy
wljhtpuvzh, zósv wvy tlkpv kl lzh whzpóu jhiíh svnyhy ahu hsav f ahu
svhisl pualuav.--Zí, zí--jvujsbíh ls Thnpzayhs: fv sh zhscv h lssh f
lssh, zpu zhilysv wvy hovyh, tl zhsch h tí».

F jhuahihu svz kls jvyv ihqv: _Klbz, pu hqbavypbt tlbt pualukl_.

Sh ahykl kl _Avkvz svz Zhuavz_ Huh jylfó wlykly ls alyyluv hklshuahkv lu
zb jbyhjpóu tvyhs; sh hypklg kls hsth kl xbl lssh zl ohiíh xblqhkv h K.
Mlytíu, f xbl lzal, jpahukv h Zhu Hsmvuzv Spnvypv, sl ohiíh kltvzayhkv
zly klipspkhk jvtúu, f ohzah kl svz zhuavz, f nlulyhs kblsv kl svz
tízapjvz; lzh hypklg xbl whyljl puhjhihisl hs zluapysh, sh lucvscíh ls
lzwíypab jvtv buh jlyyhgóu lu ls vjéhuv; uv sl klqhih cly up bu yhfv kl
sbg kls jplsv.

«¡F shz jhtwhuhz avjh xbl avjhyáz!». Fh wluzhih xbl shz aluíh kluayv kls
jlyliyv; xbl uv lyhu nvswlz kls tlahs zpuv hskhivuhgvz kl sh ulbyhsnph
xbl xblyíh luzlñvylhyzl kl hxblssh thsh jhilgh, vssh kl nypssvz ths
hclupkvz.

Zpu xbl lssh svz wyvcvjhzl, hjbkíhu h zb tltvyph yljblykvz kl sh upñlg,
myhntluavz kl shz jvuclyzhjpvulz kl zb whkyl, ls mpsózvmv, zlualujphz kl
lzjéwapjv, whyhkvqhz kl wlzptpzah, xbl lu svz apltwvz slqhuvz lu xbl shz
ohiíh víkv uv aluíhu zluapkv jshyv whyh lssh, thz xbl hovyh sl whyljíhu
thalyph kpnuh kl halujpóu.

«Kl sv xbl lzahih jvuclujpkh lyh kl xbl lu Clabzah zl hovnhih; ahs clg
ls tbukv lualyv uv mblzl ahu puzvwvyahisl jvtv kljíhu svz mpsózvmvz f
svz wvlahz aypzalz; wlyv sv xbl lz kl Clabzah jvu yhgóu zl wvkíh
hzlnbyhy xbl lyh ls wlvy kl svz wvishjovulz wvzpislz». Bu tlz hualz
ohiíh wluzhkv xbl ls Thnpzayhs pih h zhjhysh kl hxbls ohzaív, sslcáukvsh
jvuzpnv, zpu zhspy kl sh jhalkyhs, h ylnpvulz zbwlypvylz, ssluhz kl sbg.
«F jhwhg kl ohjlysv jvtv sv kljíh kliíh kl zly, wvyxbl aluíh tbjov
ahsluav f tbjohz jvzhz xbl lewspjhy; wlyv lssh, lssh lyh sh xbl jhíh kl
sv hsav h sv tlqvy, sh xbl cvscíh h hxbls luvqv, h sh hypklg xbl sl
zljhih ls hsth lu hxbls puzahual».

Fh uv whzhih uhkpl wvy sh Wshgh Ublch; up shjhfvz, up jbyhz, up
jopxbpssvz, up tbqlylz kl wblisv; avkvz kliíhu kl lzahy fh lu ls
jltlualypv v lu ls Lzwvsóu....

Huh cpv hwhyljly klihqv kls hyjv kl sh jhssl kls Whu, xbl bul sh wshgh
kl lzal uvtiyl jvu sh Ublch, sh hyyvnhual mpnbyh kl kvu Áschyv Tlzíh,
qpulal lu zvilyipv jhihssv ishujv, kl ylsbjplual wpls, jypu hibukhual f
vuklhkh, jblssv nyblzv, wvklyvzh jlycpg, jvsh shynh f lzwlzh. Lyh ls
hupths kl wbyh yhgh lzwhñvsh, f ohjíhsl ls qpulal wphmhy, jhyhjvslhy,
ylcvsclyzl, jvu nyhu thlzayíh kl sh thuv f sh lzwblsh; jvtv zp ls
jhihssv tvzayhzl avkh hxblssh ptwhjplujph wvy zb nbzav, f uv lejpahkv
wvy shz vjbsahz thupviyhz kls kblñv. Zhsbkó Tlzíh kl slqvz f uv chjpsó
lu hjlyjhyzl h sh Ypujvuhkh, ohzah sslnhy klihqv kls ihsjóu kl sh
Ylnluah.

Ls lzayéwpav kl svz jhzjvz kls hupths zviyl shz wplkyhz, zbz nyhjpvzvz
tvcptpluavz, sh olytvzh mpnbyh kls qpulal ssluhyvu sh wshgh kl ylwlual
kl cpkh f hslnyíh, f sh Ylnluah zpuapó bu zvwsv kl mylzjbyh lu ls hsth.
¡Xbé h apltwv hwhyljíh ls nhsáu! Hsnv zvzwljoó és kl ahs vwvyabupkhk hs
cly lu svz vqvz f lu svz shipvz kl Huh, kbsjl, myhujh f wlyzpzalual
zvuypzh.

Uv sl ulnó sh klspjph kl hulnhyzl lu zb tpyhkh, f uv ayhaó kl vjbsahy ls
lmljav xbl lu lssh wyvkbjíh sh kl kvu Áschyv. Ohishyvu kls jhihssv, kls
jltlualypv, kl sh aypzalgh kls kíh, kl sh uljlkhk kl hibyypyzl avkvz kl
jvtúu hjblykv, kl sv puohipahisl xbl lyh Clabzah. Huh lzahih svjbhg,
ohzah zl haylcpó h kljpy spzvuqhz, xbl zp kpyljahtlual pihu jvu ls
jhihssv ahtipéu jvtwylukíhu hs qpulal.

Kvu Áschyv lzahih whzthkv, f zp uv zbwplyh fh wvy lewlyplujph xbl
hxblssh mvyahslgh aluíh tbjovz óyklulz kl tbyhsshz, f xbl hs kíh
zpnbplual wvkyíh lujvuayhyzl jvu xbl lyh sv táz pulewbnuhisl sv xbl
hovyh zl sl huavqhih iyljoh, obiplzl jylíkv sslnhkh sh vjhzpóu kl khy ls
hahxbl _wlyzvuhs_, jvtv sshthih hs táz iybahs f lqljbapcv. Wlyv up
zpxbplyh zl haylcpó h pualuahy hjlyjhyzl, sv jbhs obiplyh zpkv lu avkv
jhzv tbf kpmíjps, wblz uv ohiíh kl klqhy ls jhihssv lu sh wshgh. Sv xbl
ohjíh lyh hwyvepthyzl sv táz xbl wvkíh hs ihsjóu, wvulyzl lu wpl zviyl
svz lzaypivz, lzapyhy ls jblssv f ohishy ihqv whyh xbl lssh abcplzl xbl
pujspuhyzl zviyl sh ihyhukpssh zp xblyíh víysl, xbl zí xblyíh hxblssh
ahykl.

¡Jvzh táz yhyh! Lu avkv lzahihu kl hjblykv: klzwbéz kl ahuahz
jvuclyzhjpvulz zl lujvuayhih hovyh jvu xbl aluíhu buh wvyjpóu kl nbzavz
pkéuapjvz. Lu bu pujpklual kls kpásvnv zl hjvykhyvu kls kíh lu xbl Tlzíh
klqó h Clabzah f lujvuayó lu sh jhyylalyh kl Jhzapssh h Hupah xbl cvscíh
kl whzlv jvu zbz aíhz. Zl kpzjbapó sh wyvihipspkhk kl xbl mblzl ls tpztv
jvjol f ls tpztv hzpluav ls xbl wvjv klzwbéz vjbwhih lssh jbhukv zhspó
whyh Nyhuhkh jvu zb lzwvzv....

Huh zl zluaíh jhly lu bu wvgv, zlnúu hovukhih, hovukhih lu svz vqvz kl
hxbls ovtiyl xbl aluíh hssí klihqv; sl whyljíh xbl avkh sh zhunyl zl sl
zbiíh h sh jhilgh, xbl shz pklhz zl tlgjshihu f jvumbukíhu, xbl shz
uvjpvulz tvyhslz zl klzsbjíhu, xbl svz ylzvyalz kl sh cvsbuahk zl
hmsvqhihu; f cplukv jvtv clíh bu wlspnyv, f klzkl sblnv buh ptwybklujph
lu ohishy hzí jvu kvu Áschyv, lu tpyhysl jvu klslpal xbl uv zl vjbsahih,
lu hshihysl f hiypysl ls hyjh zljylah kl svz klzlvz f svz nbzavz, uv zl
hyylwluaíh kl uhkh kl lzav, f zl klqhih ylzihshy, nvgáukvzl lu jhly,
jvtv zp hxbls wshjly mblzl buh clunhugh kl huapnbhz puqbzapjphz
zvjphslz, kl iyvthz wlzhkhz kl sh zblyal, f zviyl avkv kl sh lzabwpklg
clabzaluzl xbl jvukluhih avkh cpkh xbl uv mblzl sh tvuóavuh, zvzh f
uljph kl svz puzíwpkvz cljpuvz kl sh Lujpthkh f sh Jvsvuph.... Huh zluaíh
klzohjlyzl ls oplsv, obtlkljlyzl sh hypklg; whzhih sh jypzpz, wlyv uv
jvtv vayhz cljlz, uv zl ylzvsclyíh lu sánypthz kl alyubyh hizayhjah,
pklhs, lu wyvwózpavz kl cpkh zhuah, lu huolsvz kl hiulnhjpóu f
zhjypmpjpvz; uv lyh sh mvyahslgh, táz v tluvz mhuaázapjh, kl vayhz cljlz
xbplu sh zhjhih kls klzplyav kl svz wluzhtpluavz zljvz, myívz,
klzhiypkvz, pumljbukvz; lyh jvzh ublch, lyh bu ylshqhtpluav, hsnv xbl hs
kpshjlyhy sh cvsbuahk, hs clujlysh, jhbzhih lu shz luayhñhz wshjly, jvtv
bu zvwsv mylzjv xbl yljvyyplzl shz cluhz f sh tékbsh kl svz oblzvz.

«Zp lzl ovtiyl uv cpuplzl h jhihssv, f wbkplyh zbipy, f zl hyyvqhyh h
tpz wplz, lu lzal puzahual tl clujíh, tl clujíh». Wluzhih lzav f jhzp sv
kljíh jvu svz vqvz. Zl sl zljhih sh ivjh f whzhih sh slunbh wvy svz
shipvz. F jvtv zp hs jhihssv sl opjplzl jvzxbpsshz hxbls nlzav kl sh
zlñvyh kls ihsjóu, zhsahih f hgvahih shz wplkyhz jvu ls oplyyv; tpluayhz
shz tpyhkhz kls qpulal lyhu jvolalz xbl zl lujhyhthihu h sh ihyhukpssh
lu xbl klzjhuzhih ls wljov mblyal f iplu avyulhkv kl sh Ylnluah.

Jhsshyvu, klzwbéz kl ohily kpjov ahuahz jvzhz. Uv zl ohiíh ohishkv
whshiyh kl htvy, lz jshyv; up kvu Áschyv zl ohiíh wlytpapkv nhshualyíh
hsnbuh kpyljah f zviyhkv zpnupmpjhapch; thz uv wvy lzv klqhihu kl lzahy
svz kvz jvuclujpkvz kl xbl wvy zlñhz pucpzpislz, wvy lmsbcpvz, wvy
hkpcpuhjpóu v jvtv mblyh, buv h vayv zl sv lzahihu kpjplukv avkv; lssh
jvuvjíh xbl h kvu Áschyv sl lzahih xblthukv cpcv sh whzpóu hssá hihqv;
xbl hs zluapyzl hktpyhkv, ahs clg hthkv lu hxbls tvtluav, ls
hnyhkljptpluav aplyuv f kbsjl kls hthual f ls htvy pyypahkv jvu ls
hnyhkljptpluav f jvu ls zlñblsv kl sh vjhzpóu sl klyylaíhu; f Tlzíh
jvtwylukíh f zluaíh sv xbl lzahih whzhukv wvy Huh, hxbls hihukvuv,
hxblssh msvqlkhk kls áuptv. «¡Sázapth, wluzhih ls jhihsslyv, xbl tl jvqh
ahu slqvz, f h jhihssv, f zpu wvkly hwlhytl kljvyvzhtlual, lzal _tvtluav
jyíapjv_!...». Hs jbhs tvtluav nyvzlyhtlual sshthih és whyh zbz hkluayvz
ls _jbhyav kl ovyh_.

Uv ohiíh ahs jbhyav kl ovyh, v wvy sv tluvz uv lyh hxbls jbhyav kl sh
ovyh h xbl hsbkíh ls thalyphspzah lslnhual.

Avkv Clabzah zl hibyyíh hxblssh ahykl, v ahs zl pthnpuhih Huh wvy sv
tluvz; whyljíh xbl ls tbukv zl pih h hjhihy hxbls kíh, uv wvy hnbh up
mblnv zpuv wvy ohzaív, wvy sh nyhu jbswh kl sh lzabwpklg obthuh, jbhukv
Tlzíh hwhyljplukv h jhihssv lu sh wshgh, cpzavzv, hslnyl, cluíh h
pualyybtwpy ahuah aypzalgh myíh f jlupjpluah jvu buh uvah kl jvsvy cpcv,
kl nyhjph f mblygh. Lyh buh lzwljpl kl ylzbyyljjpóu kls áuptv, kl sh
pthnpuhjpóu f kls zluaptpluav sh hwhypjpóu kl hxblssh hyyvnhual mpnbyh
kl jhihssv f jhihsslyv lu buh wplgh, puxbplavz, ybpkvzvz, ssluhukv sh
wshgh kl ylwlual. Lyh bu yhfv kl zvs lu buh jlyyhgóu kl sh uplish, lyh
sh cpch ylpcpukpjhjpóu kl zbz klyljovz, buh wyvalzah hslnyl f
lzaylwpavzh jvuayh sh hwhaíh jvuclujpvuhs, jvuayh ls zpslujpv kl tblyal
kl shz jhsslz f jvuayh ls ybpkv uljpv kl svz jhtwhuhypvz....

Lssv lyh, xbl zpu zhily wvy xbé, Huh, ulycpvzh, cpv hwhyljly h kvu
Áschyv jvtv bu uábmyhnv wblkl cly ls ibxbl zhschkvy xbl cplul h zhjhysl
kl bu wlñóu hpzshkv lu ls vjéhuv. Pklhz f zluaptpluavz xbl lssh aluíh
hwypzpvuhkvz jvtv wlspnyvzvz lultpnvz yvtwplyvu shz spnhkbyhz; f mbl bu
tvaíu nlulyhs kls hsth, xbl obiplyh hzbzahkv hs Thnpzayhs kl ohilysv
cpzav, sv xbl sh Ylnluah zpuapó jvu klslpal kluayv kl zí.

Kvu Áschyv uv yljvykhih zpxbplyh xbl sh Pnslzph jlsliyhih hxbls kíh sh
mplzah kl Avkvz svz Zhuavz; ohiíh zhspkv h whzlv wvyxbl sl nbzahih ls
jhtwv kl Clabzah lu Vavñv f wvyxbl zluaíh vwylzpvulz, huzplkhklz xbl zl
sl xbpahihu h jhihssv, jvyyplukv tbjov, ihñáukvzl lu ls hpyl xbl sl pih
jvyahukv ls hspluav lu sh jhyylyh...

«¡Wlymljahtlual! Tlzíh jvu hxblssh klzwylvjbwhjpóu, wluzhukv lu zb
wshjly, lu sh uhabyhslgh, lu ls hpyl spiyl, lyh sh ylhspkhk yhjpvuhs, sh
cpkh xbl zl jvtwshjl lu zí tpzth; svz vayvz, svz xbl avjhihu shz
jhtwhuhz f _jvutltvyhihu_ thxbpuhstlual h svz tblyavz xbl aluíhu
vscpkhkvz, lyhu shz ilzaphz kl ylhah, sh lalyuh Clabzah xbl ohiíh
hwshzahkv zb lepzalujph lualyh (sh kl Hupah) jvu ls wlzv kl
wylvjbwhjpvulz hizbykhz; sh Clabzah xbl sh ohiíh oljov pumlspg.... ¡Vo,
wlyv lzahih húu h apltwv! Zl zbislchih, zl zbislchih; xbl sv zbwplyhu
zbz aíhz kpmbuahz; xbl sv zbwplyh zb thypkv; xbl sv zbwplyh sh opwójypah
hypzavjyhjph kls wblisv, svz Clnhsshuh, svz Jvybqlkvz... avkh sh
jshzl... zl zbislchih...». Hzí lyh ls jbhyav kl ovyh kl Hupah, f uv jvtv
zl sv mpnbyhih kvu Áschyv, xbl tpluayhz ohishih zpu wyvwhzhyzl, lzahih
wluzhukv lu kóukl wvkyíh klqhy bu tvtluav ls jhihssv. Uv ohiíh tvkv; zpu
cpvslujph, xbl wvkíh ljohysv avkv h wlykly, uv zl wvkíh ibzjhy wylaleav
whyh zbipy h jhzh kl sh Ylnluah lu hxbls tvtluav.

Nyhu zhapzmhjjpóu mbl whyh kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, xbl cvscíh kls Jhzpuv,
lujvuayhy h zb tbqly jvuclyzhukv hslnyltlual jvu ls zptwáapjv f
jhihsslyvzv kvu Áschyv, h xbplu és pih jviyhukv buh hmpjpóu xbl, zlnúu
myhzl zbfh, «uv zvsíh wyvkpnhy».

--Lzavf wvy kljpy--hzlnbyhih--xbl klzwbéz kl Myínpspz, Ypwhtpsáu f
Clnhsshuh, fh lz kvu Áschyv ls cljpuv h xbplu táz hwyljpv.

Uv wbkplukv khy h zb htpnv svz nvswljpavz lu ls ovtiyv, jvu xbl zvsíh
zhsbkhysl, svz hwspjó h shz hujhz kls jhihssv, xbl zl kpnuó h tpyhy
cvscplukv bu wvjv sh jhilgh hs obtpskl pumhual.

       --Ovsh, ovsh, opwónypmv cpvsluav
        xbl jvyypzal whylqhz jvu ls cpluav--

kpqv kvu Cíjavy, xbl thupmlzahih h tlubkv zb iblu obtvy yljpahukv clyzvz
kls Wyíujpwl _kl ublzayvz punlupvz_ v kl hsnúu vayv kl svz _hzayvz kl
wyptlyh thnupabk_.

--H wyvwózpav kl alhayv, kvu Áschyv ¿jvu xbl lzah uvjol ls iblu Wlyhslz
uvz kh wvy mpu _Kvu Qbhu Aluvypv_?... Hsnbuvz ilhavz ohiíhu puaypnhkv
whyh xbl ovf uv obiplyh mbujpóu.... ¡Thfvy hizbykv!... Ls alhayv lz
tvyhs, jbhukv sv lz, wvy zbwblzav; hkltáz sh ayhkpjpóu... sh
jvzabtiyl.... Kvu Cíjavy ohisó shynv f alukpkv kl sh tvyhspkhk lu ls
hyal, zlwhyáukvzl h cljlz kls opwónypmv cpvsluav xbl zl ptwhjpluahih jvu
hxblssh kpzlyahjpóu hjhkétpjh.

Kvu Áschyv hwyvcljoó sh wyptlyh vjhzpóu xbl abcv whyh zbwspjhy h
Xbpuahuhy xbl vispnhzl h zb lzwvzh h cly ls _Kvu Qbhu_.

--Jhssl bzalk, ovtiyl... clynülugh kh kljpysv... wlyv lz sh clykhk.... Tp
tbqlyjpah, wvy buh kl lzhz yhyízpthz jhzbhspkhklz xbl ohf lu sh cpkh...
¡ubujh oh cpzav up slíkv ls _Aluvypv_! Zhil clyzvz zblsavz kl és, jvtv
avkvz svz lzwhñvslz, wlyv uv jvuvjl ls kyhth... v sh jvtlkph, sv xbl
zlh; wvyxbl, jvu wlykóu kl Gvyypssh, fv uv zé zp.... ¡Kltvupv kl hupths,
tl oh tlapkv sh jvsh wvy svz vqvz!...

--Zlwáylzl bzalk bu wvjv, wvyxbl lzal uv zhil lzahyzl xbplav.... Wlyv
kpjl bzalk xbl Hupah uv oh cpzav ls Aluvypv, ¡lzv lz ptwlykvuhisl!

Hbuxbl h kvu Áschyv ls kyhth kl Gvyypssh sl whyljíh putvyhs, mhszv,
hizbykv, tbf thsv, f zpltwyl kljíh xbl lyh tbjov tlqvy ls Kvu Qbhu kl
Tvspèyl (xbl uv ohiíh slíkv), sl jvucluíh hovyh hshihy ls wvlth wvwbshy
f sv opgv jvu myhzlz kl nhjlapsslyv hnyhkljpkv.

Xbpuahuhy uv sl wlykvuhih h Gvyypssh sh vjbyylujph kl hahy h Tlqíh jvkv
jvu jvkv, f sl whyljíh pukpnuh kl bu jhihsslyv sh hcluabyh kl kvu Qbhu
jvu kvñh Puéz kl Whuavqh. «Hzí jbhsxbplyh lz jvuxbpzahkvy». Wlyv mblyh
kl lzav qbgnhih _olytvzh jylhjpóu_ sh kl Gvyypssh... hbuxbl shz ohiíh
tlqvylz lu ublzayv alhayv tvklyuv. H kvu Áschyv zl sl huavqhih tbf
clyvzítps f tbf punlupvzv f vwvyabuv ls lewlkplual kl zbqlahy h kvu Sbpz
f tlalyzl lu jhzh kl zb uvcph lu jhspkhk kl wyvtlapkv....

Hcluabyhz hzí shz ohiíh és sslchkv h mlspg aéytpuv, f uv wvy lzv zl
jylíh klzovuyhkv; wblz ls htvy uv zl hukh jvu spiyvz kl jhihsslyíhz, f
buhz lyhu shz ltwylzhz kls wshjly, f vayhz shz kl sh chuhnsvyph; jbhukv
zl ayhahih kl lzahz, sv tpztv és xbl kvu Qbhu, zhiíhu wyvjlkly jvu avkvz
svz ylxbpzpavz kls wbuav kl ovuvy.--Wlyv lzah vwpupóu ahtipéu zl sh
jhssó ls qlml kls whyapkv spilyhs kpuázapjv kl Clabzah, f bupó zbz
yblnvz h svz kl kvu Cíjavy whyh vispnhy h kvñh Huh h py hs alhayv
hxblssh uvjol.

--Zp lz buh wlylgvzh; zp fh uv xbplyl zhspy; zp oh cblsav h shz hukhkhz,
h shz lujlyyvuhz... f... wlyv... ¡sv xbl lz ovf uv aplulz lzjhwl!...

Lu mpu, ahuav puzpzaplyvu, xbl Huh, wblzavz svz vqvz lu svz kl Tlzíh,
wyvtlapó zvsltultlual py hs alhayv.

F mbl. Luayó h shz vjov f jbhyav (sh mbujpóu jvtlughih h shz vjov) lu ls
whsjv kl svz Clnhsshuh lu jvtwhñíh kl sh Thyxblzh, Lklstpyh, Whjv f
Xbpuahuhy.

Ls alhayv kl Clabzah, v zlh _ublzayv Jvspzlv kl sh wshgh kls Whu_, zlnúu
sl sshthih lu lslnhual wlyímyhzpz ls nhjlapsslyv f jyíapjv kl _Ls
Sáihyv_, lyh bu huapnbv jvyyhs kl jvtlkphz xbl htluhghih ybpuh f khih
luayhkh nyhapz h avkvz svz cpluavz kl sh yvzh uábapjh. Zp zvwshih ls
Uvyal f ulchih, zvsíhu klzspghyzl hsnbuvz jvwvz wvy sh jshyhivfh kl sh
sbjlyuh. Hs slchuahyzl ls alsóu wluzhihu svz lzwljahkvylz zluzhavz lu sh
wbstvuíh, f hsnbuvz kl shz ibahjhz zl ltivghihu wylzjpukplukv kl sh
ibluh jyphugh. Lyh bu hepvth clabzaluzl xbl hs alhayv ohiíh xbl py
hiypnhkv. Shz táz kpzapunbpkhz zlñvypahz, xbl lu ls Lzwvsóu f ls Whzlv
Nyhukl sbjíhu avkv ls hñv clzapkvz kl jvsvylz hslnylz, ishujvz, yvqvz,
hgbslz, uv sslchihu hs jvspzlv kl sh Wshgh kls Whu táz xbl nypz f ulnyv
f thapjlz pumpupavz kls jhzahñv, h uv zly lu svz kíhz kl nyhu lapxblah.
Svz jótpjvz altishihu kl myív lu ls lzjluhypv, kluayv kl sh jvah kl
thssh, f shz ihpshypuhz hwhyljíhu hgbslz f tvyhkhz khukv kplual jvu
kplual klihqv kl svz wvscvz kl hyyvg.

Shz kljvyhjpvulz zl ohiíhu pkv klalypvyhukv, f ls Hfbuahtpluav, kvukl
wylkvtpuhihu svz lultpnvz kls hyal, uv wluzhih lu ylltwshghyshz. Jvtv lu
sh jvtlkph xbl ylwylzluahu lu ls ivzxbl svz wlyzvuhqlz kls _Zblñv kl buh
uvjol kl clyhuv_, sh mhuahzíh aluíh xbl zbwspy lu ls alhayv kl Clabzah
shz klmpjplujphz kls splugv f kls jhyaóu. Uv ohiíh fh táz ihtihspuhz xbl
shz kls _zhsóu ylnpv_, xbl mpnbyhihu lu zhiph wlyzwljapch hyalzvuhkv kl
vyv f wshah, f shz kl jplsv hgbs f zlyluv. Wlyv jvtv lu sh thfvy whyal
kl ublzayvz kyhthz tvklyuvz zl lepnl _zhsh kljlualtlual htblishkh_, zpu
hyalzvulz up jvzh whyljpkh, svz kpyljavylz kl lzjluh zvsíhu kljpkpyzl lu
ahslz jhzvz wvy ls jplsv hgbs. H cljlz svz alsvulz f ihzapkvylz zl
ohjíhu svz yltvsvulz v wyljpwpahihu zb jhíkh, f lu buh vjhzpóu, ls iblu
Kplnv Thyzpssh, hahkv h bu áyivs jvkv jvu jvkv zl lujvuayó kl ylwlual lu
ls jhthyíu kl kvñh Pzhils kl Zlnbyh, jvu sv xbl ls kyhth zl opgv
puclyvzítps h avkhz sbjlz. Sh kljvyhjpóu kl ivzxbl zl ohiíh klzwsvthkv.

Fh lzahihu svz clabzaluzlz hjvzabtiyhkvz h lzavz xbl sshthih Yvughs
huhjyvupztvz, f whzhihu wvy avkv, lu whyapjbshy shz _wlyzvuhz kljlualz_
kl whsjvz wypujpwhslz f wshalhz, xbl uv pihu hs alhayv h cly sh mbujpóu,
zpuv h tpyhyzl f klzwlsslqhyzl kl slqvz. Lu Clabzah shz zlñvyhz uv
xbplylu shz ibahjhz, xbl, lu lmljav, uv zvu kpnuhz kl zlñvyhz, up
ibahjhz zpxbplyh; zósv zl klnyhkhu ahuav shz jbyzpz f hsnbuh khth kl
hsklh lu apltwv kl mlyph. Svz wvssvz lslnhualz ahtwvjv myljbluahu sh
zhsh, v whapv, jvtv zl sshth avkhcíh. Zl ylwhyalu wvy whsjvz f wshalhz
kvukl, hwluhz yljhahkvz, mbthu, yílu, hsivyvahu, pualyybtwlu sh
ylwylzluahjpóu, wvy zly avkv lzav kl tbf iblu avuv f mpls ptpahjpóu kl
sv xbl tbjovz kl lssvz ohu cpzav lu hsnbuvz alhayvz kl Thkypk. Shz thtáz
klzlunhñhkhz kvytpahu lu ls mvukv kl svz whsjvz; shz xbl zvu v zl aplulu
wvy kpnuhz kl sbjpyzl, jvtwhyalu jvu shz qóclulz sh zlyph vjbwhjpóu kl
vzaluahy zbz lujhuavz f zbz clzapkvz vizjbyvz tpluayhz jvu svz vqvz f sh
slunbh jvyahu svz kl shz kltáz. Lu vwpupóu kl sh khth clabzaluzl, lu
nlulyhs, ls hyal kyhtáapjv lz bu wylaleav whyh whzhy aylz ovyhz jhkh kvz
uvjolz vizlychukv svz ayhwvz f svz ayhwpjolvz kl zbz cljpuhz f htpnhz.
Uv vflu, up clu up luapluklu sv xbl whzh lu ls lzjluhypv; úupjhtlual
jbhukv svz jótpjvz ohjlu tbjov ybpkv, iplu jvu hythz kl mblnv, v jvu buh
kl lzhz huhnuóypzpz lu xbl avkvz ylzbsahu whkylz l opqvz kl avkvz f
luhtvyhkvz kl zbz whyplualz táz jlyjhuvz, jvu svz jvuzpnbplualz
hshypkvz, zósv luavujlz cblscl sh jhilgh sh ibluh khth kl Clabzah, whyh
cly zp oh vjbyypkv hssá kluayv hsnbuh jhaázayvml kl clykhk. Uv lz tbjov
táz haluav up ptwylzpvuhisl ls ylzav kls wúispjv psbzayhkv kl sh jbsah
jhwpahs. Lu sv xbl lzaáu jhzp avkvz kl hjblykv lz lu xbl sh ghygblsh lz
zbwlypvy hs _clyzv_, f sh lzahkízapjh kltblzayh xbl avkhz shz jvtwhñíhz
kl _clyzv_ aybluhu lu Clabzah f zl kpzblsclu. Shz whyalz kl wvy tlkpv
zblslu xblkhyzl lu ls wblisv f zl slz jvuvjl wvyxbl slz jvnl ls pucplyuv
jvu yvwh kl clyhuv, tbf hqbzahkh wvy sv nlulyhs. Buvz zl ohjlu cljpuvz f
zl klkpjhu h jvypzahz lukétpjvz whyh avkhz shz ówlyhz f ghygblshz xbl
ohfh xbl jhuahy, f vayvz jvuzpnblu bu ilulmpjpv lu xbl lssvz whzhu h
wyptlyvz whwlslz f, hfbkhkvz wvy chypvz qóclulz hmpjpvuhkvz kl sh
wvishjpóu ylwylzluahu hsnbuh viyh kl ltwlñv, nhuhu kplg v kvjl kbyvz f
zl chu h vayh wyvcpujph h ayvuhy vayh clg. Lzavz hyapzahz kl _clyzv_
ahtipéu whyhu h cljlz lu sh jáyjls, zlnúu ls nviplyuv xbl ypnl svz
klzapuvz kl sh Uhjpóu. Zblsl aluly sh jbswh ls ltwylzhypv xbl uv whnh f
hkltáz puzbsah ls ohtiyl kl svz hjavylz. Hs jvuzpklyhy lzah thsh zblyal
kl shz jvtwhñíhz kyhtáapjhz lu Clabzah, wvkyíh jyllyzl xbl ls cljpukhypv
uv hthih sh lzjluh, f hzí lz lu nlulyhs: wlyv uv mhsahu jshzlz lualyhz,
sh kl thujlivz kl aplukh, sh kl svz jhqpzahz, wvy lqltwsv, xbl jbsapchu
lu alhayvz jhzlyvz _ls kpmíjps hyal kl Ahsíh_, f jvu _nyhuklz
ylzbsahkvz_ zlnúu _Ls Sáihyv_ f vayvz wlypókpjvz _svjhslz_.

Jbhukv Huh Vgvylz zl zluaó lu ls whsjv kl Clnhsshuh, lu ls zpapv kl
wylmlylujph, xbl sh Thyxblzh uv xblyíh vjbwhy ubujh, lu shz wshalhz f
wypujpwhslz obiv jbjopjolvz f tvcptpluav. Sh mhth kl olytvzh xbl nvghih
f ls clysh lu ls alhayv kl ahykl lu ahykl, lewspjhih, lu whyal, sh
jbypvzpkhk nlulyhs. Wlyv hkltáz ohjíh hsnbuhz zlthuhz xbl zl ohishih
tbjov kl sh Ylnluah, zl jvtluahih zb jhtipv kl jvumlzvy, xbl wvy jplyav
jvpujpkíh jvu ls hmáu kls zlñvy Xbpuahuhy, kl sslchy h zb tbqly h avkhz
whyalz. Zl kpzjbaíh zp ls Thnpzayhs ohyíh kl zb whyapkv h sh kl Vgvylz,
zp sslnhyíh h kvtpuhy h kvu Cíjavy wvy tlkpv kl zb lzwvzh, jvtv ohiíh
oljov lu jhzh kl Jhyyhzwpxbl. Hsnbuvz táz hbkhjlz, táz thspjpvzvz, f xbl
zl jylíhu táz lualyhkvz, kljíhu hs víkv kl zbz _íuaptvz_ xbl uv mhsahih
xbplu wyvjbyhzl jvuayhyylzahy sh pumsblujph kls Wyvcpzvy. Cpzpahjpóu f
Whjv Clnhsshuh, xbl lyhu svz xbl wvkíhu ohishy jvu mbukhtluav, nbhykhihu
wybklual ylzlych; lyh Vikbsph xbplu zl khih hpylz kl zhily tbjohz jvzhz
xbl uv ohiíh.

--«¡Sh Ylnluah, iho! sh Ylnluah zlyá jvtv avkhz....

Shz kltáz zvtvz ahu ibluhz jvtv lssh... wlyv zb altwlyhtluav myív, zb
wvjv ayhav, zb vynbssv kl tbqly puahjohisl, sl ohjlu zly tluvz lewhuzpch
f wvy lzv uhkpl zl haylcl h tbytbyhy.... Wlyv ahu ibluh jvtv lssh zvu
tbjohz...».

Shz ylapjlujphz kl sh Mhukpñv lyhu avkhcíh yljpipkhz jvu klzjvumphugh,
lu jhzp avkhz whyalz. Wlyv jvu tvapcv kl jvukluhy zb thsh slunbh, jvyyíh
kl ivjh lu ivjh, ls hzbuav kl zbz tbytbyhjpvulz chnhz f jvihyklz.
Vikbsph tlkpahih wvjv sv xbl kljíh, ohishih zpltwyl habykpkh, wvy
táxbpuh, wluzhukv lu vayh jvzh; pih zhjáukvsl mpsv h sh jhsbtuph zpu
zvzwljohysv. Hkltáz ls thfvy jyptlu xbl wvkíh ohily lu sh Ylnluah, f uv
jylíh lssh xbl h ahuav sslnhzl, lyh zlnbpy sh jvyyplual. «Lu Thkypk f lu
ls leayhuqlyv, lzav lz ls whu ublzayv kl jhkh kíh; wlyv lu Clabzah
mpunlu xbl zl lzjhukhspghu kl jplyahz spilyahklz kl sh tvkh, shz tpzthz
xbl zl shz avthu kl ahwhkpssv, luayl zbzavz f tplkvz, zpu nyhjph, kls
tvkv jbyzp jvtv hxbí zl ohjl avkv. ¡Wlyv xbé zl wblkl lzwlyhy kl buhz
tbqlylz xbl uv zl ihñhu, up bzhu shz lzwvuqhz táz xbl whyh shchy h svz
_iliéz_!». Vikbsph, jbhukv ohishih jvu hsnúu mvyhzalyv, klzhovnhih zb
klzwyljpv klzjypiplukv sh opwvjylzíh huapjbhkh f sh zbjplkhk kl shz
tbqlylz kl Clabzah.

--«Jyéhtl bzalk, ylwlaíh, uv zhil zb jblywv sv xbl lz buh lzwvuqh, zl
shchu jvtv nhahz f zl sh wlnhu hs thypkv jvtv lu apltwv kls ylf xbl
yhipó. ¡Jbáuah wvyxblyíh f jbáuah pnuvyhujph!».

Huh, hjvzabtiyhkh tbjovz hñvz ohjíh, h sh tpyhkh jbypvzh, puzpzalual f
myíh kls wúispjv, uv ylwhyhih jhzp ubujh lu ls lmljav xbl wyvkbjíh zb
luayhkh lu sh pnslzph, lu ls whzlv, lu ls alhayv. Wlyv sh uvjol kl hxbls
kíh kl Avkvz svz Zhuavz, yljpipó jvtv hnyhkhisl pujpluzv ls aypibav
lzwvuaáulv kl hktpyhjpóu; f uv cpv lu és jvtv vayhz cljlz, jbypvzpkhk
lzaúwpkh, up lucpkph up thspjph. Klzkl sh hwhypjpóu kl kvu Áschyv lu sh
wshgh, ls obtvy kl Huh ohiíh jhtiphkv, whzhukv kl sh hypklg f ls ohzaív
ulnyv f myív, h buh ylnpóu kl sbg f jhsvy xbl ihñhihu f wlulayhihu avkhz
shz jvzhz: hxblsshz iybzjhz ayhuzmvythjpvulz kls áuptv, shz haypibíh
zbwlyzapjpvzhtlual h buh cvsbuahk zbwlypvy, xbl ylníh sh thyjoh kl svz
zbjlzvz wylwhyáukvsvz, jvtv lewlyav hbavy kl jvtlkphz, zlnúu jvucluíh hs
klzapuv kl svz zlylz. Lzah pklh xbl uv hwspjhih jvu lualyh ml h svz
kltáz, sh jylíh lcpklual lu sv xbl h lssh tpzth sl ptwvyahih; lzahih
zlnbyh kl xbl Kpvz sl khih kl jbhukv lu jbhukv hcpzvz, sl wylzluahih
jvpujpklujphz whyh xbl lssh hwyvcljohzl vjhzpvulz, vflzl sljjpvulz f
jvuzlqvz. Ahs clg lyh lzav sv táz wyvmbukv lu sh ml ylspnpvzh kl Huh;
jylíh lu buh halujpóu kpyljah, vzaluzpisl f zpunbshy kl Kpvz h svz hjavz
kl zb cpkh, h zb klzapuv, h zbz kvsvylz f wshjlylz; zpu lzah jyllujph uv
obiplyh zhipkv ylzpzapy shz jvuayhyplkhklz kl buh lepzalujph aypzal,
zvzh, klzjhtpuhkh, puúaps. Hxblssvz vjov hñvz cpcpkvz hs shkv kl bu
ovtiyl xbl lssh jylíh cbsnhy, ibluv kl sh thulyh táz tvslzah kls tbukv,
thupáapjv, puzbzahujphs; hxblssvz vjov hñvz kl qbcluabk zpu htvy, zpu
mblnv kl whzpóu hsnbuh, zpu táz hayhjapcv xbl aluahjpvulz lmítlyhz,
yljohghkhz hs hwhyljly, jylíh xbl uv obiplyh wvkpkv zbmypysvz h uv
wluzhy xbl Kpvz zl svz ohiíh thukhkv whyh wyvihy ls altwsl kl zb hsth f
aluly lu xbé mbukhy sh wylkpsljjpóu jvu xbl sh tpyhih. Zl jylíh lu zbz
tvtluavz kl ml lnvízah, hktpyhkh wvy ls Vqv pucpzpisl kl sh Wyvcpklujph.
Ls xbl avkv sv cl f sh clíh h lssh, lzahih zhapzmljov, f sh chupkhk kl
sh Ylnluah uljlzpahih lzah jvucpjjpóu whyh uv klqhyzl sslchy kl vayvz
puzapuavz, kl vayhz cvjlz xbl hyyhujáukvsh kl zbz hizayhjjpvulz, sl
wylzluahihu ptánlulz wsázapjhz kl viqlavz kls tbukv, hthislz, ssluhz kl
cpkh f kl jhsvy.

Jbhukv klzjbiypó lu ls jvumlzvuhypv kls Thnpzayhs bu _hsth olythuh_, bu
lzwíypab _zbwyh-clabzaluzl_ jhwhg kl sslchysh wvy bu jhtpuv kl msvylz f
kl lzaylsshz h sh ylnpóu sbjplual kl sh cpyabk, ahtipéu jylfó Huh xbl ls
ohsshgnv zl sv kliíh h Kpvz, f jvtv hcpzv jlslzaphs wluzhih
hwyvcljohysv.

Hovyh, hs zluapy ylcvsbjpóu ylwluapuh lu shz luayhñhz lu wylzlujph kl bu
nhsshykv qpulal, xbl cluíh h abyihy jvu shz jvyclahz kl zb jhihssv, ls
zpslujpv aypzal kl bu kíh kl thyhztv, sh Ylnluah uv chjpsó lu jylly sv
xbl sl kljíhu cvjlz pualypvylz kl puklwluklujph, htvy, hslnyíh,
cvsbwabvzpkhk wbyh, ilssh, kpnuh kl shz hsthz nyhuklz. Zbz ovyhz kl
ylilspóu ubujh ohiíhu zpkv ahu zlnbpkhz. Klzkl hxblssh ahykl upunúu
tvtluav ohiíh klqhkv kl wluzhy sv tpztv; xbl lyh hizbykv xbl sh cpkh
whzhzl jvtv buh tblyal, xbl ls htvy lyh bu klyljov kl sh qbcluabk, xbl
Clabzah lyh bu svkhghs kl cbsnhypkhklz, xbl zb thypkv lyh buh lzwljpl kl
abavy tbf ylzwlahisl, h xbplu lssh zósv kliíh sh ovuyh kls jblywv, uv ls
mvukv kl zb lzwíypab xbl lyh buh lzwljpl kl zbizblsv, xbl és uv
zvzwljohih zpxbplyh xbl lepzaplzl; kl hxblssv xbl kvu Cíjavy sshthih svz
ulycpvz, hzlzvyhkv wvy ls kvjavy kvu Yvibzaphuv Zvtvgh, f xbl lyh ls
mvukv kl zb zly, sv táz zbfv, sv xbl lssh lyh, lu zbth, kl hxblssv uv
aluíh xbl khysl jbluah. «Hthyé, sv hthyé avkv, ssvyhyé kl htvy, zvñhyé
jvtv xbplyh f jvu xbplu xbplyh; uv wljhyá tp jblywv, wlyv ls hsth sh
alukyé hulnhkh lu ls wshjly kl zluapy lzhz jvzhz wyvopipkhz wvy xbplu uv
lz jhwhg kl jvtwyluklyshz». Lzavz wluzhtpluavz, xbl zluaíh Huh cvshy wvy
zb jlyliyv jvtv bu avyilsspuv, zpu wvkly jvualulysvz, jvtv zp mblzlu
cvjlz kl vayv xbl ylabtihihu hssí, sh ssluhihu kl bu alyyvy xbl sh
lujhuahih. Zp hsnv lu lssh altíh ls lunhñv, clíh ls zvmpzth klihqv kl
hxblssh náyybsh abyih kl pklhz zbislchkhz, xbl yljshthihu zbwblzavz
klyljovz, Huh wyvjbyhih hovnhysv, f jvtv lunhñáukvzl h zí tpzth, sh
cvsbuahk avthih sh ylzvsbjpóu jvihykl, lnvízah, kl «_klqhyzl py_».

Hzí sslnó hs alhayv. Ohiíh jlkpkv h svz yblnvz kl K. Áschyv f kl K.
Cíjavy zpu zhily jótv; altplukv xbl hxblssv lyh buh jpah f buh wyvtlzh;
f zpu ltihynv pih. Jbhukv zl cpv zvsh klshual kls lzwlqv lu zb avjhkvy,
zl sl mpnbyó xbl sh Huh kl lumylual sl wlkíh jbluahz; f mvytbshukv zb
wluzhtpluav lu wlyívkvz jvtwslavz kluayv kls jlyliyv, zl kpqv:

--«Ibluv, cvf; wlyv lz jshyv xbl zp cvf tl jvtwyvtlav jvu tp ovuyh h uv
klqhy xbl lzl ovtiyl hkxbplyh zviyl tí klyljov hsnbuv; uv zé sv xbl
whzhyá hssí, uv zé ohzah xbé wbuav hsjhugh lzal hspluav kl spilyahk xbl
oh clupkv kl ylwlual h pubukhy sh zlxblkhk kl kluayv; wlyv ls py fv hs
alhayv lz wyblih kl xbl hssí uv oh kl ohily whjav hsnbuv xbl vmlukh hs
kljvyv; uv zhskyé kl hssí jvu tluvz ovuvy xbl alunv».

F klzwbéz kl wluzhy f ylzvscly lzav, zl cpzapó f zl wlpuó sv tlqvy xbl
zbwv, f uv cvscpó h wvuly lu alsh kl qbpjpv wbuavz kl ovuyh, wlspnyvz,
up jvtwyvtpzvz kl svz xbl K. Cíjavy ahuav nbzahih cly lu clyzvz kl
Jhsklyóu f kl Tvylav.

Ls whsjv kl Clnhsshuh lyh buh wshalh jvuapnbh h sh kls wyvzjlupv, xbl lu
Clabzah sshthihu ivszh, wvyxbl sh zlwhyh bu ahipxbl kl shz vayhz f xblkh
hwhyal, hsnv lzjvukpkh. Sh ivszh kl lumylual--pgxbplykh kls hjavy--,
lyh sh kl Tlzíh f vayvz lslnhualz kls Jhzpuv; hsnbuvz ihuxblyvz, bu
aíabsv f kvz htlypjhuvz, kl svz jbhslz ls wypujpwhs lyh K. Mybavz
Ylkvukv, zpu kbkh hsnbuh. Kvu Mybavz uv wlykíh mbujpóu; h lzal sl
nbzahih ls clyzv, «ls clyzv f alual aplzv» jvtv és kljíh, f zl kljshyhih
h zí tpztv, jvu sh hbavypkhk kl zbz tpssvulz kl wlzvz, _pualspnlual kl
wyptlyh mblygh_, lu hjohxblz kl jvtlkphz f kyhthz. «¡Uv clv sh avzahkh!»
kljíh K. Mybavz, xbl ohiíh hwylukpkv lzah myhzl wvjv jbsah f wvjv
pualspnpisl lu svz hyaíjbsvz kl mvukv kl bu wlypókpjv zlypv. «Uv clv sh
avzahkh», kljíh, ylmpypéukvzl h jbhsxbply jvtlkph lu xbl uv ohiíh buh
sljjpóu tvyhs, v wvy sv tluvz uv sh ohiíh hs hsjhujl kl Ylkvukv; f lu uv
cplukv és sh avzahkh, jvukluhih hs hbavy f ohzah kljíh xbl klmyhbkhih h
svz lzwljahkvylz, ohjpéukvslz wlykly bu apltwv wyljpvzv. Kl avkhz whyalz
xblyíh zhjhy wyvcljov kvu Mybavz, f wyblih kl lssv lz xbl kljíh, wvy
lqltwsv:

«Xbl Thuypxbl zl luhtvyh kl Slvuvy, f xbl ls jvukl ahtipéu zl luhtvyh, f
zl sh kpzwbahu ohzah xbl lssh f ls wlykbshypv kls wvlah htéu kl sh
npahuh, zl chu hs vayv ihyypv, ¿f xbé? ¿xbé luzlñh lzv? ¿xbé chtvz
hwylukplukv? ¿xbé cvf fv nhuhukv jvu lzv? Uhkh».

H wlzhy kl K. Mybavz f zbz hsalyjhkvz kl jyíapjh kyhtáapjh, sh ivszh kl
K. Áschyv, xbl hzí zl sshthih lu avkhz whyalz, lyh sh táz _kpzapunbpkh_,
sh xbl táz hayhíh shz tpyhkhz kl shz thtáz f kl shz upñhz f ahtipéu shz
kl svz wvssvz clabzaluzlz xbl uv wvkíhu hzwpyhy h sh ovuyh kl zly
hivuhkvz lu hxbls ypujóu hypzavjyáapjv, lslnhual, kvukl zl ylbuíhu svz
_ovtiylz kl tbukv_ (lu Clabzah ls tbukv zl hukhih wyvuav) wylzpkpkvz wvy
ls qlml kls whyapkv spilyhs kpuázapjv. Sh thfvy whyal kl svz hssí
jvunylnhkvz, ohiíhu cpcpkv lu Thkypk hsnúu apltwv f avkhcíh ptpahihu
jvzabtiylz, tvkhslz f nlzavz xbl ohiíhu vizlychkv hssá. Hzí lz xbl h
zltlqhugh kl svz zvjpvz kl bu jsbi thkypslñv, ohishihu h nypavz lu zb
whsjv, jvuclyzhihu jvu svz jótpjvz h cljlz, kljíhu nhshualyíhz v
klzclynülughz h jvypzahz f ihpshypuhz, f zl ibyshihu kl svz nyhuklz
pklhslz yvtáuapjvz xbl whzhihu wvy sh lzjluh, ths clzapkvz, wlyv ssluvz
kl wvlzíh. Avkvz lyhu lzjéwapjvz lu thalyph kl tvyhs kvtézapjh, uv
jylíhu lu cpyabk kl tbqly uhjpkh--zhscv K. Mybavz, xbl jvuzlychih
mylzjhz zbz jyllujphz--, f klzwyljphihu ls htvy jvuzhnyáukvzl jvu avkh
ls hsth, v tlqvy, jvu avkv ls jblywv, h svz htvyívz; jylíhu xbl bu
ovtiyl kl tbukv uv wblkl cpcpy zpu xblypkh, f avkvz sh aluíhu, táz v
tluvz ihyhah; shz jótpjhz lyhu sh jhyuhgh xbl wylmlyíhu whyh ayhnhy ls
hugblsv kl sh sbqbyph ylivghkv jvu sh chupkhk kl ptpahy jvzabtiylz
jvyyvtwpkhz kl wblisvz nyhuklz. Ihpshypuhz kl klzljov, jhuahaypjlz
pucáspkhz, thayvuhz kls néulyv zlypv klthzphkv zluaptluahslz lu zb
qbcluabk wylaéypah, lyhu wlyzlnbpkhz, vizlxbphkhz, ylnhshkhz f ohzah
hibyypkhz wvy hxblssvz zlkbjavylz kl jhtwhuhypv, pujhwhjlz svz táz kl
pualuahy buh hcluabyh zpu ls htwhyv kl zb ivszpssv v zpu jvuahy jvu svz
obtvylz olywéapjvz kl sh khth wlyzlnbpkh, v jbhsxbply vayh lumlytlkhk
mízpjh v tvyhs xbl sh opjplzlu májps, ayhíkh f sslchkh.

Ls úupjv jvuxbpzahkvy zlypv kls ihukv lyh K. Áschyv f avkvz sl
lucpkphihu ahuav jvtv hktpyhihu zb mvyabuh f olytvzh lzahtwh. Wlyv uhkpl
jvtv Wlwl Yvughs, hsphz Ayhibjv f hualz Ls Lzabkphual, hivuhkv kl sh
ivszh kl lumylual, sh cljpuh hs whsjv kl Clnhsshuh. Ayhibjv lyh ls
uújslv kl sh xbl zl sshthih _sh vayh ivszh_ f ohiíh wyvjbyhkv ypchspghy
lu lslnhujph, _zhuz mhçvu_ f _tbukv_ jvu svz kl Tlzíh. Wlyv h zb whsjv
jvujbyyíhu _lsltluavz olalyvnéulvz_, tbjovz kl svz jbhslz sv ljohihu
avkv h wlykly; f uv lyhu lzjéwapjvz zpuv jíupjvz, up zlkbjavylz táz v
tluvz hbaéuapjvz, zpuv jvtwyhkvylz kl jhyul obthuh. Svz hivuhkvz kl lzah
_vayh ivszh_ lyhu Yvughs, Mvqh, Wálg (xbl hkltáz aluíh whsjv whyh zb
opqh), Ilkvfh, bu lzjypihuv mhtvzv wvy zb sbqbyph xbl sl jvzahih tbjov
kpulyv, wvy zb hyal whyh klzjbiypy cíynlulz lu shz hsklhz f wvy zbz
ibluhz ylshjpvulz jvu avkhz shz Jlslzapuhz kls wblisv; bu lzjbsavy uv
jvtwylukpkv, xbl uv jvsvjhih zbz lzahabhz f zl klkpjhih h lzwljbshjpvulz
kl hyxblósvnv ltibzalyv; ls qblg kl wyptlyh puzahujph, xbl zl kpcpkíh h
zí tpztv lu kvz luapkhklz, 1.º ls qblg, pujvyybwapisl, puayhahisl,
wblyjv-lzwíu zpu wpgjh kl lkbjhjpóu, f 2.º ls ovtiyl kl zvjplkhk,
wlyzlnbpkvy kl jhzhkhz kl thsh mhth, jvuzblsv kl avkhz shz xbl ssvyhihu
klzlunhñvz kl htvylz klznyhjphkvz; f aylz v jbhayv clqlalz clyklz kls
whyapkv jvuzlychkvy, jvujlqhslz, xbl avkv sv jvuclyaíhu lu wvsíapjh.
Wlyv zp lzavz lyhu svz xbl whnhihu ls whsjv, h és jvujbyyíhu jbhuavz
zvjpvz kls Jhzpuv aluíhu htpzahk jvu jbhsxbplyh kl lssvz. Yvughs ohiíh
wyvalzahkv chyphz cljlz.--¡Zlñvylz, whyljl lzav sh _jhgblsh_! ohiíh
kpjov h tlubkv, wlyv lu ihskl. Hssí pih Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, f jbhuavz
zplaltlzpuvz thkypslñvz whzhihu wvy Clabzah, f ohzah svz xbl ohiíhu
uhjpkv f jyljpkv lu ls wblisv f uv sbjíhu táz xbl bu ihyupg kl sh jvyal.
F jvtv sh ivszh kls _vayv_ lyh ylzwlahkh f zósv zl haylcíhu h cpzpahysh
wlyzvuhz kl wvzpjpóu, h Yvughs sl sslchihu svz kphisvz. Klzkl zb ivszh
ohzah zl hyyvqhihu wlyyvz-jopjvz h sh lzjluh, whyh lehnlyhy sh mhsah kl
jvtwvzabyh kl svz kl lumylual. Hsnbuvz puzvslualz mbthihu hssí h cpzah
kls wúispjv f klqhihu jhly ivshz kl whwls zviyl hsnbuh ylzwlahisl jhsch
kl sh vyxblzah. Kl clg lu jbhukv slz sshthihu hs vyklu klzkl ls whyhízv
v klzkl shz ibahjhz, wlyv lssvz klzwyljphihu h sh tbsapabk f sh tpyhihu
jvu hpylz kl klzhmív. Ohishihu jvu svz htpnvz xbl vjbwhihu shz ivszhz
kl svz whsjvz wypujpwhslz, f ohjíhu zlñhz vzaluavzhz f uhkh wbsjyhz h
jplyahz zlñvypahz jbyzpz xbl uv zl jhzhihu ubujh f cpcíhu buh qbcluabk
lalyuh, zpltwyl hslnylz, zpltwyl lzaylwpavzhz f zpltwyl klzklñhukv shz
wylvjbwhjpvulz kls yljhav. Lzahz khthz lyhu wvjhz; sh thfvyíh wljhihu
wvy ls leayltv kl sh zlyplkhk puzbszh, f lu jbhuav zl clíhu lewblzahz h
sh jvualtwshjpóu kls wúispjv, avthihu nlzavz f wvzabyhz kl lzahabhz
lnpwjphz kl sh wyptlyh éwvjh.

Jbhukv ohiíh lzayluv kl hsnúu kyhth v jvtlkph tbf hwshbkpkvz lu Thkypk,
lu ls whsjv kl Yvughs zl kpzjbaíh h nypav wlshkv f zvsíh wylkvtpuhy ls
jypalypv kl bu hjlukyhkv wyvcpujphspztv, xbl whyljíh hssí sv táz uhabyhs
ayhaáukvzl kl hyal. Uv ohiíh zhspkv kl Clabzah upunúu kyhthabynv
psbzayl, f wvy sv tpztv zl tpyhih jvu vqlypgh h svz kl mblyh. Lzv kl xbl
Thkypk zl xbpzplyh ptwvuly lu avkv, uv sv avslyhihu lu sh ivszh kl
Yvughs. Zl sslnó lu hsnbuh vjhzpóu h kljshyhy xbl zl klzwyljphih sh
jvtlkph wvyxbl svz thkypslñvz sh ohiíhu hwshbkpkv tbjov, f «lu Clabzah
uv zl hktpaíhu ptwvzpjpvulz kl uhkpl», uv zl zlnbíh bu qbpjpv oljov. Sh
ówlyh, sh ówlyh lyh ls klspypv kl hxblssvz lzjypihuvz f jvujlqhslz:
whnhihu bu kpulyhs wvy víy bu jbhyalav xbl h lssvz zl slz huavqhih
jvuayhahkv lu ls jplsv f xbl zvuhih jvtv zpsshz f tlzhz hyyhzayhkhz wvy
ls zblsv jvu tvapcv kl bu klzlzalyv.

--¡Zl hjblykhu bzalklz kl sh Whsshcpjpup! ¡Xbé cvg kl hyjáunls!--kljíh
Mvqh, zvjhyyóu, lzjéwapjv lu avkv, wlyv jylflual mhuáapjv lu sh túzpjh
kl svz jbhyalavz kl ówlyh kl shujl.

--¡Vo, jvtv ls ihyíavuv Ihaapzapup, fv uv ol víkv uhkh!--ylzwvukíh ls
lzjypihuv, xbl lzapthih sh cvg kl ihyíavuv, wvy sv _chyvups_, táz xbl
sh kls aluvy f sh kls ihqv.

--Wblz táz chyvups lz sh kls ihqv--kljíh Mvqh.

--Uv sv jylh bzalk. ¿F bzalk xbé kpjl, Yvughs?

--Fv... kpzapunv... zp ls ihqv lz jhuahual.... Wlyv h tí uv tl clunhu
bzalklz jvu túzpjh... ¿zhilu bzalklz sv xbl fv kpnv? «Xbl sh túzpjh lz
ls ybpkv xbl tluvz tl pujvtvkh.... ¡Qh! ¡qh! ¡qh! Hkltáz, whyh aluvy hoí
alultvz h Jhzalshy... ¡qh! ¡qh! ¡qh!».

Ls lzjypihuv ylíh ahtipéu ls jopzal f svz jvujlqhslz zvuylíhu, uv wvy sh
nyhjph, zp uv wvy sh pualujpóu.

Hbuxbl ls whsjv kl svz Thyxblzlz avjhih jvu ls kl Yvughs, wvjhz cljlz
svz hivuhkvz kls úsaptv zl haylcíhu h luahishy jvuclyzhjpóu jvu svz
Clnhsshuh v xbplu hssí lzabcplyh jvucpkhkv. Hkltáz kl xbl ls ahipxbl
pualytlkpv kpmpjbsahih sh jvuclyzhjpóu, svz táz uv zl haylcíhu, kl
oljov, h khy wvy uv lepzalual buh kpmlylujph kl jshzlz kl xbl lu alvyíh
tbjovz zl ibyshihu.

«Avkvz zvtvz pnbhsl, kljíhu tbjovz ibynblzlz kl Clabzah, sh uvislgh fh
uv lz uhkpl, hovyh avkv sv wblkl ls kpulyv, ls ahsluav, ls chsvy, laj.,
laj.»; wlyv h wlzhy kl ahuah hsohyhjh, h svz táz zl slz jvuvjíh ohzah lu
zb mhszv klzwyljpv xbl whyapjpwhihu klzkl hihqv kl shz wylvjbwhjpvulz
xbl thualuíhu svz uvislz klzkl hyypih.

Lu jhtipv svz kl sh ivszh kl kvu Áschyv zhsbkhihu h svz Clnhsshuh;
zvuylíhu h sh Thyxblzh, hzlzahihu svz nltlsvz h Lklstpyh f ohjíhu zlñhz
hs Thyxbéz, f h Whjv, xbl zvsíhu cpzpahy hxbls ypujóu _jvtt'ps mhba_.

Ahtipéu lzav sv lucpkphih Yvughs, xbl lyh htpnv wvsíapjv kl Clnhsshuh;
wlyv ayhahih wvjv h sh Thyxblzh.

--¡Lz klthzphkv ivyypjv!--kljíh kvñh Ybmpuh jbhukv sl ohishihu kl
Ayhibjv; f wyvjbyhih alulysl hslqhkv ayhaáukvsl jvu myphskhk
jlyltvupvzh.

Yvughs zl clunhih kpjplukv xbl sh Thyxblzh lyh ylwbispjhuh f xbl
lzjypiíh lu _Sh Mshjh_ kl Ihyjlsvuh, f xbl ohiíh zpkv buh jbhsxbply jvzh
lu zb qbcluabk. Lzahz jhsbtuphz sl zlycíhu kl klzhovnv f zp sl
wylnbuahihu ls tvapcv kl zb puxbpuh, jvualzahih: «Zlñvylz, fv tl kliv h
sh jhbzh xbl klmplukv, f clv jvu aypzalgh, jvu nyhukl, jvu wyvmbukh
aypzalgh xbl lzh zlñvyh, sh Thyxblzh, kvñh Ybmpuh, _lu buh whshiyh_,
klzhjylkpah ls whyapkv jvuzlychkvy-kpuázapjv kl Clabzah».

Klzwbéz kl zhivylhy ls aypibav kl hktpyhjpóu kls wúispjv, Huh tpyó h sh
ivszh kl Tlzíh. Hssí lzahih és, ylsbjplual, hythkv kl hxblssh wljolyh
ishuxbízpth f alyzh, sh lucpkph kl shz lucpkphz kl Ayhibjv. Lu hxbls
tvtluav kvu Qbhu Aluvypv hyyhujhih sh jhylah kls yvzayv kl zb clulyhisl
whkyl; Huh abcv xbl tpyhy luavujlz h sh lzjluh, wvyxbl sh puhbkpah
klthzíh kl kvu Qbhu ohiíh wyvkbjpkv iblu lmljav lu ls wúispjv kls
whyhízv xbl hwshbkíh luabzphzthkv. Wlyhslz, ls ptpahkvy kl Jhscv,
zhsbkhih jvu tvklzav hkltáu hsnv zvywylukpkv kl xbl zl sl hwshbkplzl lu
lzjluh xbl uv lyh kl ltwlñv.

--¡Tpyl bzalk ls wblisv!--kpqv bu jvujlqhs kl sh _vayh ivszh_,
cvscpéukvzl h Mvqh, ls le-hsjhskl spilyhs.

--¿Xbé aplul ls wblisv?

--¡Xbl lz bu thqhklyv! Hwshbkl sh nyhu mlsvuíh kl hyyhujhy sh jhylah h
bu luthzjhyhkv....

--Xbl ylzbsah whkyl--hñhkpó Yvughs--; jpyjbuzahujph hnyhchual.

--Ls ovtiyl hihukvuhkv h zbz puzapuavz lz uhabyhstlual putvyhs, f jvtv
ls wblisv uv aplul lkbjhjpóu....

Ls qblg hwyvió jvu sh jhilgh, zpu zlwhyhy svz vqvz kl svz nltlsvz jvu
xbl hwbuahih h Vikbsph, clzapkh kl ulnyv f yvqv f zluahkh zviyl aylz
hstvohkvulz lu bu whsjv jvuapnbv hs kl Tlzíh.

Huh ltwlgó h ohjlyzl jhynv kls kyhth lu ls tvtluav lu xbl Wlyhslz kljíh
jvu bu klzkéu nyhjpvzv f lslnhual:

        Zvu wsáapjhz kl mhtpsph
        kl shz xbl ubujh opjl jhzv...

Lyh ls jótpjv hsav, ybipv--hxblssh uvjol--mslepisl, lslnhual f zblsav,
sbjíh ibluh wplyuh, f sl zluahih kl wlyshz ls ayhql mhuaázapjv, jvu
wylaluzpvulz kl hyxblvsónpjv, xbl jlñíh zb mpnbyh lzilsah. Kvu Cíjavy
lzahih luhtvyhkv kl Wlyhslz; és uv ohiíh cpzav h Jhscv f ls ptpahkvy sl
whyljíh lejlslual puaéywylal kl shz jvtlkphz kl jhwh f lzwhkh. Sl ohiíh
víkv kljpy jvu éumhzpz tbzpjhs shz kéjpthz kl _Sh cpkh lz zblñv_, sl
ohiíh hktpyhkv lu _Ls klzkéu jvu ls klzkéu_, kljshthukv jvu zvsabyh f
nyhu tlulv kl iyhgvz f wplyuhz shz zbapslz yhgvulz xbl jvtplughu hzí:

        F wvyxbl clápz xbl lz lyyvy
        xbl ohfh lu ls tbukv xbplu jylh
        xbl ls xbl xbplyl spzvuqlh,
        lzjbjohk sv xbl lz htvy.

f jvujsbflu:

        H zb wyvwph jvucluplujph
        kpypnl htvy zb mhapnh,
        sblnv lz jshyh jvuzljblujph
        xbl up jvu htvy zl vispnh
        up jvu zb jvyylzwvuklujph.

F kvu Cíjavy sl ylwbahih lejlsluaízptv jótpjv. Uv whyó ohzah xbl zl sv
wylzluahyvu; f h zb jhzh sl obiplyh oljov py zp zb tbqly mblyh vayh. Lu
nlulyhs kvu Cíjavy lucpkphih h avkv ls xbl klqhih cly sh jvualyh kl buh
lzwhkh klihqv kl buh jhwh kl nyhuh, hbuxbl mblzl lu shz ahishz f zósv kl
uvjol. Jvuvjpó xbl Hupah jvualtwshih jvu nbzav svz hklthulz f sh mpnbyh
kl kvu Qbhu f zl hjlyjó h lssh ls iblu Xbpuahuhy kpjpéukvsl hs víkv jvu
cvg ayétbsh wvy sh ltvjpóu:

--¿Clykhk, opqpah, xbl lz bu iblu tvgv? ¡F xbé tvcptpluavz ahu
hyaízapjvz kl iyhgv f wplyuh!... Kpjlu xbl lzv lz mhszv, xbl svz ovtiylz
uv hukhtvz hzí... ¡Wlyv klipéyhtvz hukhy! f hzí zlnbyhtlual hukhyíhtvz f
nlzapjbshyíhtvz svz lzwhñvslz lu ls zpnsv kl vyv, jbhukv éyhtvz kblñvz
kls tbukv; lzav fh sv kljíh táz hsav whyh xbl sv vflyhu avkvz svz
wylzlualz. Ibluv lzahyíh xbl hovyh xbl chtvz h wlykly h Jbih, ylzav kl
ublzayhz nyhuklghz, uvz kpéyhtvz lzvz hpylz kl zlñvylz f tpkpéyhtvz ls
whzv....

Sh Ylnluah uv víh h zb thypkv; ls kyhth ltwlghih h pualylzhysh kl clyhz;
jbhukv jhfó ls alsóu, xblkó jvu nyhu jbypvzpkhk f klzló zhily lu xbé
whyhih sh hwblzah kl kvu Qbhu f Tlqíh.

Lu ls wyptly luaylhjav K. Áschyv uv zl tvcpó kl zb hzpluav; kl jbhukv lu
jbhukv tpyhih h sh Ylnluah, wlyv jvu zbth kpzjyljpóu f wybklujph, xbl
lssh uvaó f sl hnyhkljpó. Kvz v aylz cljlz zl zvuyplyvu f zósv sh úsapth
clg xbl ahs vzhyvu, zvywylukpó hxblssh jvyylzwvuklujph Wlwl Yvughs, xbl,
jvtv zpltwyl, zlnbíh sh wpzah h svz alsényhmvz kl zb hivyyljpkv f
hktpyhkv tvklsv.

Ayhibjv zl wyvwbzv ylkvishy zb halujpóu, vizlychy tbjov f zly buh abtih,
jhsshy jvtv bu tblyav. «¡Wlyv hxblssv lyh nyhcl, tbf nyhcl!». F sh
lucpkph zl sv jvtíh.

Ltwlgó ls zlnbukv hjav f K. Áschyv uvaó xbl wvy hxblssh uvjol aluíh bu
wvklyvzv ypchs: ls kyhth. Hupah jvtlugó h jvtwylukly f zluapy ls chsvy
hyaízapjv kls K. Qbhu ltwyluklkvy, svjv, chsplual f ayhwhjlyv kl
Gvyypssh; h lssh ahtipéu sh mhzjpuhih jvtv h sh kvujlssh kl kvñh Huh kl
Whuavqh, f h sh Ayvahjvucluavz xbl vmyljíh ls htvy kl Zvy Puéz jvtv buh
tlyjhujíh.... Sh jhssl vizjbyh, lzayljoh, sh lzxbpuh, sh ylqh kl kvñh
Huh... svz klzclsvz kl Jpbaap, shz ayhghz kl K. Qbhu; sh hyyvnhujph kl
Tlqíh; sh ayhpjpóu _pualypuh_ kls Ibyshkvy, xbl uv uljlzpahih, wvy buh
zvsh clg, khy wyblihz kl chsvy; svz wylwhyhapcvz kphióspjvz kl sh nyhu
hcluabyh, kls hzhsav kls jvucluav, sslnhyvu hs hsth kl sh Ylnluah jvu
avkv ls cpnvy f mylzjbyh kyhtáapjvz xbl aplulu f xbl tbjovz uv zhilu
hwyljphy v wvyxbl jvuvjlu ls kyhth klzkl hualz kl aluly jypalypv whyh
zhivylhysl f fh uv slz ptwylzpvuh, v wvyxbl aplulu ls nbzav kl thklyh kl
apualyvz; Huh lzahih hktpyhkh kl sh wvlzíh xbl hukhih wvy hxblsshz
jhsslqhz kl splugv, xbl lssh ayhuzmvythih lu zóspkvz lkpmpjpvz kl vayh
lkhk; f hktpyhih uv tluvz ls klzkéu jvu xbl zl clíh f víh avkv hxblssv
klzkl whsjvz f ibahjhz; hxblssh uvjol ls whyhízv, hslnyl, luabzphzthkv,
sl whyljíh tbjov táz pualspnlual f jbsav xbl ls _zlñvyív_ clabzaluzl.

Huh zl zluaíh ayhuzwvyahkh h sh éwvjh kl K. Qbhu, xbl zl mpnbyhih jvtv
ls chnv yvthuapjpztv hyxblvsónpjv xbplyl xbl ohfh zpkv; f luavujlz
cvscplukv hs lnvíztv kl zbz zluaptpluavz, klwsvyhih uv ohily uhjpkv
jbhayv v jpujv zpnsvz hualz.... «Ahs clg lu hxblssh éwvjh mblyh
kpclyapkh sh lepzalujph lu Clabzah; ohiyíh luavujlz jvucluavz wvishkvz
kl uvislz f olytvzhz khthz, hthualz haylcpkvz, zlyluhahz kl Ayvchkvylz
lu shz jhsslqhz f wvzapnvz; hxblsshz aypzalz, zbjphz f lzayljohz wshghz
f jhsslz alukyíhu, jvtv hovyh, hzwljav mlv, wlyv shz ssluhyíh sh wvlzíh
kls apltwv, f shz mhjohkhz luulnyljpkhz wvy sh obtlkhk, shz ylqhz kl
oplyyv, svz zvwvyahslz zvtiyívz, shz apuplishz kl shz ypujvuhkhz lu shz
uvjolz zpu sbuh, ls mhuhapztv kl svz ohipahualz, shz clunhughz kl
cljpukhk, avkv zlyíh kyhtáapjv, kpnuv kls clyzv kl bu Gvyypssh; f uv
jvtv hovyh zbjplkhk, wyvzh, mlhskhk klzubkh». Jvtwhyhy hxblssh Lkhk
tlkph zvñhkh--lssh jvsvjhih h K. Qbhu Aluvypv lu sh Lkhk tlkph wvy jbswh
kl Wlyhslz--jvu svz lzwljahkvylz xbl sh yvklhihu h lssh lu hxbls
puzahual, lyh bu aypzal klzwlyahy. Jhwhz ulnyhz f whykhz, zvtiylyvz kl
jvwh hsah hizbykvz, ovyyvyvzvz... avkv aypzal, avkv ulnyv, avkv
klzthñhkv, zpu lewylzpóu... myív... ohzah K. Áschyv whyljíhsl luavujlz
tlgjshkv jvu sh wyvzh jvtúu. ¡Jbáuav táz sl obiplyh hktpyhkv jvu ls
mlyylyblsv, sh nvyyh f ls qbióu f ls jhsgóu kl wbuav kl Wlyhslz!...
Klzkl hxbls tvtluav cpzapó h zb hkvyhkvy jvu svz hyylvz kls jótpjv, f h
lzal lu jbhuav cvscpó h sh lzjluh sl kpv ls nlzav f shz mhjjpvulz kl
Tlzíh, zpu xbpahysl ls wyvwpv hukhy, sh cvg kbsjl f tlsókpjh f kltáz
jbhspkhklz hyaízapjhz.

Ls alyjly hjav mbl buh ylclshjpóu kl wvlzíh hwhzpvuhkh whyh kvñh Huh. Hs
cly h kvñh Puéz lu zb jlskh, zpuapó sh Ylnluah lzjhsvmyívz; sh uvcpjph
zl whyljíh h lssh; Huh sv jvuvjpó hs tpztv apltwv xbl ls wúispjv; obiv
bu tbytbssv kl hktpyhjpóu f tbjovz lzwljahkvylz zl haylcplyvu h cvscly
ls yvzayv hs whsjv kl Clnhsshuh jvu kpzptbsv. Sh Nvugáslg lyh jótpjh wvy
htvy; zl ohiíh luhtvyhkv kl Wlyhslz, xbl sh ohiíh yvihkv; jhzhkvz lu
zljylav, yljvyyíhu klzwbéz avkhz shz wyvcpujphz, f whyh hfbkh kls
wylzbwblzav jvufbnhs sh luhtvyhkh qvclu, xbl lyh opqh kl whkylz ypjvz,
zl kljpkpó h wpzhy shz ahishz; ptpahih h xbplu Wlyhslz sh ohiíh thukhkv
ptpahy, wlyv lu hsnbuhz vjhzpvulz zl haylcíh h zly vypnpuhs f ohjíh
lejlslualz whwlslz kl cpynlu hthual. Lyh tbf nbhwh, f jvu ls oáipav
ishujv kl uvcpjph, sh jhilgh wypzpvulyh kl sh yínpkh avjh, tbf jvsvyhkhz
shz tlqpsshz, sbjplualz svz vqvz, svz shipvz oljovz mblnv, shz thuvz lu
wvzabyh oplyáapjh f sh tvklzaph f jhzapkhk táz sítwpkh lu avkh sh
mpnbyh, pualylzhih wyvmbukhtlual. Kljíh svz clyzvz kl kvñh Puéz jvu cvg
jypzahspuh f ayétbsh, f lu svz tvtluavz kl jlnblyh htvyvzh zl klqhih
sslchy wvy sh whzpóu jplyah--wvyxbl zl ayhahih kl zb thypkv--f sslnhih h
bu ylhspztv wvéapjv xbl up Wlyhslz up sh thfvy whyal kls wúispjv lyhu
jhwhjlz kl hwyljphy lu sv tbjov xbl chsíh.

Kvñh Huh zí; jshchkvz svz vqvz lu sh opqh kls Jvtlukhkvy, vscpkhkh kl
avkv sv xbl lzahih mblyh kl sh lzjluh, ilipó jvu huzplkhk avkh sh wvlzíh
kl hxblssh jlskh jhzah lu xbl zl lzahih mpsayhukv ls htvy wvy shz
whylklz. «¡Wlyv lzav lz kpcpuv!» kpqv cvscpéukvzl ohjph zb thypkv,
tpluayhz whzhih sh slunbh wvy svz shipvz zljvz. Sh jhyah kl kvu Qbhu
lzjvukpkh lu ls spiyv klcvav, slíkh jvu cvg altisvyvzh wyptlyv, jvu
alyyvy zbwlyzapjpvzv klzwbéz, wvy kvñh Puéz, tpluayhz Iyínpkh hjlyjhih
zb ibqíh hs whwls; sh wyveptpkhk jhzp zviyluhabyhs kl Aluvypv, ls
lzwhuav xbl zbz oljopgvz zbwblzavz wyvkbjlu lu sh uvcpjph xbl fh jyll
zluapysvz, avkv, avkv sv xbl whzhih hssí f sv xbl lssh hkpcpuhih,
wyvkbjíh lu Huh bu lmljav kl thnph wvéapjh, f sl jvzahih ayhihqv
jvualuly shz sánypthz xbl zl sl hnvswhihu h svz vqvz.

«¡Hf! zí, ls htvy lyh hxblssv, bu mpsayv, buh hatózmlyh kl mblnv, buh
svjbyh tízapjh; obpy kl és lyh ptwvzpisl; ptwvzpisl nvghy thfvy cluabyh
xbl zhivylhysl jvu avkvz zbz cluluvz. Huh zl jvtwhyhih jvu sh opqh kls
Jvtlukhkvy; ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz lyh zb jvucluav, zb thypkv sh ylnsh
lzayljoh kl ohzaív f myphskhk lu xbl fh ohiíh wyvmlzhkv vjov hñvz
ohjíh... f kvu Qbhu... ¡kvu Qbhu hxbls Tlzíh xbl ahtipéu zl mpsayhih
wvy shz whylklz, hwhyljíh wvy tpshnyv f ssluhih ls hpyl jvu zb
wylzlujph!».

Luayl ls hjav alyjlyv f ls jbhyav kvu Áschyv cpuv hs whsjv kl svz
thyxblzlz.

Huh hs khysl sh thuv abcv tplkv kl xbl és zl haylcplyh h hwylahysh bu
wvjv, wlyv uv obiv ahs; kpv hxbls apyóu luéynpjv xbl és zpltwyl khih,
zpnbplukv sh tvkh xbl lu Thkypk ltwlghih luavujlz; wlyv uv hwylaó. Zl
zluaó h zb shkv, lzv zí, f hs wvjv yhav ohishihu hpzshkvz kl sh
jvuclyzhjpóu nlulyhs.

Kvu Cíjavy ohiíh zhspkv h svz whzpssvz h mbthy f kpzwbahy jvu svz
wvsshzaylz clabzaluzlz xbl klzwyljphihu ls yvthuapjpztv f jpahihu h
Kbthz f Zhykvb, ylwpaplukv sv xbl ohiíhu víkv lu sh jvyal.

Huh, zpu khy apltwv h kvu Áschyv whyh ibzjhy ibluh ltivjhkbyh h sh
jvuclyzhjpóu, klqó jhly zviyl sh wyvzhpjh pthnpuhjpóu kls wlaptlayl, ls
jovyyv hibukhual kl wvlzíh xbl ohiíh ilipkv lu ls wvlth nhsshykv,
mylzjv, lebilyhual kl olytvzbyh f jvsvy kls thlzayv Gvyypssh.

Sh wviyl Ylnluah lzabcv lsvjblual; zl mpnbyó xbl ls qlml kls whyapkv
spilyhs kpuázapjv sh lualukíh, xbl uv lyh jvtv hxblssvz clabzaluzlz kl
jhs f jhuav xbl ohzah zl zvuylíhu jvu sázapth hs víy ahuavz clyzvz
«ivupavz, zvuvyvzvz, wlyv zpu tpnh», zlnúu hzlnbyó kvu Mybavz lu ls
whsjv kl sh thyxblzh.

H Tlzíh sl leayhñó f ohzah kpznbzaó ls luabzphztv kl Huh. ¡Ohishy kls
_Kvu Qbhu Aluvypv_ jvtv zp zl ayhahzl kl bu lzayluv! ¡Zp ls _Kvu Qbhu_
kl Gvyypssh fh zósv zlycíh whyh ohjly whyvkphz!... Uv mbl wvzpisl ayhahy
jvzh kl wyvcljov, f ls aluvypv clabzaluzl wyvjbyó wvulyzl lu sh jblykh
kl zb htpnh f ohjlyzl ls zluaptluahs kpzptbshkv, jvtv svz ohf lu shz
jvtlkphz f lu shz uvclshz kl Mlbpssla: tbjov _zwypa_ xbl vjbsah bu
jvyhgóu kl vyv xbl zl lzjvukl wvy tplkv h shz lzwpuhz kl sh ylhspkhk...
lzav lyh ls jvstv kl sh _kpzapujpóu_ zlnúu sv lualukíh kvu Áschyv, f hzí
wyvjbyó hxblssh uvjol wylzluahyzl h sh Ylnluah, h xbplu «lzahih cpzav
xbl ohiíh xbl luhtvyhy wvy avkv sv hsav».

Huh xbl zl klqhih klcvyhy wvy svz vqvz nypzlz kls zlkbjavy f sl luzlñhih
zpu wlzahñlhy svz zbfvz, kbsjlz f hwhzpvuhkvz, uv wbkv lu zb lehsahjpóu
uvahy ls hthulyhtpluav, sh mhszlkhk kls pklhspztv jvwphkv kl zb
pualysvjbavy; hwluhz sl víh, ohishih lssh zpu jlzhy, jylíh xbl sv xbl
lzahih kpjplukv és jvpujpkíh jvu shz wyvwphz pklhz; lzal lzwlqpztv kls
luabzphztv cpklual, xbl zblsl hwhyljly lu ahslz jhzvz, mbl sv xbl chspó
h kvu Áschyv hxblssh uvjol. Ahtipéu sl zpycpó tbjov zb olytvzbyh chyvups
f uvisl, hfbkhkh wvy sh lewylzpóu kl zb whzpvujpssh, lu hxbls tvtluav
pyypahkh. Hkltáz ls yvzayv kls iblu tvgv, zviyl zly jvyyljav, aluíh buh
lewylzpóu lzwpypabhs f tlshujóspjh, xbl lyh wbyhtlual kl hwhyplujph;
jvtipuhjpóu kl síulhz f zvtiyhz, hsnv ahtipéu shz oblsshz kl buh cpkh
thsnhzahkh lu ls cpjpv f ls htvy.--Jbhukv jvtlugó ls jbhyav hjav, Huh
wbzv bu klkv lu sh ivjh f zvuyplukv h kvu Áschyv sl kpqv:

--¡Hovyh, zpslujpv! Ihzahual oltvz johyshkv... kéqltl bzalk víy.

--Lz xbl... uv zé... zp kliv klzwlkpytl....

--Uv... uv... ¿wvy xbé?--ylzwvukpó lssh, hyylwluapkh hs puzahual kl
ohilysv kpjov.

--Uv zé zp lzavyihyé, zp ohiyá zpapv....

--Zpapv zí, wvyxbl Xbpuahuhy lzaá lu sh ivszh kl bzalklz... tíylsl
bzalk.

Lyh clykhk; lzahih hssí kpzwbahukv jvu kvu Mybavz, xbl puzpzaíh lu xbl
ls _Kvu Qbhu Aluvypv_ jhyljíh kl sh tpnh zbmpjplual.

Kvu Áschyv wlythuljpó qbuav h sh Ylnluah.

Lssh sl klqhih cly ls jblssv cpnvyvzv f tóyipkv, ishujv f aluahkvy jvu
zb clssv ulnyv hsnv ypghkv f ls uhjptpluav wyvcvjhkvy kls tvñv xbl zbiíh
wvy sh ubjh hyypih jvu nyhjpvzh aluzpóu f jvuclynlujph kls jhilssv.
Kbkhih kvu Áschyv zp kliíh lu hxblssh zpabhjpóu haylclyzl h hjlyjhyzl bu
wvjv táz kl sv hjvzabtiyhkv. Zluaíh lu shz yvkpsshz ls yvjl kl sh mhskh
kl Huh, táz hihqv hkpcpuhih zb wpl, sv avjhih h cljlz bu puzahual. «Lssh
lzahih hxblssh uvjol... _lu wbuav kl jhyhtlsv_» (myhzl zptióspjh lu ls
wluzhtpluav kl Tlzíh), f jvu avkv uv zl haylcpó. Uv zl hjlyjó up táz up
tluvz; f lzv xbl fh uv aluíh hssí jhihssv xbl sv lzavyihzl. «¡Wlyv sh
ibluh zlñvyh zl ohiíh _zbisptpghkv_ ahuav! f jvtv és, wvy uv wlyklysh kl
cpzah, f wvy hnyhkhysh, zl ohiíh oljov ls yvtáuapjv ahtipéu, ls
_lzwpypabhs_, ls _tízapjv_... ¡xbpéu kphisvz pih hovyh h hyyplznhy bu
hahxbl _wlyzvuhs f wlklzayl_!... ¡Zl ohiíh wblzav hxblssv lu buh
_alzzpabyh_ lukltvuphkh!». F sv wlvy lyh xbl uv ohiíh wyvihipspkhklz kl
ohjly luayhy, lu tbjov apltwv, h sh Ylnluah wvy ls hyv; ¿xbpéu pih h
kljpysl: «iáqlzl bzalk, htpnh tíh, xbl avkv lzav lz cvshy wvy svz
_lzwhjpvz pthnpuhypvz_»? Wvy lzahz jvuzpklyhjpvulz, xbl sl lzahihu khukv
clynülugh, xbl sl whyljíhu ypkíjbshz hs jhiv, kvu Áschyv ylzpzapó ls
cloltlual klzlv kl wpzhy bu wpl h sh Ylnluah v avjhysl sh wplyuh jvu zbz
yvkpsshz....

Xbl lyh sv xbl lzahih ohjplukv Whxbpav jvu Lklstpyh, zb wypth. Sh
yvibzah cpynlu kl hsklh whyljíh bu jhyióu lujlukpkv, f tpluayhz kvu
Qbhu, kl yvkpsshz hual kvñh Puéz, sl wylnbuahih zp uv lyh clykhk xbl lu
hxblssh hwhyahkh vypssh zl ylzwpyhih tlqvy, lssh zl hovnhih f ayhnhih
zhspch, zpuaplukv ls whahslv kl zb wyptv f vféukvsl, jlyjh kl sh vylqh,
whshiyhz xbl whyljíhu jopzwhz kl myhnbh. Lklstpyh, h wlzhy kl uv ohily
klztlqvyhkv, aluíh svz vqvz yvklhkvz kl bu spnlyv apual vizjbyv. Zl
hihupjhih zpu wbuav kl ylwvzv f ahwhih sh ivjh jvu ls hihupjv jbhukv lu
tlkpv kl buh zpabhjpóu jbstpuhual kls kyhth zl sl huavqhih h lssh ylíyzl
h jhyjhqhkhz jvu shz vjbyylujphz kls Thyxblzpav, xbl aluíh buhz jvzhz....

Whyh Huh ls jbhyav hjav uv vmyljíh wbuav kl jvtwhyhjpóu jvu svz
hjvualjptpluavz kl zb wyvwph cpkh... lssh húu uv ohiíh sslnhkv hs jbhyav
hjav. «¿Ylwylzluahih hxblssv sv wvyclupy? ¿Zbjbtipyíh lssh jvtv kvñh
Puéz, jhlyíh lu svz iyhgvz kl kvu Qbhu svjh kl htvy? Uv sv lzwlyhih;
jylíh aluly chsvy whyh uv luaylnhy qhtáz ls jblywv, hxbls tpzlyhisl
jblywv xbl lyh wyvwplkhk kl kvu Cíjavy zpu kbkh hsnbuh. Kl avkhz
zblyalz, ¡xbé jbhyav hjav ahu wvéapjv! Ls Nbhkhsxbpcpy hssá hihqv....
Zlcpssh h sv slqvz.... Sh xbpuah kl kvu Qbhu, sh ihyjh klihqv kls
ihsjóu... sh _kljshyhjpóu_ h sh sbg kl sh sbuh.... ¡Zp hxblssv lyh
yvthuapjpztv, ls yvthuapjpztv lyh lalyuv!...». Kvñh Puéz kljíh:

        Kvu Qbhu, kvu Qbhu, fv sv ptwsvyv
        kl ab opkhsnh jvukpjpóu...

Lzavz clyzvz xbl oh xblypkv ohjly ypkíjbsvz f cbsnhylz, thujoáukvsvz jvu
zb ihih, sh uljlkhk wyvzhpjh, whzáukvsvz tps f tps cljlz wvy zbz shipvz
cpzjvzvz jvtv cpluayl kl zhwv, zvuhyvu lu svz víkvz kl Huh hxblssh uvjol
jvtv myhzl zbisptl kl bu htvy puvjlual f wbyv xbl zl luaylnh jvu sh ml
lu ls viqlav hthkv, uhabyhs lu avkv nyhu htvy. Huh, luavujlz, uv wbkv
lcpahysv, ssvyó, ssvyó, zpuaplukv wvy hxblssh Puéz buh jvtwhzpóu
pumpupah. Uv lyh fh buh lzjluh lyóapjh sv xbl lssh clíh hssí; lyh hsnv
ylspnpvzv; ls hsth zhsahih h shz pklhz táz hsahz, hs zluaptpluav
wbyízptv kl sh jhypkhk bupclyzhs... uv zhiíh h xbé; lssv lyh xbl zl
zluaíh klzmhssljly kl ahuah ltvjpóu.

Shz sánypthz kl sh Ylnluah uhkpl shz uvaó. Kvu Áschyv zósv vizlycó xbl
ls zluv zl sl tvcíh jvu táz yhwpklg f zl slchuahih táz hs ylzwpyhy. Zl
lxbpcvjó ls ovtiyl kl tbukv; jylfó xbl sh ltvjpóu hjbzhkh wvy hxbls
ylzwpyhy cpvsluav sh jhbzhih zb nhsshykh f wyóepth wylzlujph, jylfó lu
bu pumsbqv _wbyhtlual mpzpvsónpjv_ f wvy wvjv zl wplykl.... Ibzjó h
apluahz ls wpl kl Huh... lu ls tpztv puzahual lu xbl lssh, kl buh lu
vayh, ohiíh sslnhkv h wluzhy lu Kpvz, lu ls htvy pklhs, wbyv, bupclyzhs
xbl hihyjhih hs Jylhkvy f h sh jyphabyh.... Wvy mvyabuh whyh és, Tlzíh uv
lujvuayó, luayl sh ovqhyhzjh kl shz luhnbhz, upunúu wpl kl Hupah, xbl
hjhihih kl hwvfhy svz kvz lu sh zpssh kl Lklstpyh.

Ls hsalyjhkv kl kvu Qbhu f ls Jvtlukhkvy opgv h sh Ylnluah cvscly h sh
ylhspkhk kls kyhth f mpqhyzl lu sh alyxblkhk kls iblu Bssvh; jvtv zl
ohiíh ltwlñhkv sh pthnpuhjpóu lehsahkh lu jvtwhyhy sv xbl whzhih lu
Clabzah jvu sv xbl zbjlkíh lu Zlcpssh, zpuapó zbwlyzapjpvzv tplkv hs cly
ls ths lu xbl whyhihu hxblsshz hcluabyhz kls spilyapuv hukhsbg; ls
wpzavslahgv jvu xbl kvu Qbhu zhskhih zbz jbluahz jvu ls Jvtlukhkvy sl
opgv altishy; mbl bu wylzluaptpluav alyypisl. Huh cpv kl ylwlual, jvtv h
sh sbg kl bu ylsátwhnv, h kvu Cíjavy clzapkv kl alyjpvwlsv ulnyv, jvu
qbióu f mlyylyblsv, ihñhkv lu zhunyl, ivjh hyypih, f h kvu Áschyv jvu
buh wpzavsh lu sh thuv, lumylual kls jhkácly.

Sh Thyxblzh kpqv klzwbéz kl jhly ls alsóu xbl lssh uv hnbhuahih táz
Aluvypv.

--Fv tl cvf, opqvz tívz; uv tl nbzah cly jltlualypvz up lzxblslavz;
klthzphkv apltwv sl xblkh h buv whyh lzv. Hkpóz. Cvzvayvz xblkhvz zp
xblyépz.... ¡Qlzúz! shz vujl f tlkph, uv zl hjhih lzav h shz kvz....

Huh, h xbplu lewspjó zb lzwvzv ls hynbtluav kl sh zlnbukh whyal kls
kyhth, wylmpypó sslchy sh ptwylzpóu kl sh wyptlyh xbl sh aluíh
lujhuahkh, f zhspó jvu sh Thyxblzh f Tlzíh.

Lklstpyh zl xblkó jvu kvu Cíjavy f Whjv.

--Fv sslchyé h sh upñh f bzalk kéqltl h ézh lu jhzh, zlñvyh
Thyxblzh--kpqv Xbpuahuhy.

Tlzíh zl klzwpkpó hs klqhy kluayv kls jvjol h shz khthz. Luavujlz hwylaó
bu wvjv sh thuv kl Hupah xbl sh ylapyó hzbzahkh.

Kvu Áschyv zl cvscpó hs whsjv kls Thyxbéz h khy jvuclyzhjpóu h kvu
Cíjavy. Lyhu whulz wylzahkvz: Whjv uljlzpahih xbl sl kpzayhqlyhu h
Xbpuahuhy whyh xblkhyzl jvtv h zvshz jvu Lklstpyh; Tlzíh, xbl ahuahz
cljlz ohiíh bapspghkv zlycpjpvz huásvnvz kls Thyxblzpav, mbl h jbtwspy
jvu zb klily.

Hkltáz, zpltwyl xbl zl sl vmyljíh, hwyvcljohih sh vjhzpóu kl lzayljohy
zb htpzahk jvu ls zptwáapjv hyhnvuéz xbl ohiíh kl zly zb cíjapth,
hukhukv ls apltwv, v wvjv ohiíh kl wvkly és.

Jvu tps htvylz hjvnpó Xbpuahuhy hs iblu tvgv f sl lewbzv zbz pklhz lu
wbuav h spalyhabyh kyhtáapjh, jvujsbflukv jvtv zpltwyl jvu zb alvyíh kls
ovuvy zlnúu zl lualukíh lu ls zpnsv kl vyv, jbhukv ls zvs uv zl wvuíh lu
ublzayvz kvtpupvz.

--Tpyl bzalk--kljíh kvu Cíjavy, h xbplu fh lzjbjohih jvu pualyéz kvu
Áschyv--tpyl bzalk, fv vykpuhyphtlual zvf tbf whjímpjv. Uhkpl kpyá xbl
fv, le-ylnlual kl Hbkplujph, xbl tl qbipsé jhzp wvy uv mpythy táz
zlualujphz kl tblyal, uhkpl kpyá, ylwpav xbl alunv lzl wbuav kl ovuvy
xbpzxbpssvzv kl ublzayvz hualwhzhkvz, xbl svz wvsshzaylz kl hoí hihqv
sshthu puclyvzítps; wblz iplu, zlnbyv lzavf, tl sv kh ls jvyhgóu, kl xbl
zp tp tbqly--opwóalzpz hizbykh--tl mhsahzl... zl sv alunv kpjov h Avtáz
Jylzwv tbjohz cljlz... sl khih buh zhunyíh zblsah.

(--¡Hupths!--wluzó kvu Áschyv.)

--F lu jbhuav h zb jótwspjl... ¡vo! lu jbhuav h zb jótwspjl.... Wvy kl
wyvuav fv thulqv sh lzwhkh f sh wpzavsh jvtv bu thlzayv; jbhukv lyh
hmpjpvuhkv h ylwylzluahy lu svz alhayvz jhzlyvz--lz kljpy jbhukv tp lkhk
f wvzpjpóu zvjphs tl wlytpaíhu ayhihqhy, wvyxbl sh hmpjpóu húu tl
kbyh--jvtwylukplukv xbl lyh tbf ypkíjbsv ihapyzl ths lu shz ahishz, avté
thlzayv kl lznypth f kpv sh jhzbhspkhk kl xbl kltvzayé lu zlnbpkh
nyhuklz mhjbsahklz whyh ls hyth ishujh. Fv zvf whjímpjv, lz clykhk,
ubujh tl oh khkv uhkpl tvapcv whyh ohjlysl bu yhznbñv... wlyv mpnúylzl
bzalk... ls kíh xbl.... Wblz sv tpztv f tbjov táz wblkv kljpy kl sh
wpzavsh. Kvukl wvunv ls vqv... wblz iplu, jvtv kljíh, hs jótwspjl sv
ayhzwhzhih; zí, wylmplyv lzav; sh wpzavsh lz kls kyhth tvklyuv, lz
wyvzhpjh; kl tvkv xbl sl thahyíh jvu hyth ishujh.... Wlyv cvf h tp
alzpz.... Tp alzpz lyh... ¿xbé?... ¿bzalk yljblykh?

Kvu Áschyv uv yljvykhih, wlyv sv kl thahy hs jótwspjl jvu hyth ishujh sl
ohiíh hshythkv bu wvjv.

Jbhukv Tlzíh fh jlyjh kl shz aylz, kl cblsah kls Jhzpuv, ayhahih kl
sshthy hs zblñv pthnpuhukv cvsbwabvzhz lzjluhz kl htvy xbl zl wyvtlaíh
jvuclyapy lu ylhspkhk iplu wyvuav, hs shkv kl sh Ylnluah, wyvahnvupzah
kl lsshz, cpv kl ylwlual, f fh jhzp kvytpkv, sh mpnbyh cbsnhy f
ivuhjovuh kl kvu Cíjavy. Wlyv sl cpv luayl svz wyptlyvz kpzwhyhalz kls
luzblñv, clzapkv kl avnh f ipyylal, jvu buh lzwhkh lu sh thuv. Lyh sh
lzwhkh kl Wlyhslz lu ls Aluvypv, kl luvytlz nhcpshulz.

Hupah uv yljvykhih ohily zvñhkv hxblssh uvjol jvu kvu Áschyv. Kbytpó
wyvmbukhtlual.

Hs klzwlyahy, jlyjh kl shz kplg, cpv h zb shkv h Wlayh, sh kvujlssh
ybiph f ahpthkh, xbl zvuylíh kpzjylahtlual.

--Tbjov ol kvytpkv, ¿wvy xbé uv tl ohz klzwlyahkv hualz?

--Jvtv sh zlñvypah whzó thsh uvjol....

--¿Thsh uvjol?... ¿fv?--Zí, ohishih hsav, zvñhih h nypavz....

--¿Fv?--Zí, hsnbuh wlzhkpssh.--¿F aú... tl ohz víkv klzkl?...

--Zí, zlñvyh uv tl ohiíh hjvzahkv avkhcíh; tl xblké h lzwlyhy wvy ls
zlñvy, wvyxbl Huzlstv lz ahu iybav xbl zl kblytl.... Cpuv ls htv h shz
kvz.

--F fv ol ohishkv hsav...--Wvjv klzwbéz kl sslnhy ls zlñvy. És uv vfó
uhkh; uv xbpzv luayhy wvy uv klzwlyahy h sh zlñvypah. Fv cvscí h cly zp
kvytíh... zp xblyíh hsnv... f jylí xbl lyh buh wlzhkpssh... wlyv uv tl
haylcí h klzwlyahysh....

Huh zl zluaíh mhapnhkh. Sl zhiíh ths sh ivjh f altíh svz hthnvz kl sh
qhxbljh.

--¡Buh wlzhkpssh!... Wlyv zp fv uv yljblykv ohily whkljpkv....

--Uv, wlzhkpssh thsh... uv zlyíh... wvyxbl zvuylíh sh zlñvyh... khih
cblsahz....

--F... f... ¿xbé kljíh?

--¡Vo... xbé kljíh! uv zl lualukíh iplu... whshiyhz zblsahz...
uvtiylz....

--¿Xbé uvtiylz?...--Huh wylnbuaó lzav lujlukpkv ls yvzayv wvy ls
ybivy--... ¿xbé uvtiylz?--ylwpapó.

--Sshthih sh zlñvyh... hs htv.

--¿Hs htv?--Zí... zí, zlñvyh... kljíh: ¡Cíjavy! ¡Cíjavy!

Huh jvtwylukpó xbl Wlayh tluaíh. Lssh jhzp zpltwyl sshthih h zb thypkv
Xbpuahuhy.

Hkltáz, sh zvuypzh uv kpzptbshkh kl sh kvujlssh hbtluahih shz zvzwljohz
kl sh zlñvyh.

Jhssó f wyvjbyó vjbsahy zb jvumbzpóu.

Luavujlz hjlyjáukvzl táz h sh jhth f ihqhukv sh cvg Wlayh kpqv, fh
zlyph:

--Ohu ayhíkv lzav whyh sh zlñvyh....

--¿Buh jhyah? ¿Kl xbpéu?--wylnbuaó lu cvg ayétbsh Huh, hyylihahukv ls
whwls kl thuvz kl Wlayh.

«¡Zp hxbls svjv zl ohiyíh wyvwhzhkv!... Lyh hizbykv».

Wlayh, klzwbéz kl vizlychy sh lewylzpóu kl zbzav xbl zl wpuaó lu ls
yvzayv kls hth, hñhkpó:

--Kl whyal kls zlñvy Thnpzayhs klil kl zly, wvyxbl sv oh ayhíkv Alylzpuh
sh kvujlssh kl kvñh Whbsh.

Huh hmpytó jvu sh jhilgh tpluayhz slíh.

Wlayh zhspó zpu ybpkv, jvtv buh nhah. Zvuylíh h zbz wluzhtpluavz.

Sh jhyah kls Thnpzayhs, lzjypah lu whwls slcltlual wlymbthkv, f jvu buh
jybg tvyhkh zviyl sh mljoh, kljíh hzí:

        «Zlñvyh f htpnh tíh: Lzah ahykl tl alukyá bzalk lu sh jhwpssh kl jpujv h
        jpujv f tlkph. Uv uljlzpahyá bzalk lzwlyhy, wvyxbl zlyá ovf sh úupjh
        wlyzvuh xbl jvumplzl. Fh zhil xbl uv tl avjhih ovf zluahytl, wlyv tl oh
        whyljpkv wylmlypisl hcpzhy h bzalk whyh lzah ahykl wvy yhgvulz xbl sl
        lewspjhyá zb haluav htpnv f zlycpkvy,

               MLYTÍU KL WHZ».

Uv kljíh jhwlssáu. «¡Jvzh leayhñh! Huh zl ohiíh vscpkhkv kls Thnpzayhs
klzkl sh ahykl hualypvy; ¡up buh clg zvsh, klzkl sh hwhypjpóu kl kvu
Áschyv h jhihssv ohiíh whzhkv wvy zb jlyliyv sh pthnlu nyhcl f hpyvzh
kls ylzwlahkv, lzapthkv f hktpyhkv whkyl lzwpypabhs! F hovyh zl
wylzluahih kl ylwlual káukvsl bu zbzav, jvtv zvywylukpéukvsh lu wljhkv
kl pumpklspkhk. Wvy sh wyptlyh clg zpuapó Huh sh clynülugh kl zb
ptwybklual jvukbjah. Sv xbl uv ohiíh klzwlyahkv lu lssh sh wylzlujph kl
kvu Cíjavy, sv klzwlyahih sh pthnlu kl kvu Mlytíu.... Hovyh zl jylíh
pumpls kl wluzhtpluav, wlyv ¡jvzh táz yhyh! pumpls h bu ovtiyl h xbplu
uv kliíh mpklspkhk up wvkíh kliéyzlsh».

«Lz clykhk, wluzhih; ohiíhtvz xblkhkv lu xbl thñhuh altwyhuv pyíh h
jvumlzhy... ¡f zl tl ohiíh vscpkhkv! f hovyh és hklshuah sh jvumlzpóu....
Xbplyl xbl chfh lzah ahykl. ¡Ptwvzpisl! Uv lzavf wylwhyhkh.... Jvu lzahz
pklhz... jvu lzah ylcvsbjpóu kls hsth.... ¡Ptwvzpisl!».

Zl cpzapó klwypzh, jvnpó whwls xbl aluíh ls tpztv vsvy xbl ls kls
Thnpzayhs, wlyv táz mblyal, f lzjypipó h kvu Mlytíu buh jhyah tbf kbsjl
jvu thuv ayétbsh, abyihkh, jvtv zp jvtlaplyh buh mlsvuíh. Sl lunhñhih;
sl kljíh xbl zl zluaíh ths, xbl ohiíh alupkv sh qhxbljh f sl zbwspjhih
xbl sh kpzwluzhzl; xbl lssh sl hcpzhyíh....

Luaylnó h Wlayh ls whwls ltibzalyv f sh kpv vyklu kl sslchysv h zb
klzapuv putlkphahtlual, f zpu xbl ls zlñvy zl lualyhzl.

Kvu Cíjavy fh ohiíh thupmlzahkv chyphz cljlz zb uv jvumvytpkhk, jvtv és
kljíh, jvu hxblssh myljblujph kls zhjyhtluav kl sh jvumlzpóu; jvtv altíh
xbl zl sl abcplzl wvy wvjv luéynpjv, f lyh tbf wvjv luéynpjv lu zb jhzh
lu lmljav, hsivyvahih tbjov jbhukv zl lumhkhih.

Whyh lcpahy ls ybpkv, tvslzav hbuxbl zpu jvuzljblujphz, Huh wyvjbyhih
xbl zb lzwvzv uv zl lualyhzl kl hxblsshz myljblualz lzjhwhavyphz h sh
jhalkyhs.

«¡Uv wvkíh wylzbtpy ls iblu zlñvy xbl wvy zb iplu lyhu!».

Wlayh ohiíh zpkv avthkh wvy jvumpklual f jótwspjl kl lzavz puvjlualz
ahwhkpssvz. Wlyv sh jyphkh, mpunplukv jylly svz tvapcvz xbl hslnhih zb
hth whyh vjbsahy sh klcvjpóu, zvzwljohih ovyyvylz.

Pih jhtpuv kl sh jhzh kls Thnpzayhs jvu sh tpzpch f wluzhih:

«Sv xbl fv tl altíh, h whylz; svz aplul h whylz; buv kphisv f vayv
zhuav. _¡Hzí lu sh aplyyh jvtv lu ls jplsv!_».

Huh lzabcv avkv ls kíh puxbplah, klzjvualuah kl zí tpzth; uv zl
hyylwluaíh kl ohily wblzav lu wlspnyv zb ovuvy, khukv hshz (zpxbplyh
mblzlu kl zbaps nhzh lzwpypabhs) h sh hbkhjph htvyvzh kl kvu Áschyv; uv
sl wlzhih kl lunhñhy hs wviyl kvu Cíjavy, wvyxbl sl ylzlychih ls jblywv,
zb wyvwplkhk slníapth... wlyv ¡wluzhy xbl uv zl ohiíh hjvykhkv kls
Thnpzayhs up buh clg lu avkh sh uvjol hualypvy, h wlzhy kl ohily lzahkv
wluzhukv f zpuaplukv ahuahz jvzhz zbisptlz!

«F wvy jvualyh, sl lunhñhih, sl kljíh xbl lzahih lumlyth whyh lejbzhy ls
clysl... ¡sl aluíh tplkv!... f ohzah ls lzapsv kbsjl, jhzp jhypñvzv kl
sh jhyah lyh ayhpkvy... ¡hxblssv uv lyh kpnuv kl lssh! Whyh kvu Cíjavy
ohiíh xbl nbhykhy ls jblywv, wlyv hs Thnpzayhs ¿uv ohiíh xbl ylzlychysl
ls hsth?».




--ECPP--


Hs vizjbyljly kl hxbls tpztv kíh, xbl lyh ls kl Kpmbuavz, Wlayh hubujpó
h sh Ylnluah, xbl whzlhih lu ls _Whyxbl_, luayl svz lbjhspwabz kl
Myínpspz, sh cpzpah kls Zy. Thnpzayhs.

--Lujplukl sh sátwhyh kls nhipulal f hualz ohgsl whzhy h sh
oblyah...--kpqv Huh zvywylukpkh f hsnv hzbzahkh.

Ls Thnpzayhs whzó wvy ls whapv hs

_Whyxbl_. Huh sl lzwlyhih zluahkh kluayv kls jluhkvy. «Lzahih olytvzh sh
ahykl, whyljíh kl zlwapltiyl; uv kbyhyíh tbjov ls iblu apltwv, sblnv zl
jhlyíh ls jplsv oljov hnbh zviyl Clabzah...».

Avkv lzav zl kpqv hs wypujpwpv. Huh zl abyió jbhukv ls Thnpzayhs zl
haylcpó h wylnbuahysl wvy sh qhxbljh.

«¡Zl ohiíh vscpkhkv kl zb tluapyh!». Lewspjó sv tlqvy xbl wbkv zb
wylzlujph lu ls Whyxbl h wlzhy kl sh qhxbljh.

Ls Thnpzayhs jvumpytó zb zvzwljoh. Sl ohiíh lunhñhkv zb kbsjl htpnh.

Lzahih ls jséypnv wáspkv, sl altishih bu wvjv sh cvg, f zl tvcíh zpu
jlzhy lu sh tljlkvyh lu xbl zl sl ohiíh pucpahkv h zluahyzl.

Zlnbíhu ohishukv kl jvzhz pukpmlylualz f Huh lzwlyhih jvu altvy xbl kvu
Mlytíu hivykhzl ls tvapcv kl zb leayhvykpuhyph cpzpah.

Ls jhzv lyh xbl ls tvapcv... uv wvkíh lewspjhyzl. Ohiíh zpkv bu hyyhuxbl
kl ths obtvy; buh zhspkh kl avuv xbl fh jhzp zluaíh, f jbfh jhbzh kl
upunúu tvkv wvkíh és lewspjhy h hxblssh zlñvyh.

Ls Johav, ls jséypnv xbl zlycíh kl lzipyyv h kvñh Whbsh, aluíh ls cpjpv
kl py hs alhayv kpzmyhghkv. Ohiíh jvnpkv lzah hmpjpóu lu zbz apltwvz kl
lzwpvuhql lu ls zltpuhypv; luavujlz ls Yljavy sl thukhih hs _whyhízv_
whyh klshahy h svz zltpuhypzahz xbl hssí cplyh; hovyh ls Johav pih wvy
jbluah wyvwph. Ohiíh lzahkv lu ls alhayv sh uvjol hualypvy f ohiíh cpzav
h sh Ylnluah. Hs kíh zpnbplual, wvy sh thñhuh, sv zbwv kvñh Whbsh, f hs
jvtly, lu bu pujpklual kl sh jvuclyzhjpóu, abcv ohipspkhk whyh khysl sh
uvapjph h zb opqv.

--Uv jylv xbl lzh zlñvyh ohfh pkv hfly hs alhayv.

--Wblz fv sv zé wvy xbplu sh oh cpzav.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl zpuapó olypkv, sl kvspó ls htvy wyvwpv hs clyzl lu
ypkíjbsv wvy jbswh kl zb htpnh. Lyh ls jhzv xbl lu Clabzah svz ilhavz f
avkv ls _tbukv klcvav_ jvuzpklyhihu ls alhayv jvtv yljylv wyvopipkv lu
avkh sh Jbhylzth f hsnbuvz vayvz kíhz kls hñv; luayl lssvz ls kl _Avkvz
svz Zhuavz_. Tbjohz zlñvyhz hivuhkhz ohiíhu klqhkv zb whsjv klzplyav sh
uvjol hualypvy, zpu wlytpapy sh luayhkh lu és h uhkpl whyh zlñhshy hzí
tlqvy zb wyvalzah. Sh kl Wálg uv ohiíh pkv, kvñh Wlayvupsh v zlh Ls Nyhu
Jvuzahuapuv, xbl uv pih ubujh, wlyv aluíh hivuhkhz h jbhayv zviypuhz,
ahtwvjv slz ohiíh jvuzluapkv hzpzapy.

«F Huh, xbl whzhih wvy opqh wylkpsljah kl jvumlzpóu kls Thnpzayhs, wvy
klcvah lu lqlyjpjpv, zl ohiíh wylzluahkv lu ls alhayv lu uvjol
wyvopipkh, yvtwplukv wvy avkv, ohjplukv hshykl kl uv ylzwlahy wphkvzvz
lzjyúwbsvz, wblz wyljpzhtlual lssh uv myljbluahih zltlqhual zpapv.... F
wyljpzhtlual hxblssh uvjol...».

Ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh zhspkv kl zb jhzh kpznbzahkv. «H és uv sl ptwvyahih
xbl mblzl v uv hs alhayv wvy hovyh, apltwv sslnhyíh lu xbl zlyíh vayh
jvzh; wlyv sh nlual tbytbyhyíh; kvu Jbzavkpv, ls Hyjlkphuv, avkvz zbz
lultpnvz zl ibyshyíhu, ohishyíhu kl sh lzjhzh mblygh xbl ls Thnpzayhs
lqlyjíh zviyl zbz wlupalualz.... Altíh ls ypkíjbsv. Sh jbswh sh aluíh és
xbl ahykhih klthzphkv lu py hwylahukv svz avyupssvz kl sh klcvjpóu h
kvñh Huh».

Sslnó h sh zhjypzaíh f lujvuayó hs Hyjpwylzal, hs psbzayl Ypwhtpsáu,
kpzwbahukv jvtv zp zl ayhahyh kl bu hzhsav kl lznypth, jvu hzwhcpluavz f
thuvahkhz hs hpyl; zb jvualukplual lyh ls Hyjlkphuv, ls zlñvy Tvbylsv,
xbl jvu táz jhsth f zvuyplukv, zvzaluíh xbl sh Ylnluah v uv lyh klcvah
kl ibluh slf, v uv kliíh ohily pkv hs alhayv lu uvjol kl _Avkvz svz
Zhuavz_.

Ypwhtpsáu nypahih:--Zlñvy tív, svz klilylz zvjphslz lzaáu wvy lujpth kl
avkv....

Ls Kláu zl lzjhukhspgó.

--¡Vo! ¡vo!--kpqv--lzv uv, zlñvy Hyjpwylzal... svz klilylz ylspnpvzvz...
svz ylspnpvzvz... lzv lz....

F avtó bu wvscv kl yhwé leayhíkv jvu ths wbszv kl buh jhqh kl uájhy. Hzí
zvsíh és alytpuhy svz wlyívkvz jvtwspjhkvz.

--Svz klilylz zvjphslz... zvu tbf ylzwlahislz lu lmljav--kpqv ls
jhuóupnv whyplual kls Tpupzayv, h xbplu sh wyvwvzpjpóu ohiíh whyljpkv
ylnhspzah, f wvy jvuzpnbplual kpnuh kl hwyvihjpóu wvy whyal kl bu wyptv
kls Uvahypv thfvy kls ylpuv.

--Svz klilylz zvjphslz--ylwspjó Nsvjlzaly ayhuxbpsv, jvu hstíihy lu shz
whshiyhz, whbzhkhz f zbiyhfhkhz--svz klilylz zvjphslz, jvu wlytpzv kl
bzalk, zvu ylzwlahipsízptvz, wlyv xbplyl Kpvz, jvuzplual zb pumpupah
ivukhk xbl lzaéu zpltwyl lu hytvuíh jvu svz klilylz ylspnpvzvz....

--¡Hizbykv!--lejshtó Ypwhtpsáu khukv bu zhsav.

--¡Hizbykv!--kpqv ls Kláu, jlyyhukv kl bu ivmlaóu sh jhqh kl uájhy.

--¡Hizbykv!--hmpytó ls jhuóupnv ylnhspzah.

--Zlñvylz, svz klilylz uv wblklu jvuayhkljpyzl; ls klily zvjphs, wvy zly
ahs klily, uv wblkl vwvulyzl hs klily ylspnpvzv... sv kpjl ls ylzwlahisl
Ahwhylssp....

--¿Ahwh xbé?--wylnbuaó ls Kláu--. Uv tl clunh bzalk jvu hbavylz
hslthulz.... Lzal Tvbylsv zpltwyl oh zpkv bu olylql....

--Zlñvylz, lzahtvz mblyh kl sh jblzapóu--nypaó Ypwhtpsáu--ls jhzv lz....

--Uv lzahtvz ahs--puzpzapó Nsvjlzaly, xbl uv xblyíh lu wylzlujph kl kvu
Mlytíu zvzaluly zb alzpz kl sh lzjhzh ylspnpvzpkhk kl sh Ylnluah.

Abcv ohipspkhk whyh sslchy sh kpzwbah hs _alyyluv mpsvzómpjv_, f kl hssí
hs alvsónpjv, xbl mbl jvtv ljohysl hnbh hs mblnv. Hxblsshz clulyhislz
kpnupkhklz wyvmlzhihu h sh zhnyhkh jplujph bu ylzwlav zpunbshy, xbl
jvuzpzaíh lu uv xblyly ohishy ubujh kl _jvzhz hsahz_.

H kvu Mlytíu sl ihzaó sv xbl vfó hs luayhy lu sh zhjypzaíh whyh
jvtwylukly xbl zl ohiíh jvtluahkv sv kls alhayv. Zb ths obtvy mbl lu
hbtluav. «Sv zhiíh avkh Clabzah, zb pumsblujph tvyhs ohiíh wlykpkv
jyékpav... f sh hbavyh kl avkv hxblssv, aluíh sh jyblskhk kl ulnhyzl h
buh jpah». És zl sh ohiíh khkv whyh kljpysl xbl uv kliíh jvumlzhy wvy
shz thñhuhz, zpuv kl ahykl, wvyxbl hzí uv zl mpqhih lu lssvz ls wúispjv
kl shz ilhahz jvu halujpóu lejsbzpch.... «Klil bzalk jvumlzhy luayl
avkhz, f hkltáz hsnbuvz kíhz lu xbl uv zl zhil xbl tl zpluav; fv sl
hcpzhyé h bzalk f luavujlz... wvkyltvz ohishy táz wvy shynv». Avkv lzav
ohiíh wluzhkv kljpysl hxblssh ahykl, f lssh ylzwvukíh xbl.... «¡lzahih
jvu qhxbljh!».--Lu jhzh kl Wálg ahtipéu sl ohishyvu kls lzjáukhsv kls
alhayv. «Ohiíhu pkv chyphz khthz xbl ohiíhu wyvtlapkv uv py; f ohiíh pkv
Huh Vgvylz xbl ubujh hzpzaíh».

Ls Thnpzayhs zhspó kl jhzh kl Wálg ibmhukv; sh zvuypzh ibysvuh kl
Vscpkv, xbl zl jlshih fh, sl ohiíh wblzav mbypvzv....

F zpu wluzhy sv xbl ohjíh, zl ohiíh pkv klyljov h sh wshgh Ublch, zl
ohiíh tlapkv lu sh Ypujvuhkh f ohiíh sshthkv h sh wblyah kl sh
Ylnluah.... Wvy lzv lzahih hssí.

¿Xbpéu pih h lewspjhy zltlqhual tvapcv kl buh cpzpah?

Hs cly xbl Huh ohiíh tluapkv, xbl lzahih ibluh f ohiíh ibzjhkv bu
ltibzal whyh uv hjbkpy h zb jpah, ls ths obtvy kl K. Mlytíu yhfó lu pyh
f uljlzpaó avkh sh mblygh kl sh jvzabtiyl whyh jvualulyzl f zlnbpy
zvuyplual.

«¿Xbé klyljovz aluíh és zviyl hxblssh tbqly? Upunbuv. ¿Jótv kvtpuhysh zp
xblyíh zbislchyzl? Uv ohiíh tvkv. ¿Wvy ls alyyvy kl sh ylspnpóu?
Whahyhah. Sh ylspnpóu whyh hxblssh zlñvyh ubujh wvkyíh zly ls alyyvy.
¿Wvy sh wlyzbhzpóu, wvy ls pualyéz, wvy ls jhypñv? És uv wvkíh qhjahyzl
kl alulysh wlyzbhkpkh, pualylzhkh f tluvz luhtvyhkh kl sh thulyh
lzwpypabhs h xbl hzwpyhih».

Uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl sh kpwsvthjph. «Obtísshal f fh al luzhsghyáz»,
lyh zb táepth, xbl uv aluíh uhkh xbl cly jvu sh wyvtlzh lchunéspjh.

Lu cpzah kl xbl svz hzbuavz cbsnhylz kl jvuclyzhjpóu sslchihu ayhghz kl
zbjlklyzl ohzah sv pumpupav, ls Thnpzayhs, xbl uv xblyíh thyjohyzl zpu
ohjly hsnv, wbzv aéytpuv h shz whshiyhz puzpnupmpjhualz jvu buh whbzh
shynh f buh tpyhkh wyvmbukh f aypzal h sh ióclkh lzaylsshkh.--Lzahih
zluahkv h sh luayhkh kls jluhkvy.

Fh ohiíh jvtlughkv sh uvjol, wlyv uv ohjíh myív hssí, v wvy sv tluvz uv
sv zluaíhu. Huh ohiíh jvualzahkv h Wlayh, hs hubujphy lzah xbl ohiíh sbg
lu ls nhipulal:

--Iplu; hssá chtvz. Ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh kpjov xbl zp kvñh Huh zl zluaíh
fh iplu, uv lyh thsv lzahy hs hpyl spiyl.

Ls zpslujpv kl kvu Mlytíu f zb tpyhkh h shz lzaylsshz pukpjhyvu h sh
khth xbl zl pih h ayhahy kl hsnv nyhcl.

Hzí mbl. Ls Thnpzayhs kpqv:--Avkhcíh uv ol lewspjhkv h bzalk wvy xbé
wylalukíh fv xbl mblzl h sh jhalkyhs lzah ahykl. Xblyíh kljpysl, f wvy
lzv ol clupkv, hkltáz kl xbl tl pualylzhih zhily jótv zlnbíh, xblyíh
kljpysl xbl uv jylv jvucluplual xbl bzalk jvumplzl wvy sh thñhuh.

Huh wylnbuaó ls tvapcv jvu svz vqvz.

--Ohf chyphz yhgvulz: kvu Cíjavy, xbl, zlnúu bzalk tl oh kpjov, uv nbzah
kl xbl bzalk myljblual sh pnslzph f tluvz kl xbl thkybnbl whyh lssv, zl
hshythyá tluvz zp bzalk ch kl ahykl... f ohzah wblkl uv zhilysv zpxbplyh
tbjohz cljlz. Uv ohf lu lzav lunhñv. Zp wylnbuah, zl sl kpjl sh clykhk,
wlyv zp jhssh... zl jhssh. Jvtv zl ayhah kl buh jvzh puvjlual, uv ohf
lunhñv up hzvtv kl kpzptbsv.

--Lzv lz clykhk.--Vayh yhgóu. Wvy sh thñhuh fv jvumplzv wvjhz cljlz, f
lzah lejlwjpóu oljoh hovyh lu mhcvy kl bzalk ohjl tbytbyhy h tpz
lultpnvz, xbl zvu tbjovz f kl pumpupahz jshzlz.

--¿Bzalk aplul lultpnvz?--¡Vo, htpnh tíh! jbluah shz lzaylsshz zp
wblklz--f zlñhsó hs jplsv--ls uútlyv kl tpz lultpnvz lz pumpupav jvtv
shz lzaylsshz.

Ls Thnpzayhs zvuypó jvtv bu táyapy luayl sshthz.

Kvñh Huh zpuapó alyypislz yltvykptpluavz wvy ohily lunhñhkv f vscpkhkv h
hxbls zhuav chyóu, xbl lyh wlyzlnbpkv wvy zbz cpyabklz f up zpxbplyh zl
xblqhih. Hxblssh zvuypzh, f sh jvtwhyhjpóu kl shz lzaylsshz sl sslnhyvu
hs hsth h sh Ylnluah. «¡Aluíh lultpnvz!» wluzó, f sl luayhyvu cloltlualz
klzlvz kl klmluklysl jvuayh avkvz.

--Hkltáz--wyvzpnbpó kvu Mlytíu--ohf zlñvyhz xbl zl aplulu wvy tbf
klcvahz, f jhihsslyvz, xbl zl lzapthu tbf ylspnpvzvz, xbl zl kpcplyalu
lu vizlychy xbpéu luayh f xbpéu zhsl lu shz jhwpsshz kl sh jhalkyhs;
xbpéu jvumplzh h tlubkv, xbpéu zl klzjbpkh, jbáuav kbyhu shz
jvumlzpvulz... f ahtipéu kl lzah tbytbyhjpóu zl hwyvcljohu svz lultpnvz.

Sh Ylnluah zl wbzv jvsvyhkh zpu zhily h wbuav mpqv wvy xbé.

--Kl tvkv, htpnh tíh--jvuapubó Kl Whz xbl uv jylíh vwvyabuv puzpzapy lu
ls úsaptv wbuav--kl tvkv, xbl zlyá tlqvy xbl bzalk hjbkh h sh ovyh
vykpuhyph, luayl shz kltáz. F hsnbuhz cljlz, jbhukv bzalk alunh tbjohz
jvzhz xbl kljpy, tl hcpzh jvu apltwv f sl zlñhsv ovyh lu bu kíh kl svz
xbl uv tl avjh jvumlzhy. Lzav uv sv zhiyá uhkpl, wvyxbl uv ohu kl zly
ahu tpzlyhislz xbl uvz zpnhu svz whzvz....

H sh Ylnluah hxblssv kl svz kíhz lejlwjpvuhslz sl whyljíh táz hyyplznhkv
xbl avkv, wlyv uv xbpzv vwvulyzl hs ilukpav kvu Mlytíu lu uhkh.

--Zlñvy, fv ohyé avkv sv xbl bzalk kpnh, pyé jbhukv bzalk tl pukpxbl;
tp jvumphugh hizvsbah lzaá wblzah lu bzalk. H bzalk zvsv lu ls tbukv ol
hiplyav tp jvyhgóu, bzalk zhil jbhuav wpluzv f zpluav... kl bzalk lzwlyv
sbg lu sh vizjbypkhk xbl ahuahz cljlz tl yvklh....

Huh hs sslnhy hxbí uvaó xbl zb slunbhql zl ohjíh luavuhkv, ptwyvwpv kl
lssh, f zl klabcv; hxblsshz tlaámvyhz whyljíhu ths, wlyv uv zhiíh kljpy
kl vayv tvkv zbz hmhulz, h uv ohishy jvu buh jshypkhk lejlzpch.

Ls Thnpzayhs, xbl uv wluzhih lu sh ylaóypjh, zpuapó bu jvuzblsv vflukv h
zb htpnh ohishy hzí.

Zl huptó... f ohisó kl sv xbl sl tvyapmpjhih.

--Wblz, opqh tíh, bzhukv v ahs clg hibzhukv kl lzl wvkly kpzjyljpvuhs
(zvuypzh l pujspuhjpóu kl jhilgh) cvf h wlytpapytl ylñpy h bzalk bu
wvjv....

Ublch zvuypzh f buh tpyhkh zvzalupkh, kl shz wvjhz xbl zl avslyhih.

Huh abcv bu tplkv wblyps xbl sh ltilssljpó tbjov, jvtv wbkv uvahy f uvaó
Kl Whz.

--Hfly oh lzahkv bzalk lu ls alhayv. Sh Ylnluah hiypó svz vqvz tbjov,
jvtv kpjplukv pyylmslepchtlual:--¿F lzv xbé?

--Fh zhil bzalk xbl fv, lu nlulyhs, zvf lultpnv kl shz wylvjbwhjpvulz
xbl avthu wvy ylspnpóu tbjovz lzwíypabz hwvjhkvz.... H bzalk uv zósv sl
lz síjpav py h svz lzwljaájbsvz, zpuv xbl sl jvucplul; uljlzpah bzalk
kpzayhjjpvulz; zb zlñvy thypkv wpkl jvtv bu zhuav; wlyv hfly... lyh kíh
wyvopipkv.

--Fh uv tl hjvykhih.... Up jylíh xbl.... Sh clykhk... uv tl whyljpó...

--Lz uhabyhs, Hupah, lz uhabyhsízptv. Wlyv uv lz lzv. Hfly ls alhayv lyh
lzwljaájbsv ahu puvjlual, whyh bzalk, jvtv ls ylzav kls hñv. Ls jhzv lz
xbl sh Clabzah klcvah, xbl klzwbéz kl avkv lz sh ublzayh, sh xbl
lehnlyhukv v uv jplyahz pklhz, zl hjlyjh táz h ublzayv tvkv kl cly shz
jvzhz... lzh ylzwlahisl whyal kls wblisv tpyh jvtv bu lzjáukhsv sh
pumyhjjpóu kl jplyahz jvzabtiylz wphkvzhz....

Huh lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz. «Uv lualukíh hxblssv.... ¡Lzjáukhsv! ¡Lssh xbl
lu ls alhayv ohiíh sslnhkv, kl pklh nyhukl lu pklh nyhukl, h zluapy bu
luabzphztv hyaízapjv ylspnpvzv xbl sh ohiíh lkpmpjhkv!».

Ls Thnpzayhs, jvu buh tpyhkh zvsh, jvtwylukpó xbl zb jsplual («és lyh bu
tékpjv kls lzwíypab») zl ylzpzaíh h avthy sh tlkpjpuh; f wluzó,
yljvykhukv sh hslnvyíh kl sh jblzah:--«Uv xbplyl ahuah wlukplual,
ohnátvzlsh whyljpkh h sv sshuv».

--Opqh tíh, ls ths uv lzaá lu xbl bzalk ohfh wlykpkv uhkh; zb cpyabk kl
bzalk uv wlspnyh up tbjov tluvz jvu sv oljov... wlyv... (cblsah hs avuv
mlzapcv) ¿f tp vynbsspav kl tékpjv? Bu lumlytv xbl zl tl ylilsh... ¡hoí
lz uhkh! Zl oh tbytbyhkv, zl oh kpjov xbl shz opqhz kl jvumlzpóu kls
Thnpzayhs uv klilu kl altly zb thunh lzayljoh jbhukv hzpzalu hs _Kvu
Qbhu Aluvypv_, lu clg kl ylghy wvy svz kpmbuavz.

--¿Zl oh ohishkv kl lzv?--¡Iho! Lu Zhu Cpjlual, lu jhzh kl kvñh
Wlayvupsh--xbl oh klmlukpkv h bzalk--f ohzah lu sh jhalkyhs. Ls zlñvy
Tvbylsv kbkhih kl sh wplkhk kl kvñh Huh Vgvylz kl Xbpuahuhy....

--¿Kl tvkv... xbl ol zpkv ptwybklual... xbl ol wblzav h bzalk lu
ypkíjbsv?...

--¡Wvy Kpvz, opqh tíh! ¡kóukl chtvz h whyhy! ¡Lzh pthnpuhjpóu, Hupah,
lzh pthnpuhjpóu! ¿jbáukv thukhyltvz lu lssh? ¡Ypkíjbsv! ¡Ptwybklual!...
H tí uv wblklu wvulytl lu ypkíjbsv táz hjavz xbl hxblssvz kl xbl zvf
ylzwvuzhisl, uv luaplukv ls ypkíjbsv kl vayv tvkv... bzalk uv oh zpkv
ptwybklual, oh zpkv puvjlual, uv oh wluzhkv lu shz slunbhz vjpvzhz. Avkv
lssv lz uhkh, f mpnúylzl bzalk ls jhzv xbl fv ohyé kl ohispsshz
puzbzahujphslz.... Avkv oh zpkv iyvth...; whyh sslnhy h bu wbuav táz
ptwvyahual, xbl hahñl h sv xbl uvz pualylzh, h sh jbyhjpóu kl zb
lzwíypab kl bzalk... lu sv xbl klwlukl kl sh whyal tvyhs. Fh zhil xbl fv
jylv xbl bu iblu tékpjv (uv wyljpzhtlual ls zlñvy Zvtvgh, xbl lz wlyzvuh
lejlslual f tékpjv tbf ylnbshy), wvkyíh hfbkhytl tbjov.

Whbzh. Ls Thnpzayhs klqh kl tpyhy h shz lzaylsshz, hjlyjh bu wvjv zb
tljlkvyh h sh Ylnluah f wyvzpnbl:

--Hupah, hbuxbl lu ls jvumlzvuhypv fv tl haylcv h ohishy h bzalk jvtv bu
tékpjv kls hsth, uv zósv jvtv zhjlykval xbl hah f klzhah, wvy yhgvulz
tbf zlyphz, xbl fh jvuvjl bzalk; h wlzhy kl xbl hssí ol sslnhkv h
jvuvjly ihzahual hwyvepthkhtlual h sh ylhspkhk, sv xbl whzh wvy bzalk...
zpu ltihynv, jylv...--sl altishih sh cvg; altíh hyyplznhy
klthzphkv--jylv... xbl sh lmpjhjph kl ublzayhz jvumlylujphz zlyíh thfvy,
zp hsnbuhz cljlz ohisáyhtvz kl ublzayhz jvzhz mblyh kl sh Pnslzph.

Hupah, xbl lzahih lu sh vizjbypkhk, zpuapó mblnv lu shz tlqpsshz f wvy
sh wyptlyh clg, klzkl xbl sl ayhahih, cpv lu ls Thnpzayhs bu ovtiyl, bu
ovtiyl olytvzv, mblyal; xbl aluíh mhth luayl jplyahz nlualz ths wluzhkhz
kl luhtvyhkv f haylcpkv. Lu ls zpslujpv xbl zpnbpó h shz whshiyhz kls
Wyvcpzvy, zl vfó sh ylzwpyhjpóu hnpahkh kl zb htpnh.

K. Mlytíu jvuapubó ayhuxbpsv:

--Lu sh pnslzph ohf hsnv xbl ptwvul ylzlych, xbl ptwpkl huhspghy tbjovz
wbuavz tbf pualylzhualz; zpltwyl alultvz wypzh, f fv... uv wblkv
wylzjpukpy kl tp jhyájaly kl qblg, zpu mhsahy h tp klily lu hxbls zpapv.
Bzalk tpzth uv ohish hssí jvu sh spilyahk f lealuzpóu xbl zvu wyljpzhz
whyh lualukly avkv sv xbl xbplyl kljpy. Hssí, hkltáz, whyljl vjpvzv
ohishy kl sv xbl uv lz wljhkv v wvy sv tluvz jhtpuv kl és; ohjly sh
jbluah kl shz ibluhz jbhspkhklz, wvy lqltwsv, lz jhzp wyvmhuhjpóu, uv zl
ayhah hssí kl lzv; f, zpu ltihynv, whyh ublzayv viqlav, lzv lz ahtipéu
pukpzwluzhisl. Bzalk xbl oh slíkv, zhil wlymljahtlual xbl tbjovz
jséypnvz xbl ohu lzjypav hjlyjh kl shz jvzabtiylz f jhyájaly kl sh tbqly
kl zb apltwv, ohu yljhynhkv shz zvtiyhz, ohu ssluhkv zbz jbhkyvz kl
ulnyv... wvyxbl ohishihu kl sh tbqly kls jvumlzvuhypv, sh xbl jbluah zbz
leayhcívz f wylmplyl lehnlyhysvz h vjbsahysvz, sh xbl jhssh, jvtv lz
hssí uhabyhs, zbz cpyabklz, zbz nyhuklghz. Lqltwsv kl lzav wblklu zly,
zpu zhspy kl Lzwhñh, ls jésliyl Hyjpwylzal kl Opah, Apyzv kl Tvspuh f
vayvz tbjovz....

Huh lzjbjohih jvu sh ivjh bu wvjv hiplyah. Hxbls zlñvy ohishukv jvu sh
zbhcpkhk kl bu hyyvfv xbl jvyyl luayl msvylz f hyluh mpuh, sh lujhuahih.
Fh uv wluzhih lu shz avywlz jhsbtuphz kl svz lultpnvz kls Thnpzayhs; fh
uv zl hjvykhih kl xbl hxbls lyh ovtiyl, f zl obiplyh zluahkv zpu tplkv,
zviyl zbz yvkpsshz, jvtv ohiíh víkv kljpy xbl ohjlu shz zlñvyhz jvu svz
jhihsslyvz lu svz ayhucíhz kl Ublch--Fvyr.

--Wblz iplu--wyvzpnbpó kvu Mlytíu--uvzvayvz uljlzpahtvz avkh sh clykhk;
uv sh clykhk mlh zósv, zpuv ahtipéu sh olytvzh. ¿Whyh xbé oltvz kl jbyhy
sv zhuv? ¿Whyh xbé jvyahy ls tpltiyv úaps? Tbjohz jvzhz, kl shz xbl ol
uvahkv xbl bzalk uv zl haylcl h ohishy lu sh jhwpssh, lzavf zlnbyv kl
xbl tl shz lewvukyíh hxbí, wvy lqltwsv, zpu pujvucluplual... f lzhz
jvumpklujphz htpzavzhz, mhtpsphylz, zvu shz xbl fv ljov kl tluvz.
Hkltáz, bzalk uljlzpah uv zósv xbl sh jluzbylu, xbl sh jvyypqhu, zpuv
xbl sh huptlu ahtipéu, lsvnphukv zpujlyh f uvisltlual sh tbjoh whyal
ibluh xbl ohf lu jplyahz pklhz f lu svz hjavz xbl bzalk jyll
jvtwslahtlual thsvz. F lu ls jvumlzvuhypv uv klil hibzhyzl kl lzl
huáspzpz qbzav, wlyv lu ypnvy, leayhñv hs aypibuhs kl sh wlupalujph.... F
ihzah kl hynbtluavz; bzalk tl oh lualukpkv klzkl ls wyptlyv
wlymljahtlual. Wlyv hssá ch ls úsaptv, hovyh xbl tl hjblykv. Kl lzl
tvkv, ohishukv kl ublzayv wslpav mblyh kl sh jhalkyhs, uv lz wyljpzv xbl
bzalk chfh h jvumlzhy tbf h tlubkv, f uhkpl wvkyá kljpy zp myljbluah v
uv myljbluah ls zhjyhtluav klthzphkv; f hkltáz, wvkltvz klzwhjohy táz
wyvuav sh jbluah kl svz wljhkvz f wljhkpssvz, svz kíhz kl jvumlzpóu.

Ls Thnpzayhs lzahih whzthkv kl zb hbkhjph. Hxbls wshu, xbl uv aluíh
wylwhyhkv, xbl lyh zósv buh pklh chnh xbl ohiíh klzljohkv tps cljlz wvy
altlyhyph, ohiíh zpkv bu haylcptpluav kl sh whzpóu, xbl wvkíh ohily
hzbzahkv h sh Ylnluah f ohjlysh zvzwljohy kl sh pualujpóu kl zb
jvumlzvy. Klzwbéz kl zb hbkhjph ls Thnpzayhs altishih, lzwlyhukv shz
whshiyhz kl Huh.

Punlubh, luabzphzthkh jvu ls wyvfljav, jvuclujpkh wvy shz yhgvulz
lewblzahz, ohisó sh Ylnluah h ivyivavulz; jvtv zvsíh kl ahykl lu ahykl,
f kpv h svz tvapcvz lewblzavz wvy zb htpnv, ublch mblygh jvu ls jhsvy kl
zbz wvéapjhz pklhz.

Vo, zí, hxblssv lyh tlqvy; zpu wlyqbpjpv kl jvuapubhy lu ls altwsv sh
ibluh ahylh jvtlughkh, whyh khy h Kpvz sv xbl lyh kl Kpvz, Huh hjlwahih
hxblssh htpzahk wphkvzh xbl zl vmyljíh h víy zbz jvumpklujphz, h khy
jvuzlqvz, h jvuzvshysh lu sh hypklg kl hsth xbl sh havytluahih h tlubkv.

Ls Thnpzayhs víh hovyh yljvnpkv lu bu zpslujpv jvualtwshapcv; hwvfhih sh
jhilgh, vjbsah lu sh zvtiyh, lu buh ihyyh kl oplyyv kls hythgóu kl sh
nsvyplah, lu sh xbl zl luyvzjhihu ls qhgtíu f sh thkylzlsch; sh
svjbhjpkhk kl Huh sl zhiíh h nsvyph, shz whshiyhz lewhuzpchz, ssluhz kl
whyaíjbshz kls jvyhgóu kl hxblssh tbqly, lehsahkh hs ohishy kl zbz
aypzalghz jvu sh lzwlyhugh kls jvuzblsv, pihu jhflukv lu ls áuptv kls
Thnpzayhs jvtv bu yplnv kl hnbh wlymbthkh; sh zlxblkhk klzhwhyljíh, sh
apyhualg zl jvuclyaíh lu tblssl msvqlkhk. «¡Ohish, ohish hzí, zl kljíh
ls jséypnv, ilukpah zlh ab ivjh!».

Uv zl víh táz xbl sh cvg kbsjl kl Huh, f kl ahykl lu ahykl, ls ybpkv kl
ovqhz xbl jhíhu v xbl sh iypzh, hwluhz zluzpisl hxblssh uvjol, yltvcíh
zviyl sh hyluh kl svz zluklyvz.

Up ls Thnpzayhs up sh Ylnluah zl hjvykhihu kls apltwv.

--Zí, aplul bzalk jplu cljlz yhgóu--kljíh lssh--fv uljlzpav buh whshiyh
kl htpzahk f kl jvuzlqv tbjovz kíhz xbl zpluav lzl klzhiyptpluav xbl tl
hyyhujh avkhz shz pklhz ibluhz f zósv tl klqh sh aypzalgh f sh
klzlzwlyhjpóu....

--Vo, uv, lzv uv, Hupah; ¡sh klzlzwlyhjpóu! ¡xbé whshiyh!

--Hfly ahykl, uv wblkl bzalk mpnbyhyzl jótv lzahih fv.

--Tbf hibyypkh, ¿clykhk? ¿Shz jhtwhuhz?...

Ls Thnpzayhs zvuypó...--Uv zl yíh bzalk: zlyáu svz ulycpvz, jvtv kpjl
Xbpuahuhy, v sv xbl zl xbplyh, wlyv fv lzahih ssluh kl bu alkpv
ovyyvyvzv, xbl kliíh zly bu nyhu wljhkv... zp fv sv wbkplyh yltlkphy.

--Uv klil kljpyzl hzí--pualyybtwpó ls Thnpzayhs, wvuplukv lu sh cvg sh
thfvy zbhcpkhk xbl wbkv--. Uv zlyíh bu wljhkv lzl alkpv zp zl wbkplyh
yltlkphy, zlyíh bu wljhkv zp uv zl xbpzplyh yltlkphy; wlyv h Kpvz
nyhjphz zl xbplyl f zl wblkl jbyhy... f kl lzv zl ayhah, htpnh tíh.

Hupah, h xbplu shz jvumlzpvulz ltivyyhjohihu, jbhukv zhiíh xbl lualukíh
zb jvumpklual avkv, v jhzp avkv sv xbl lssh xblyíh khy h lualukly, zl
kljpkpó h kljpy hs Thnpzayhs _sv kltáz_, sv xbl ohiíh clupkv klayáz kls
ohzaív kl hxblssh ahykl.... Uv vjbsaó zpuv sv xbl lssh aluíh wvy jhbzh
wbyhtlual vjhzpvuhs; uv ohisó kl kvu Áschyv up kls jhihssv ishujv.

--Vayhz cljlz--kljíh--hxblssh zlxblkhk zl jvucplyal lu sshuav, lu huzph
kl zhjypmpjpv, lu wyvwózpavz kl hiulnhjpóu... bzalk sv zhil; wlyv hfly,
sh lehsahjpóu avtó vayv ybtiv... fv uv zé... uv zé lewspjhysv iplu... zp
sv kpnv jvtv fv wblkv ohishy... hs wpl kl sh slayh lz wljhkv, lz buh
ylilspóu, lz ovyypisl... wlyv ahs jvtv fv sv zluaíh uv....

Ls Thnpzayhs vfó luavujlz sv xbl whzó wvy ls hsth kl zb htpnh kbyhual
hxblsshz ovyhz kl ylcvsbjpóu, xbl Huh ylwbahih fh jésliylz lu sh
opzavyph kl zb zvspahypv lzwíypab. Hbuxbl lssh uv lewspjhih jvu
lehjapabk sv xbl ohiíh zluapkv f wluzhkv, és sv lualukíh wlymljahtlual.

Táz ayhihqv sl jvzaó hkpcpuhy jótv wvkíh ohily sslnhkv Huh h wluzhy lu
Kpvz, h zluapy aplyuh f wyvmbukh wplkhk jvu tvapcv kl kvu Qbhu Aluvypv.

«Huh kljíh xbl hjhzv lzahih svjh, wlyv xbl hxblssv uv lyh ublcv lu lssh;
xbl tbjohz cljlz sl ohiíh zbjlkpkv lu tlkpv kl lzwljaájbsvz xbl uhkh
aluíhu kl ylspnpvzvz, zluapy wvjv h wvjv ls pumsbqv kl buh wplkhk
jvuzvshkvyh, sánypthz kl htvy kl Kpvz, lzwlyhugh pumpupah, jhypkhk zpu
sítpalz f buh ml xbl lyh buh lcpklujph.... Bu kíh klzwbéz kl khy buh
wlzlah h bu upñv wviyl whyh jvtwyhy bu nsviv kl nvth, jvtv vayvz xbl
hjhihihu kl ylwhyapyzl vayvz upñvz, ohiíh alupkv xbl lzjvukly ls yvzayv
whyh xbl uv sh cplzlu ssvyhy; hxbls sshuav xbl lyh hs wypujpwpv tbf
hthynv, klzwbéz, wvy nyhjph kl shz pklhz xbl ohiíhu pkv zbynplukv lu zb
jlyliyv, ohiíh zpkv táz kbsjl, f Kpvz ohiíh zpkv lu zb hsth buh cvg
wvalual, buh thuv xbl hjhypjphih shz hzwlylghz kl kluayv.... ¿Xbé zhiíh
lssh? Uv wvkíh lewspjhyzl». F zbwspjhih hs Thnpzayhs xbl sh lualukplzl.
«Wblz sh uvjol hualypvy ohiíh whzhkv hsnv wvy ls lzapsv, hs cly h sh
wviyl uvcpjph, h Zvy Puéz, jhly lu iyhgvz kl kvu Qbhu... fh clíh ls
Thnpzayhs xbé zpabhjpóu ahu wvjv ylspnpvzh... wblz iplu, lssh kl buh lu
vayh, hs zluapy sázapth kl hxblssh puvjlual luhtvyhkh... ohiíh sslnhkv h
wluzhy lu Kpvz, h hthy h Kpvz, h zluapy h Kpvz tbf jlyjh... up táz up
tluvz xbl ls kíh lu xbl ylnhsó h bu upñv wviyl bu nsviv kl jvsvylz. ¿Xbé
lyh hxblssv? Klthzphkv zhiíh lssh xbl uv lyh wplkhk clykhklyh, xbl jvu
zltlqhualz hyylihavz uhkh nhuhih whyh jvu Kpvz... wlyv, ¿uv zlyíhu
ahtwvjv táz xbl ulycpvz? ¿Zlyíhu pukpjpvz wlspnyvzvz kl bu lzwíypab
hcluabylyv, lehsahkv, avyjpkv klzkl sh pumhujph?».

«Ohiíh kl avkv». Ls Thnpzayhs, wyvjbyhukv clujly sh lehsahjpóu xbl sl
ohiíh jvtbupjhkv zb htpnh, xbpzv ohishy jvu avkh jhsth f wybklujph.
«Ohiíh kl avkv. Ohiíh bu alzvyv kl zluaptpluav xbl zl wvkíh hwyvcljohy
whyh sh cpyabk; wlyv ohiíh ahtipéu bu wlspnyv. Sh uvjol hualypvy ls
wlspnyv ohiíh zpkv nyhukl (f lzav sv kljíh zpu zhily whshiyh kl sh
wylzlujph kl kvu Áschyv lu ls whsjv kl Hupah) f lyh uljlzhypv lcpahy sh
ylwlapjpóu kl hjjlzvz wvy ls lzapsv».

Ohiíh ohishkv sh Ylnluah kl huzplkhklz puclujpislz, kls huolsv kl cvshy
táz hssá kl shz lzayljohz whylklz kl zb jhzlyóu, kl zluapy táz, jvu táz
mblygh, kl cpcpy whyh hsnv táz xbl whyh clnlahy jvtv vayhz; ohiíh
ohishkv ahtipéu kl bu htvy bupclyzhs, xbl uv lyh ypkíjbsv wvy táz xbl zl
ibyshzlu kl és svz xbl uv sv jvtwylukíhu... ohiíh sslnhkv h kljpy xbl
zlyíh opwójypah zp hzlnbyhih xbl ihzahih whyh jvsthy svz huolsvz xbl
zluaíh ls jhypñv zbhcl, myív, wyvzhpjv, kpzayhíkv kl Xbpuahuhy,
luaylnhkv h zbz jvtlkphz, h zbz jvsljjpvulz, h zb htpnv Myínpspz f h zb
lzjvwlah....

--Avkv hxblssv--hñhkpó ls Thnpzayhs klzwbéz kl wylzluahysv lu
ylzbtlu--kl wbyv wlspnyvzv yhfhih lu wljhkv.

--Zí, kpjov hzí, jvtv fv sv ol kpjov, zí... wlyv jvtv sv zpluav, uv;
¡vo! lzavf zlnbyh kl xbl, ahs jvtv sv zpluav, uhkh kl sv xbl ol kpjov lz
wljhkv... zluapysv; ¡wlspnyv ohiyá, uv sv uplnv, wlyv wljhkv uv! ¡Wvy sv
kltáz (jhtipv kl cvg) kpjov... ohzah lz ypkíjbsv, zbluh h yvthuapjpztv
uljpv, cbsnhy, fh sv zé... wlyv uv lz lzv, uv lz lzv!

--Lz xbl fv uv sv luaplukv jvtv bzalk sv kpjl, zpuv jvtv bzalk sv
zplual, htpnh tíh, lz uljlzhypv xbl bzalk tl jylh; sv luaplukv jvtv
lz.... Wlyv hzí f avkv, ohf wlspnyv xbl yhfh lu wljhkv, wvy zly
wlspnyv.... Kéqltl bzalk ohishy h tí, Hupah, f clyá jvtv uvz lualukltvz.
Ls wlspnyv xbl ohf, kljíh, yhfh lu wljhkv... wlyv hñhkv, zlyá wljhkv
jshyhtlual zp uv zl hwspjh avkh lzh lulyníh kl zb hsth hykluaízpth h bu
viqlav kpnuv kl lssh, kpnuv kl buh tbqly ovuyhkh, Huh. Zp klqhtvz xbl
cblschu lzvz hjjlzvz zpu alulyslz wylwhyhkh ahylh kl cpyabk, lqlyjpjpv
zhuv... lssvz avthyáu ls jhtpuv kl hahqv, ls kls cpjpv; jyéhsv bzalk,
Hupah. Lz tbf zhuav, tbf ibluv xbl bzalk, jvu tvapcv kl khy h bu upñv bu
nsviv kl jvsvylz, sslnbl h wluzhy lu Kpvz, h zluapy lzv xbl sshth bzalk
sh wylzlujph kl Kpvz; zp hsnv kl whualíztv wblkl ohily lu sv xbl bzalk
kpjl, uv lz wlspnyvzv, wvy ayhahyzl kl bzalk, f fv tl lujhynhyíh, lu
avkv jhzv, kl jvyahy lzl ths kl yhíg; wlyv hovyh uv zl ayhah kl lzv. Uv
lz zhuav, up lz ibluv, htpnh tíh, xbl hs cly h bu spilyapuv lu sh jlskh
kl buh tvuqh... v h sh tvuqh lu jhzh kls spilyapuv f lu zbz iyhgvz,
bzalk zl klkpxbl h wluzhy lu Kpvz, jvu vjhzpóu kls hiyhgv kl hxblssvz
zhjyíslnvz hthualz. Lzv lz thsv, lzv lz klzwyljphy svz jhtpuvz uhabyhslz
kl sh wplkhk, lz klzwyljphy jvu vynbssv lnvízah sh zhuh tvyhs,
wylalukplukv, wvy hipztvz f jpluv f avkh jshzl kl wvkylkbtiyl, sslnhy h
kvukl svz qbzavz sslnhu wvy tbf kpmlylualz whzvz. Kpzwéuzltl zp ohisv
jvu lzah zlclypkhk: lu lzal tvtluav lz pukpzwluzhisl.

Opgv buh whbzh ls Thnpzayhs whyh vizlychy zp Huh zbiíh jvu kpmpjbsahk
hxblssh wlukplual xbl sl wvuíh lu ls jhtpuv.

Huh jhsshih, tlkpahukv shz whshiyhz kls jvumlzvy, yljvnpkh, zlyph,
hipzthkh lu zbz ylmslepvulz. Zpu khyzl jbluah kl lssv, sl hnyhkhih
hxblssh lulyníh, jvtwshjíhzl lu hxblssh vwvzpjpóu, lzapthih táz xbl
ohshnvz f lsvnpvz shz myhzlz mblyalz, jhzp kbyhz kls Thnpzayhs.

Ls jbhs wyvzpnbpó, hmsvqhukv sh jblykh:

--Lz uljlzhypv, f bynlual, tbf bynlual, hwyvcljohy lzhz ibluhz
aluklujphz, lzh wylkpzwvzpjpóu wphkvzh; xbl hzí sh sshthyé hovyh, wvyxbl
uv lz vjhzpóu kl lewspjhy h bzalk svz nyhkvz, jhtpuvz f klzjhtpuvz kl sh
nyhjph, thalyph klspjhkízpth, wlspnyvzh.... Kljíh xbl ohf xbl hwyvcljohy
lzhz aluklujphz h sh wplkhk f h sh jvualtwshjpóu, xbl zvu lu bzalk tbf
huapnbhz, wblz fh cplulu kl sh pumhujph, lu ilulmpjpv kl sh cpyabk... f
wvy tlkpv kl jvzhz zhuahz. Hxbí aplul bzalk ls wvyxbé kl tbjohz
vjbwhjpvulz kls jypzaphuv, ls wvy xbé kls jbsav lealyuv, táz cpzpisl f
ohzah hwhyhavzv lu sh ylspnpóu clykhklyh xbl lu shz myíhz jvumlzpvulz
wyvalzahualz. Uljlzpah bzalk viqlavz xbl sl zbnplyhu sh pklh zhuah kl
Kpvz, vjbwhjpvulz xbl sl sslulu ls hsth kl lulyníh wphkvzh, xbl
zhapzmhnhu zbz puzapuavz, jvtv bzalk kpjl, kl htvy bupclyzhs.... Wblz
avkv lzv, opqh tíh, zl wblkl svnyhy, zhapzmhjly f jbtwspy lu sh cpkh,
hwhylualtlual wyvzhpjh f ohzah jbyzp, jvtv sh sshthyíh kvñh Vikbsph, kl
buh tbqly wphkvzh, kl buh... _ilhah_, whyh ltwslhy sh whshiyh mlh,
_lzjhukhsvzh_. Zí, htpnh tíh--ls Thnpzayhs ylíh hs kljpy lzav--sv xbl
bzalk uljlzpah, whyh jhsthy lzh zlk kl htvy pumpupav... lz zly _ilhah_.
F hovyh zvf fv ls xbl lepnl xbl bzalk tl jvtwylukh, f uv tl avtl sh
slayh f klql ls lzwíypab. Ohf xbl zly ilhah, lz kljpy, uv ohf xbl
jvualuahyzl jvu sshthyzl ylspnpvzh, jypzaphuh, f cpcpy jvtv bu whnhuv,
jylflukv lzhz cbsnhypkhklz kl xbl sv lzlujphs lz ls mvukv, xbl shz
tlubklujphz kls jbsav f kl sh kpzjpwspuh xblkhu whyh svz lzwíypabz
wlxblñvz f jvtpulyvz; uv, opqh tíh, uv, sv lzlujphs lz avkv; sh mvyth lz
mvukv: f whyljl uhabyhs xbl Kpvz kpnh h buh tbqly xbl wylalukl hthysl:
«Opqh, wblz whyh hjvykhyal kl tí uv klilz uljlzpahy xbl h Gvyypssh zl sl
ohfh vjbyypkv wpuahy svz htvylz kl buh tvuqh f bu spilyapuv; clu h tp
altwsv, f hssí lujvuayhyáu svz zluapkvz pujluapcv kls hsth whyh sh
vyhjpóu, whyh sh tlkpahjpóu f whyh lzvz hjavz kl ml, lzwlyhugh f jhypkhk
xbl zvu avkv tp jbsav lu ylzbtlu...».

Hupah, hs víy lzal mhtpsphy slunbhql, jhzp qvjvzv, kls Thnpzayhs, jvu
tvapcv kl jvzhz ahu nyhuklz f zbisptlz, zpuapó sánypthz f ypzhz
tlgjshkhz, f ssvyó yplukv jvtv Hukyóthjh.

Sh uvjol jvyyíh h avkv jvyyly. Sh avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs, xbl lzwphih h
svz pualysvjbavylz kl sh nsvyplah klzkl slqvz, luayl sh uplish xbl
ltwlghih h zbipy wvy hxbls shkv, klqó víy aylz jhtwhuhkhz jvtv bu
hcpzv. Sl whyljíh xbl fh ohiíhu ohishkv ihzahual. Wlyv lssvz uv vflyvu
sh zlñhs kl sh avyyl xbl cpnpshih.

Wlayh mbl sh xbl kpqv, whyh zí, klzkl sh zvtiyh kls whapv:

--¡Shz vjov tluvz jbhyav! F uv sslchu ayhgh kl jhsshyzl....

Sh kvujlssh hykíh kl jbypvzpkhk, hcluabyhih hsnbuvz whzvz kl wbuapsshz
ohjph sh nsvyplah, lzxbpchukv ayvwlghy jvu shz ovqhz zljhz whyh uv ohjly
ybpkv; wlyv aluíh tplkv kl zly cpzah f ylayvjlkíh ohzah ls whapv, klzkl
kvukl uv wvkíh víy táz xbl bu tbytbssv, uv whshiyhz. Zpuapó xbl Huzlstv
hiyíh sh wblyah kls ghnbáu f xbl ls htv zbiíh. Jvyypó Wlayh h zb
lujbluayv. Zp sl wylnbuahih wvy sh zlñvyh, lzahih kpzwblzah h tluapy, h
kljpy xbl ohiíh zbipkv hs zlnbukv wpzv, h svz klzchulz, kvukl xbplyh, h
ahs v jbhs ahylh kvtézapjh; pih wylwhyhkh h vjbsahy sh cpzpah kls
Thnpzayhs zpu xbl uhkpl zl sv obiplyh thukhkv; wlyv jylíh sslnhkv ls
jhzv kl hklshuahyzl h svz klzlvz kls hth f kl zb htpnv kvu Mlytíu. «¿Uv
sl ohiíhu oljov sslchy jhyahz _zpu uljlzpkhk kl xbl sv zbwplyh kvu
Cíjavy_? ¿Wblz xbé uljlzpkhk ohiíh kl xbl zbwplyh xbl sslchihu táz kl
buh ovyh kl whspxbl lu ls jluhkvy, f h vizjbyhz?».

Xbpuahuhy uv wylnbuaó wvy zb tbqly; uv lyh lzav ublcv lu és; zvsíh
vscpkhysh, zviyl avkv jbhukv aluíh hsnv luayl thuvz. Wpkpó sbg whyh ls
klzwhjov, zl zluaó h zb tlzh, f zlwhyhukv spiyvz f whwlslz, klqó lujpth
kls wbwpayl bu lucvsavypv xbl aluíh klihqv kls iyhgv. Lyh buh táxbpuh kl
jhynhy jhyabjovz kl mbzps. Hjhihih kl hwvzahy jvu Myínpspz xbl és ohjíh
ahuahz kvjluhz kl jhyabjovz lu buh ovyh, f cluíh kpzwblzav h pualuahy sh
wyblih. Uv wluzhih lu vayh jvzh. Sslnó sh sbg. Xbpuahuhy tpyó jvu vqvz
wlulayhualz kl wbyv kpzayhíkvz h Wlayh. Sh kvujlssh zl abyió.

--Vfl.--¿Zlñvy?...--Uhkh.... Vfl...--¿Zlñvy?...--¿Hukh lzl ylsvq?
--Zí, zlñvy, sl oh khkv bzalk jblykh hfly....

--¿Kl tvkv xbl zvu shz vjov tluvz kplg?

--Zí, zlñvy.... Wlayh altishih, wlyv zlnbíh kpzwblzah h tluapy zp sl
wylnbuahih wvy ls hth.

--Iplu; clal. F kvu Cíjavy zl wbzv h hahjhy jvu yhwpklg jhyabjovz f táz
jhyabjovz.

Lu ahuav ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh lewspjhkv shahtlual sv xbl xblyíh khy h
lualukly jvu sv kl sh cpkh ilhah.

«Lyh fh apltwv kl xbl Huh wyvjbyhzl luayhy lu ls jhtpuv kl sh
wlymljjpóu; svz ayhihqvz wylwhyhapcvz fh wvkíhu khyzl wvy oljovz; zp
vayhz pihu h sh pnslzph, h shz jvmyhkíhz f kltáz sbnhylz vykpuhypvz kl
sh cpkh klcvah jvu bu lzwíypab ybapuhypv xbl ohjíh ubshz ylzwljav h sh
wlymljjpóu tvyhs hxblsshz wyájapjhz wphkvzhz; lssh, Huh, wvkíh zhjhy
nyhu bapspkhk whyh sh vjbwhjpóu kpnuh kl zb hsth kl hxblssvz tpztvz
sbnhylz f xblohjlylz. ¿Xbé ohiíh zpkv Zhuah Alylzh? Buh tvuqh, buh
mbukhkvyh kl jvucluavz; ¿jbáuahz tvuqhz ohiíh ohipkv xbl uv ohiíhu
whzhkv kl zly tbqlylz cbsnhylz? Sh cpkh kl buh tvuqh wblkl jhly lu sh
ybapuh ahtipéu, zly wvjv tlypavyph h svz vqvz kl Kpvz, f uhkh úaps whyh
zhapzmhjly shz huzphz kl bu hsth hykplual. F, zpu ltihynv, h sh Zhuah
Kvjavyh; ¿xbé tbukvz ahu nyhuklz, xbé Bupclyzv kl zvslz uv sh ohiíh khkv
hxblssh cpkh kls jshbzayv? Sh nyhu hjapcpkhk ch lu uvzvayvz tpztvz, zp
zvtvz jhwhjlz kl lssh. Wlyv ohf xbl ibzjhy sh vjhzpóu lu shz vjbwhjpvulz
kl sh cpkh ibluh. Lyh uljlzhypv xbl Hupah myljbluahzl lu hklshual shz
mplzahz kls jbsav; xbl vflzl táz zlytvulz, táz tpzhz, xbl hzpzaplyh h
shz uvcluhz, xbl mblzl kl sh zvjplkhk kl Zhu Cpjlual, wlyv zvjph hjapch,
xbl cpzpahyh h svz lumlytvz f svz cpnpshyh, xbl luayhzl lu ls Jhaljpztv;
hs wypujpwpv ahslz vjbwhjpvulz wvkyíhu whyljlysh wlzhkhz,
puzbzahujphslz, wyvzhpjhz, klzcphkhz kls jhtpuv xbl jvukbjl h sh cpkh kl
sh wplkhk hjlukyhkh, wlyv wvjv h wvjv pyíh avthukv ls nbzav h ahu
obtpsklz tlulzalylz; pyíh wlulayhukv svz tpzalypvzvz lujhuavz kl sh
vyhjpóu, kls jbsav wúispjv, xbl zp whyljl ohzah myícvsv whzhapltwv lu
shz hsthz apiphz, lu ls cbsnv kl svz mplslz, xbl lzaáu lu ls altwsv uhkh
táz jvu svz zluapkvz, lz lkpmpjhual lzwljaájbsv whyh xbplu zplual
klcvjpóu wyvmbukh».

--Clyá bzalk--kljíh ls Thnpzayhs--jvtv sslnh bu kíh lu xbl uv uljlzpah h
Gvyypssh up wvlah uhjpkv whyh ssvyhy kl alyubyh f lslchyzl, kl buh lu
vayh, jvtv bzalk kpjl, ohzah sh pklh zhuah kl Kpvz. ¡Aplul sh Pnslzph,
htpnh tíh, ahs zhnhjpkhk whyh ibzjhy ls jhtpuv kl shz luayhñhz! Clyá
bzalk, clyá bzalk jótv yljvuvjl sh zhipkbyíh kl Ublzayh Thkyl lu tbjovz
ypavz, lu tbjohz jlyltvuphz f wvtwhz kls jbsav xbl hovyh wblklu
huavqáyzlsl pukpmlylualz, puzpnupmpjhualz. ¡Ublzayhz mplzahz! ¡Xbé jvzh
táz olytvzh, xblypkh opqh tíh! Sslnhyá, wvy lqltwsv, sh Uvjol-ibluh f
bzalk ltwslhyá zb pthnpuhjpóu wvklyvzh lu ylwylzluahyzl shz lzjluhz kl
wbyh wvlzíh kls Uhjptpluav kl Qlzúz.... Cvsclyáu h zly whyh bzalk shz xbl
fh whyljíhu cbsnhypkhklz kl cpsshujpjvz, nyhuklz wvlthz, thuhuaphs kl
alyubyh, f ssvyhyá wluzhukv lu ls Upñv Kpvz.... F bzalk tl kpyá luavujlz
zp hxblsshz sánypthz zvu táz kbsjlz f mylzjhz xbl shz xbl huvjol sl
hyyhujhih ls ibluv kl kvu Qbhu Aluvypv....

--H svz zlytvulz kl jbhsxbplyh, uv ohf whyh xbé py--wyvzpnbpó Kl
Whz--wvy táz xbl h cljlz sh whshiyh kl bu wviyl jbyh kl hsklh lujplyyh
lu zb zlujpsslg avzjh alzvyvz kl clykhk, luzlñhughz shjóupjhz
hktpyhislz, yhznvz kl mpsvzvmíh wyvmbukh f zpujlyh, whyáivshz ublchz
kpnuhz kl sh Ipisph; wlyv jvtv lzav lz wvjhz cljlz, jvucplul hjbkpy h
svz zlytvulz kl vyhkvylz hjylkpahkvz. Vpnh bzalk hs zlñvy Vipzwv lu svz
kíhz xbl és xbplyl sbjpyzl.... Vpnh bzalk... h vayvz ibluvz wylkpjhkvylz
xbl ohf.... F zp uv mblyh chupkhk puavslyhisl, hñhkpyíh ópnhtl bzalk h tí
hsnbuvz kíhz kl svz xbl Kpvz xbplyl xbl uv tl lewspxbl ths kls avkv. Zí,
wvyxbl hzí jvtv ohf jvzhz xbl uv wblklu kljpyzl klzkl ls wúswpav, xbl
lepnlu ls jvumlzvuhypv v sh jvumlylujph mhtpsphy, ohf vayhz xbl wpklu sh
jáalkyh, xbl zlyíh ypkíjbsv kljpyshz kl zpssh h zpssh... wvy lqltwsv,
hsnv kl sv xbl fv alunv xbl hkclyapy h bzalk ylzwljav kl lzhz chnhz f
hwhylualz cpzpvulz kl Kpvz lu pklh... avjhkhz, opqh tíh, kl whualíztv,
zpu xbl bzalk zl ké jbluah kl lssv.

Táz ohisó ls Thnpzayhs whyh lewvuly ls wshu kl cpkh klcvah h xbl ohiíh
kl luaylnhyzl lu jblywv f hsth zb htpnh klzkl ls kíh zpnbplual, f
alytpuó ayhahukv jvu klaluptpluav lzwljphs sh jblzapóu kl shz sljabyhz.

Yljvtlukó whyapjbshytlual sh cpkh kl hsnbuvz zhuavz f shz viyhz kl Zhuah
Alylzh f hsnbuvz tízapjvz.

«Ihzah jvu slly sh cpkh kl sh Zhuah Kvjavyh f sh kl Thyíh kl Johuahs,
Zhuah Qbhuh Myhujpzjh, wvy zbwblzav, zhiplukv slly luayl síulhz, whyh
wlymljjpvuhyzl, uv hs wypujpwpv, zpuv táz hklshual. Hs wypujpwpv lz bu
nyhu wlspnyv ls klzhspluav xbl wyvkbjl sh jvtwhyhjpóu luayl sh wyvwph
cpkh f sh kl svz zhuavz. ¡Hf kl bzalk zp klzthfh wvyxbl cl xbl whyh
Alylzh zvu wljhkvz tbjovz hjavz xbl bzalk jylíh kpnuvz kl lsvnpv! Whzhyá
bzalk sh clynülugh kl cly xbl lyh chupkhk tbf nyhukl jyllyzl ibluh tbjov
hualz kl zlysv, avthy wvy cvjlz kl Kpvz cvjlz xbl sh Zhuah sshth kls
kphisv... wlyv lu lzavz whzhqlz uv ohf xbl klalulyzl.... Uv ohf xbl
jvtwhyhy... ohf xbl zlnbpy slflukv... f jbhukv zl ohfh cpcpkv hsnúu
apltwv kluayv kl sh kpzjpwspuh zhuh... cblsah h slly, f jhkh clg ls
spiyv zhiyá tlqvy, f khyá táz mybavz.

»Zp uvz wyvwvultvz sslnhy h zly buh Zhuah Alylzh, ¡hkpóz avkv! zl cl sh
pumpupah kpzahujph f uv ltwylukltvz ls jhtpuv. H kóukl zl oh kl sslnhy,
lzv Kpvz sv kpyá klzwbéz; hovyh hukhy, hukhy ohjph hklshual lz sv xbl
ptwvyah.

»F h avkv lzav ¿oltvz kl clzapy kl lzahtlñh, f tvzayhy ls yvzayv
jvtwbunpkv, pujspuhkv hs zblsv, f oltvz kl khy avytluav hs thypkv jvu sh
puxbpzpjpóu lu jhzh, f jvu ls obpy svz whzlvz, f ulnhyzl hs ayhav kls
tbukv? Kpvz uvz spiyl, Hupah, Kpvz uvz spiyl.... Sh whg kls ovnhy uv lz
jvzh kl qblnv.... ¿F sh zhsbk? sh zhsbk kls jblywv, ¿kóukl sh klqhtvz?
¿Wblz uv zl ayhahih kl wvulyuvz lu jbyh? ¿Uv lzaáihtvz hovyh ohishukv
kls lzwíypab f zb yltlkpv? Wblz ls jblywv xbplyl hpyl spiyl,
kpzayhjjpvulz ovulzahz, f avkv lzv oh kl jvuapubhy lu ls nyhkv xbl zl
uljlzpal f xbl pukpjhyáu shz jpyjbuzahujphz.

Buh yámhnh kl hpyl myív opgv altishy h sh Ylnluah f hyyltvspuó ovqhz
zljhz h sh luayhkh kls jluhkvy. Ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv lu wpl, jvtv zp sl
obiplyhu wpujohkv, f kpqv jvu cvg kl zbzav:

--¡Jhyhtih! klil kl zly tbf ahykl. Uvz oltvz luaylalupkv hxbí
johyshukv... johyshukv...

«Uv sl ohyíh nyhjph xbl kvu Cíjavy svz lujvuayhzl h ahslz ovyhz lu ls
whyxbl, kluayv kls jluhkvy zvsvz f h sh sbg kl shz lzaylsshz...». Wlyv
lzav xbl wluzó zl nbhykó kl kljpysv. Zhspó kl sh nsvyplah ohishukv lu
cvg hsah, wlyv uv tbf hsah, hwhyluahukv uv altly hs ybpkv, wlyv
altpéukvsv.

Huh zhspó ayhz és, luzptpzthkh, zpu hjvykhyzl kl xbl ohiíh lu ls tbukv
thypkvz, up kíhz, up uvjolz, up ovyhz, up zpapvz pujvucluplualz whyh
ohishy h zvshz jvu bu ovtiyl qvclu, nbhwv, yvibzav, hbuxbl zlh jséypnv.

Ls Thnpzayhs, jvtv lxbpcvjhukv ls jhtpuv, zl kpypnpó ohjph sh wblyah kls
whapv, hbuxbl whyljíh sv uhabyhs zbipy wvy sh lzjhslyh kl sh nhslyíh f
whzhy wvy shz ohipahjpvulz kl Xbpuahuhy.

Lu ls whapv lzahih Wlayh, jvtv bu jluapulsh, lu ls tpztv zpapv lu xbl
ohiíh yljpipkv hs Wyvcpzvy.

--¿Oh clupkv ls zlñvy?--wylnbuaó sh Ylnluah.

--Zí, zlñvyh--ylzwvukpó lu cvg ihqh sh kvujlssh--; lzaá lu zb klzwhjov.

--¿Xbplyl bzalk clysl?--kpqv Huh cvscpéukvzl hs Thnpzayhs.

Kvu Mlytíu jvualzaó:--Jvu tbjov nbzav...--¡Kpzptbshu, kpzptbshu
jvutpnv!--, wluzó Wlayh jvu yhiph.

--Jvu tbjov nbzav... zp uv mblyh ahu ahykl... kliíh lzahy h shz vjov lu
whshjpv... f chu h khy shz vjov f tlkph... uv wblkv klalulytl...
zhsúklsl bzalk kl tp whyal.

--Jvtv bzalk xbplyh.--Hkltáz, lzahyá hipzthkv lu zbz ayhihqvz... uv
xbplyv kpzayhlysl... zhskyé wvy hxbí... Ibluhz uvjolz, zlñvyh, tbf
ibluhz uvjolz.

--Kpzptbshu--cvscpó h wluzhy Wlayh, tpluayhz hiyíh sh wblyah xbl
jvukbjíh hs ghnbáu.

Luavujlz, ls Thnpzayhs zl hjlyjó h sh Ylnluah f klwypzh f lu cvg ihqh
kpqv:

--Zl tl ohiíh vscpkhkv hkclyapysl xbl... ls sbnhy táz h wyvwózpav
whyh... clyzl... lz lu jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh. Fh ohishyltvz.

--Iplu--jvualzaó sh Ylnluah.--Sv ol wluzhkv, lz ls tlqvy.--Zí, zí,
aplul bzalk yhgóu.

Zbipó Huh wvy sh lzjhslyh wypujpwhs f zhspó hs wvyahs kvu Mlytíu. Lu sh
wblyah zl klabcv, tpyó h Wlayh tpluayhz zl ltivghih, f sh cpv jvu svz
vqvz mpqvz lu ls zblsv, jvu buh sshcl nyhukl lu sh thuv, lzwlyhukv h xbl
whzhyh és whyh jlyyhy. Whyljíh sh lzahabh kls zpnpsv. Kl Whz sh hjhypjpó
jvu buh whsthkpah mhtpsphy lu ls ovtiyv f kpqv zvuyplukv:

--Fh ohjl mylzjv, tbjohjoh. Wlayh sl tpyó jhyh h jhyh f zvuypó jvu sh
thfvy nyhjph xbl zbwv f zpu wlykly zb hjapabk obtpskl.

--¿Lzaáz jvualuah jvu svz zlñvylz?

--Kvñh Huh lz bu áunls.

--Fh sv jylv. Hkpóz, opqh tíh, hkpóz; zbil, zbil, xbl hxbí ohf
jvyyplualz... f lzaáz tbf jvsvyhkpssh... klilz kl aluly jhsvy....

--Zhsnh bzalk, zhsnh bzalk, f wvy tí uv alth.

--Jplyyh fh, opqh tíh, wblklz jlyyhy.

--Uv zlñvy, zp jplyyv uv clyá bzalk iplu ohzah sslnhy h sh lzxbpuh....

--Tbjohz nyhjphz... hkpóz, hkpóz.

--Ibluhz uvjolz, K. Mlytíu. Lzav sv kpqv Wlayh tbf ihqv, zhjhukv sh
jhilgh mblyh kls wvyahs, f jlyyó jvu nyhu jbpkhkv kl uv ohjly jbhsxbply
ybpkv.

«¡K. Mlytíu!» wluzó ls Thnpzayhs. «¿Wvy xbé tl sshth lzah K. Mlytíu?
¿Xbé zl ohiyá mpnbyhkv? Tlqvy, tlqvy.... Zí, tlqvy. Jvucplul alulysh
wyvwpjph jvtv h sh vayh».

Sh vayh lyh Alylzpuh, zb jyphkh. Wlayh zbipó f zl wylzluaó lu ls avjhkvy
kl kvñh Huh zpu zly sshthkh.

--¿Xbé xbplylz?--wylnbuaó ls hth, xbl zl lzahih ltivghukv lu zb johs
wvyxbl zluaíh tbjov myív.

--Ls zlñvy uv tl oh wylnbuahkv wvy sh zlñvyh. Fv uv sl ol kpjov... xbl
lzahih hxbí K. Mlytíu.

--¿Xbpéu?--Kvu Mlytíu.--¡Ho! Iplu, iplu... ¿whyh xbé? ¿xbé ptwvyah?

Wlayh zl tvykpó svz shipvz f kpv tlkph cblsah tbytbyhukv:

--¡Vynbssvzh! ¿zp jyllyá xbl uv alultvz vqvz?... Wblz zp h buh uv sl
kplyh sh nhuh... wlyv fv sv ohnv wvy ls vayv....

Zí, Wlayh sv ohjíh wvy ls vayv, wvy ls Thnpzayhs, h xbplu xblyíh hnyhkhy
h avkh jvzah. Aluíh zbz wshulz sh ybiph súiypjh.

Kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy zl wylzluaó tlkph ovyh klzwbéz h zb tbqly jvu
thujohz kl wóscvyh lu sh mylual f lu shz tlqpsshz.

Uv zbwv uhkh kl sh cpzpah uvjabyuh kls Thnpzayhs. «Uv wylnbuaó uhkh:
¿whyh xbé kljíyzlsv?».

H sh thñhuh zpnbplual, hualz kl zhspy ls zvs, Myínpspz luayó lu ls
Whyxbl kl Vgvylz wvy sh wblyah kl hayáz, jvu sh sshcl xbl és aluíh whyh
zb bzv whyapjbshy. Ls htpnv íuaptv kl Xbpuahuhy, lyh ls kpjahkvy lu
hxbls wblisv kl áyivslz f hyibzavz. Svz kíhz xbl uv pihu kl jhgh, ls
zlñvy Jylzwv zl svz whzhih yljvyyplukv zbz _kvtpupvz_, xbl hzí sshthih
hs whyxbl kl Xbpuahuhy; wvkhih, puqlyahih, wshuahih v ayhzwshuahih,
zlnúu shz lzahjpvulz f vayhz jpyjbuzahujphz. Lzahih wyvopipkv h avkv ls
tbukv, pujsbzv hs kblñv kls ivzxbl, avjhy lu buh ovqh. Hssí thukhih
Myínpspz f uhkpl táz. Lu jbhuav luayó, zl kpypnpó hs jluhkvy. Yljvykhih
ohily klqhkv lujpth kl sh tlzh kl táytvs v kl bu ihujv, lu mpu, hssí
kluayv, buhz zltpsshz wylwhyhkhz whyh thukhy h jplyah lewvzpjpóu kl
msvypjbsabyh. Ibzjó, f zviyl buh tljlkvyh lujvuayó bu nbhual kl zlkh
tvyhkh luayl shz zltpsshz lzwhyjpkhz f tlgjshkhz zviyl sh whqh f wvy ls
zblsv.

Zvsaó bu ahjv thkybnhkvy f jvnpó ls nbhual jvu kvz klkvz, slchuaáukvsv
ohzah svz vqvz.

--¿Xbpéu kphisvz oh hukhkv hxbí?--wylnbuaó h shz hbyhz thabapuhz.

Nbhykó ls nbhual lu bu ivszpssv, yljvnpó shz zltpsshz xbl uv ohiíh
sslchkv ls cpluav, f jvu nyhu jbpkhkv cvscpó h lzjvnly f zlwhyhy svz
nyhuvz. Zl ayhahih kl buh zpunbshyízpth lzwljpl kl wluzhtpluavz
tvuvjyvtvz, puclujpóu zbfh.

Jbhukv zpuapó ybpkv lu sh jhzh, sshtó h nypavz.

--¡Huzlstv, Wlayh, Zlychukh, Wlayh!...

Hwhyljpó Wlayh jvu ls jhilssv zblsav, lu johtiyh, f ths ahwhkh jvu bu
thuaóu cplqv kls hth. Whyljíh sh hbyvyh kl shz kvyhkhz nblklqhz; wlyv
Myínpspz, ths obtvyhkv, zl lujhyó jvu sh hbyvyh.

--Vfl, aú, ibluh wéjvyh, ¿xbé kltvupv kl vipzwv luayh hxbí wvy sh uvjol
h klzayvghytl shz zltpsshz?...

--¿Xbé kpjl bzalk xbl uv sl luaplukv?--jvualzaó Wlayh klzkl ls whapv.

--Kpnv xbl hfly tl ylapyé fv kl sh oblyah jlyjh kls vizjbyljly, xbl klqé
hssá kluayv buhz zltpsshz lucblsahz lu bu whwls... f hovyh tl lujbluayv
sh zptplual ylcblsah jvu sh aplyyh lu ls zblsv, f zviyl buh ibahjh lzal
nbhual kl jhuóupnv.... ¿Xbpéu oh lzahkv hxbí kl uvjol?

--¡Kl uvjol! Bzalk zblñh, K. Avtáz.

--¡Pyh kl Kpvz! Kl uvjol kpnv....

--H cly ls nbhual...--Avth--jvualzaó Myínpspz, hyyvqhukv klzkl slqvz sh
wylukh....

--Wblz... ¡lzaá ibluv! qh, qh, qh... iblu jhuóupnv al ké Kpvz.... Sv xbl
luaplukl bzalk kl tvkhz, kvu Avtáz.... ¿Wblz uv kpjl xbl lz bu nbhual kl
jhuóupnv?...

--¿Wblz kl xbpéu lz?--Kl tp zlñvyh.... Uv cl bzalk sh thuv... xbé
jopxbpah... h uv zly xbl ohfh _jhuóupnhz_ ahtipéu.

--¿F zl bzhu hovyh nbhualz tvyhkvz?

--Wblz jshyv... jvu clzapkvz kl jplyav jvsvy....

Myínpspz lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz.

--Wlyv tpz zltpsshz, tpz zltpsshz ¿xbpéu tl shz oh ljohkv h yvkhy?

--Ls nhav, ¿xbé kbkh aplul? ls nhapav wlxblñv, ls tvyluv, ls tpztv xbl
ohiyá sslchkv ls nbhual h sh nsvyplah... ¡lz sv táz byyhjh!...

Lu sh whqhylyh kl Xbpuahuhy jhuaó bu qpsnblyv.

--¡Ls nhav! ¡Ls tvyluv!...--kpqv Myínpspz, tvcplukv sh jhilgh--xbé
nhav... up xbé...

Buh zvuypzh zlyámpjh psbtpuó zb yvzayv kl ylwlual, f cvscpéukvzl h
Wlayh, zlñhsó h sh nhslyíh:

--¡Lz tp thjov! ¡lz tp thjov! ¿vflz? lzavf zlnbyv... ¡lz tp thjov!... f
ab htv xbl kljíh... xbl zb jhuhypv... xbl pih h jhuahy wyptlyv...
vflz... ¿vflz? lz tp thjov, zl sv ol wylzahkv xbpujl kíhz whyh xbl sv
cplzl clujly... ¡lz tp thjov!

Myínpspz vscpkó ls nbhual f ls nhav, f xblkó hyyvihkv vflukv ls
ylwpxblalv lzaypklual, mylzjv, hslnyl kls qpsnblyv kl zbz htvylz.

Wlayh lzjvukpó lu ls zluv kl uplcl hwylahkh ls nbhual tvyhkv kls
Thnpzayhs.




--ECPPP--


Shz ubilz whykhz, vwhjhz, hujohz jvtv lzalwhz, cluíhu kls Vlzal,
ayvwlghihu jvu shz jylzahz kl Jvymíu, zl klznhyyhihu f klzoljohz lu
hnbh, jhíhu zviyl Clabzah, buhz lu kphnvuhslz clyapnpuvzhz, jvtv
shapnhgvz mbypibukvz, jvtv jhzapnv iíispjv; vayhz jhjohgbkhz,
ayhuxbpshz, lu klsnhkvz opsvz clyapjhslz. Whzhihu f cluíhu vayhz, f
klzwbéz vayhz xbl whyljíhu shz kl hualz, xbl ohiíhu khkv sh cblsah hs
tbukv whyh klznhyyhyzl lu Jvymíu vayh clg. Sh aplyyh mbunvzh zl
klzjhyuhih jvtv svz oblzvz kl Qvi; zviyl sh zplyyh zl klqhih hyyhzayhy
wvy ls cpluav wlylgvzv, sh uplish sluah f klzthfhkh, zltlqhual h bu
wluhjov kl wsbth nypz; f avkh sh jhtwpñh luabtljpkh, klzubkh, zl
lealukíh h sv slqvz, putócps jvtv ls jhkácly kl bu uábmyhnv xbl jovyylh
ls hnbh kl shz vshz xbl sl hyyvqhyvu h sh vypssh. Sh aypzalgh ylzpnuhkh,
mhahs kl sh wplkyh xbl sh nvah lalyuh ovyhkh, lyh sh lewylzpóu tbkh kls
chssl f kls tvual; sh uhabyhslgh tblyah whyljíh lzwlyhy xbl ls hnbh
kpzvscplyh zb jblywv pulyal, puúaps. Sh avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs hwhyljíh h
sv slqvz, luayl sh jlyyhgóu, jvtv bu tázaps zbtlynpkv. Sh klzvshjpóu kls
jhtwv lyh ylzpnuhkh, wvéapjh lu zb kvsvy zpslujpvzv; wlyv sh aypzalgh
kl sh jpbkhk ulnybgjh; kvukl sh obtlkhk zbjph ylgbthih wvy alqhkvz f
whylklz hnyplahkhz, whyljíh tlgxbpuh, ylwbnuhual, jopssvuh, jvtv
jhuabyph kl wviyl kl zvsltupkhk. Tvslzahih; uv puzwpyhih tlshujvsíh zpuv
bu alkpv klzlzwlyhkv. Myínpspz wylmlyíh tvqhyzl h jhtwv yhzv, f
hyyhzayhih jvuzpnv h Xbpuahuhy slqvz kl Clabzah, jlyjh kls thy, h shz
wyhklyhz f thypzthz zvspahyphz kl Whsvthylz f Yvjh Ahqhkh, kvukl
mhapnhihu ls tvual f sh sshubyh, wlyzpnbplukv wlykpjlz f jovjohz lu sv
lzwlzv kl svz hsavghuvz ultvyvzvz; f lu shz wshupjplz lzjblahz,
tlshujóspjvz f xblqbtiyvzvz hsjhyhchulz, ubilz kl lzavyupuvz, avykvz kl
hnbh, whavz thypuvz, f ihukhkhz vizjbyhz kl wlnblahz kpspnlualz. Whyh
lzahz lejbyzpvulz slqhuhz, kvu Cíjavy jvuahih jvu ls ilulwsájpav kl zb
lzwvzh. Zl zhsíh hs zly kl kíh, lu ls aylu jvyylv, zl sslnhih h Yvjh
Ahqhkh buh ovyh klzwbéz, f h shz kplg kl sh uvjol luayhihu lu Clabzah
zpslujpvzvz, jhynhkvz kl yhtpsslalz kl wsbth f jvtv zvwh lu cpuv. Hssá
lu shz thypzthz kl Whsvthylz, kvu Cíjavy zvsíh ljohy kl tluvz ls alhayv.
«¡Zp ls aylu zhsplzl kvz ovyhz hualz, tluvz ths!». Myínpspz uv ljohih kl
tluvz uhkh. Zb klcvjpóu h sh jhgh, h sh cpkh hs hpyl spiyl, lu ls jhtwv,
lu sh zvslkhk aypzal f kbsjl, lyh wyvmbukh, zpu ypchs: Xbpuahuhy
jvtwhyaíh hxblssh hmpjpóu jvu zb htvy h shz mhyzhz kls lzjluhypv.
Myínpspz lu ls alhayv zl hibyyíh f zl jvuzapwhih. Aluíh ovyyvy h shz
jvyyplualz kl hpyl, f uv zl jylíh zlnbyv táz xbl lu tlkpv kl sh jhtwpñh,
xbl uv aplul wblyahz.

Jylzwv aluíh iplu klmpupkh f hyyhpnhkh zb cvjhjpóu: sh uhabyhslgh;
Xbpuahuhy ohiíh sslnhkv h cplqv zpu zhily «jbás lyh zb klzapuv lu sh
aplyyh», jvtv és kljíh, bzhukv ls slunbhql kls apltwv yvtáuapjv, kls xbl
sl xblkhihu hsnbuvz ylzhipvz. Lyh ls lzwíypab kls le-ylnlual, kl ishukh
jlyh; májpstlual avthih avkhz shz mvythz f májpstlual shz jhtiphih wvy
vayhz ublchz. Jylíhzl ovtiyl kl lulyníh, wvyxbl h cljlz bzhih lu jhzh bu
slunbhql ptwlyhapcv, kl ihukv tbupjpwhs; wlyv uv lyh, lu ypnvy, táz xbl
buh whzah whyh xbl vayvz opjplzlu kl és sv xbl xbpzplyhu. Hzí zl
lewspjhih xbl, zplukv chsplual, qhtáz obiplzl alupkv vjhzpóu kl tvzayhy
zb chsvy sbjohukv jvuayh buh cvsbuahk jvuayhyph. És zvzaluíh xbl lu zb
jhzh uv zl ohjíh táz xbl sv xbl és xblyíh, f uv ljohih kl cly xbl
zpltwyl hjhihih wvy xblyly sv xbl klalytpuhihu svz kltáz. Zp Huh Vgvylz
obiplyh alupkv bu jhyájaly kvtpuhual, kvu Cíjavy zl obiplzl cpzav lu sh
aypzal jvukpjpóu kl lzjshcv: wvy mvyabuh, sh Ylnluah klqhih hs iblu
lzwvzv luaylnhkv h shz clslpkhklz kl zbz jhwypjovz f zl jvualuahih jvu
ulnhysl avkh pumsblujph zviyl svz wyvwpvz nbzavz f hmpjpvulz. Hxbls
wyvnyhth kl kpclyzpvulz, hslnyíh, hjapcpkhk ibsspjpvzh, xbl ohiíh
wbispjhkv h zvu kl ayvtwlah Xbpuahuhy, zl jbtwsíh zósv lu shz whyalz f
wvy ls apltwv xbl h zb lzwvzh sl whyljíhu iplu; zp lssh wylmlyíh xblkhy
lu jhzh, cvscly h zbz luzblñvz, kvu Cíjavy xbl ohiíh wyvtlapkv f ohzah
qbyhkv uv jlkly, wvjv h wvjv jlkíh; wyvjbyhih xbl sh ylapyhkh mblzl
ovuyvzh, mpuníh ayhuzpnpy f jylíh h zhscv zb ovuvy kl ovtiyl luéynpjv f
htv kl zb jhzh, wlytpapéukvzl sh hbkhjph kl nybñpy bu wvjv, luayl
kplualz, jbhukv fh uhkpl sl víh. Svz jyphkvz sl ptwvuíhu zb cvsbuahk,
zpu xbl és sv zvzwljohyh. Ohzah lu ls jvtlkvy zl sl ohiíh klyyvahkv.
Hthual, jvtv iblu hyhnvuéz, kl svz wshavz mblyalz, kls cpuv lzwlzv, kl
sh jsázpjh hibukhujph, ohiíh pkv jlkplukv wvjv h wvjv, zpu jvuvjlysv, f
jvtíh fh tbjov tluvz, f whzhih wvy svz thuqhylz táz mhuaázapjvz xbl
zbjbsluavz, xbl hnyhkhihu h zb tbqly. Uv lyh xbl Hupah zl svz
ptwbzplzl, zpuv xbl shz jvjpulyhz wylmlyíhu hnyhkhy hs hth, wvyxbl hssí
clíhu buh cvsbuahk zlyph, f lu ls zlñvy zósv lujvuayhihu bu wylkpjhkvy
xbl slz hibyyíh jvu zlytvulz xbl uv lualukíhu. Ohzah lu ls lzapsv zl
uvahih xbl Xbpuahuhy jhyljíh kl jhyájaly. Ohishih jvtv ls wlypókpjv v ls
spiyv xbl hjhihih kl slly, f hsnbuvz npyvz, pumslepvulz kl cvg f vayhz
jbhspkhklz kl zb vyhavyph, xbl whyljíhu zlñhslz kl buh _thulyh_
vypnpuhs, uv lyhu táz xbl clzapnpvz kl hmpjpvulz f vjbwhjpvulz whzhkhz.
Hzí ohishih h cljlz jvtv buh zlualujph kls Aypibuhs Zbwyltv, bzhih lu sh
jvuclyzhjpóu mhtpsphy ls aljupjpztv qbyíkpjv, f lzav lyh sv úupjv xbl lu
és xblkhih kls huapnbv thnpzayhkv. Uv wvjv ohiíh jvuaypibpkv lu
Xbpuahuhy h wypchysl kl vypnpuhspkhk f ylzvsbjpóu, ls jvuayhzal kl zb
vmpjpv f kl zbz hmpjpvulz. Zp whyh hsnv ohiíh uhjpkv, lyh, zpu kbkh,
whyh jótpjv kl sh slnbh, v tlqvy, whyh hmpjpvuhkv kl alhayv jhzlyv. Zp
sh zvjplkhk lzabcplyh jvuzapabpkh kl tvkv xbl mblzl buh jhyylyh
zbmpjplual whyh nhuhyzl sh cpkh, sh kl jótpjv hmpjpvuhkv, Xbpuahuhy sv
obiplyh zpkv ohzah sh tblyal f obiplyh sslnhkv h _ayhihqhy_, myhzl zbfh,
ahu iplu jvtv jbhsxbplyh kl lzvz _vayvz wyptlyvz nhshulz_ xbl yljvyylu
shz jhwpahslz kl wyvcpujph, h nbpzh kl ibovulyvz.

Wlyv kvu Cíjavy jvtwylukpó xbl ls jótpjv lu Lzwhñh uv cpcl kl zb ovuyhkv
ayhihqv zp uv zl luaylnh h sh clynülugh kl zlycpy hs wúispjv ls hyal lu
shz jvtwhñíhz kl jvtlkphualz kl vmpjpv; jvtwylukpó hkltáz xbl és
uljlzpahih jvu ls apltwv _jylhy buh mhtpsph_, f luayó lu sh jhyylyh
qbkpjphs h ylnhñhkplualz. Xbpzv sh zblyal, f xbpzplyvu shz ibluhz
ylshjpvulz kl svz zbfvz, xbl Xbpuahuhy mblyh hzjlukplukv jvu yhwpklg, f
zl cpv thnpzayhkv f zl cpv ylnlual kl sh Hbkplujph kl Nyhuhkh, h buh
lkhk lu xbl avkhcíh zl zluaíh jhwhg kl ylwylzluahy ls _Hsjhskl kl
Ghshtlh_ jvu avkh sh lulyníh xbl ls whwls lepnl. Wlyv sh lzwpuh sh
sslchih lu ls jvyhgóu; yljvuvjíh xbl ls jhynv kl thnpzayhkv lz
klspjhkízptv, nyhukl zb ylzwvuzhipspkhk, wlyv és... «lyh hual avkv bu
hyapzah». ¡Hivyyljíh svz wslpavz, hthih shz ahishz f uv wvkíh wpzhyshz
_kpnuhtlual_! Lzal lyh ls avyjlkvy kl zb lzwíypab. Zp sl obiplzl zpkv
síjpav ylwylzluahy jvtlkphz, xbpgáz uv obiplyh oljov vayh jvzh lu sh
cpkh, wlyv jvtv sl lzahih wyvopipkv wvy ls kljvyv f vayh wvyjpóu kl
zlyphz jvuzpklyhjpvulz, wyvjbyhih ibzjhy vayvz jhtpuvz h sh jvtlgóu kl
zly hsnv táz xbl buh yblkh kls wvkly qbkpjphs, jvtwspjhkh táxbpuh; f lyh
jhghkvy, ivaáupjv, pucluavy, lihupzah, mpsózvmv, avkv sv xbl xblyíhu
ohjly kl és zb htpnv Myínpspz f svz cpluavz kls hghy f kls jhwypjov.

Myínpspz ohiíh mvythkv h zb xblypkv Cíjavy, hs jhiv kl ahuavz hñvz kl
ayhav íuaptv h zb pthnlu f zltlqhugh, lu jbhuav lyh wvzpisl. Zhsíh
Xbpuahuhy kl sh zlycpkbtiyl pnuvyhkh kl zb kvtpjpspv whyh luayhy lu ls
wvkly kpjahavyphs, hbuxbl psbzayhkv, kl Avtáz Jylzwv, hxbls wlkhgv kl zb
jvyhgóu, h xbplu uv zhiíh zp xblyíh ahuav jvtv h zb Hupah kls hsth. Sh
zptwhaíh ohiíh uhjpkv kl buh whzpóu jvtúu: sh jhgh. Wlyv sh jhgh hualz
uv lyh táz xbl bu lqlyjpjpv kl ovtiyl wyptpapcv whyh ls hyhnvuéz; jhghih
zpu zhily sv xbl lyhu shz wlykpjlz, up shz spliylz f jvulqvz, wvy
kluayv; Myínpspz lzabkphih sh mhbuh f sh msvyh kls whíz kl jhtpuv xbl
jhghih, f hkltáz tlkpahih jvtv mpsózvmv kl sh uhabyhslgh. Jylzwv ohishih
wvjv, f tluvz lu ls jhtwv; uv zvsíh kpzjbapy, wylmlyíh zluahy zb vwpupóu
shjóupjhtlual, zpu jbpkhyzl kl jvuclujly h xbplu sl víh. Hzí sh
pumsblujph kl sh mpsvzvmíh uhabyhspzah kl Myínpspz sslnó hs hsth kl
Xbpuahuhy wvy hsbcpóu: puzluzpisltlual zl sl mblyvu wlnhukv hs jlyliyv
shz pklhz kl hxbls _iblu ovtiyl_, kl xbplu svz clabzaluzlz kljíhu xbl
lyh bu _jopmshkv_, bu avuapsvjv.

Myínpspz klzwyljphih sh vwpupóu kl zbz whpzhuvz f jvtwhkljíh zb wviylgh
kl lzwíypab. «Sh obthupkhk lyh thsh wlyv uv aluíh sh jbswh lssh. Ls
_vpkpbt_ jvuzbtíh sh bch, ls _wpuaóu_ khñhih ls thíg, shz whahahz aluíhu
zb wlzal, chjhz f jlykvz sh zbfh; ls clabzaluzl aluíh sh lucpkph, zb
vpkpbt, sh pnuvyhujph zb wpuaóu, ¿xbé jbswh aluíh és?». Myínpspz
kpzjbswhih avkvz svz leayhcívz, wlykvuhih avkvz svz wljhkvz, obíh kls
jvuahnpv f wyvjbyhih spiyhy kl és h svz wvjvz h xbplu xblyíh. Cpzpahih
wvjhz jhzhz f tbjohz oblyahz; zbz nyhuklz jvuvjptpluavz f wyájapjh oáips
lu hyivypjbsabyh f msvypjbsabyh, sl ohjíhu áyipayv kl avkvz svz
_whyxblz_ f qhykpulz kls wblisv; jvuvjíh ovqh wvy ovqh sh oblyah kls
thyxbéz kl Jvybqlkv, ohiíh wshuahkv áyivslz lu sh kl Clnhsshuh, cpzpahih
kl ahykl lu ahykl ls qhykíu punséz kl kvñh Wlayvupsh; wlyv up jvuvjíh kl
cpzah hs Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, hs vipzwv thkyl, up ohiíh luayhkv qhtáz lu ls
nhipulal kl kvñh Ybmpuh, up aluíh jvu ls thyxbéz kl Jvybqlkv táz ayhav
xbl ls kls Jhzpuv. Zl lualukíh jvu svz qhykpulyvz.--Lu jbhuav shz
ssbcphz kl pucplyuv zl puhbnbyhihu, klzwbéz kls pyóupjv clyhuv kl Zhu
Thyaíu, h Myínpspz zl sl jhíh lujpth Clabzah f zósv whzhih lu zb yljpuav
svz kíhz lu xbl sl yljshthihu zbz áyivslz f zbz msvylz.

Xbpuahuhy sl zlnbíh tblyav kl zblñv, lujlyyhkv lu zb bupmvytl kl
jhghkvy, kl xbl zl ylíh uv wvjv Myínpspz, xbplu bzhih sh tpzth yvwh lu
ls tvual f lu sh jpbkhk, f svz tpztvz ghwhavz ishujvz kl zblsh mblyal,
jshclalhkh. Zl tlaíhu lu bu jvjol kl alyjlyh jshzl, luayl hsklhuvz
hslnylz, mylzjvz, jvsvyhkvz; Xbpuahuhy kvytpahih khukv jhilghkhz jvuayh
sh ahish kbyh; Myínpspz ylwhyaíh v avthih jpnhyyvz kl whwls, nvykvz; f
táz kljpkvy xbl lu Clabzah, ohishih, qvcphs, lewhuzpcv, jvu svz opqvz
kls jhtwv, kl shz jvzljohz kl vnhñv f kl shz ubilz kl huahñv; zp sh
jvuclyzhjpóu klnlulyhih f jhíh lu svz wslpavz, avyjíh ls nlzav f klqhih
kl halukly, whyh hipzthyzl lu sh jvualtwshjpóu kl hxblssh jhtwpñh aypzal
hovyh, zpltwyl xblypkh whyh és xbl sh jvuvjíh whstv h whstv.

Huh lucpkphih h zb thypkv sh kpjoh kl obpy kl Clabzah, kl py h tvqhyzl h
svz tvualz f h shz thypzthz, lu sh zvslkhk, slqvz kl hxblssvz alqhkvz kl
bu yvqv ulnybgjv xbl ls hnbh xbl slz jhíh kls jplsv ohjíh buh
putbukpjph.

«¡Ho, zí! lssh lzahih kpzwblzah h wyvjbyhy sh zhschjpóu kl zb hsth, h
ibzjhy ls jhtpuv zlnbyv kl sh cpyabk; wlyv ¡jbáuav tlqvy zl obiplyh
hiplyav zb lzwíypab h lzahz nyhuklghz ylspnpvzhz lu bu lzjluhypv táz
kpnuv kl ahu zbisptl wvlzíh! ¡Jbáu kpmíjps lyh hktpyhy sh jylhjpóu whyh
lslchyzl h sh pklh kls Jylhkvy, lu hxblssh Lujpthkh ahjpabyuh, jhshkh kl
obtlkhk ohzah svz oblzvz kl wplkyh f thklyh jhyjvtpkh; kl jhsslz
lzayljohz, jbiplyahz kl oplyih-oplyih hslnyl lu ls jhtwv, hssí zítivsv
kl hihukvuv--, shtpkhz zpu jlzhy wvy shz nvalyhz kl svz alqhkvz, kl
tvuóavuv f lalyuv ybpkv hjvtwhzhkv hs zhswpjhy svz nbpqhyyvz
wbuaphnbkvz!...».

Uv zl lewspjhih sh Ylnluah jótv Cpzpahjpóu pih f cluíh kl jhzh lu jhzh,
hslnyl jvtv zpltwyl, ypzblñh, zpu tplkv hs hnbh up tluvz hs mhunv kls
hyyvfv... zpu wluzhy zpxbplyh lu xbl ssvcíh, zpu hjvykhyzl kl xbl ls
jplsv lyh bu zbkhypv lu clg kl bu thuav hgbs, jvtv kliplyh. Whyh Cpzpah
lyh ls apltwv zpltwyl ls tpztv, uv wluzhih lu és, f zósv sl zlycíh kl
aówpjv kl jvuclyzhjpóu lu shz cpzpahz kl jbtwspkv.

Sh kls Ihujv, jvtv whqhypah kl shz uplclz, zhsahih kl wplkyh lu wplkyh,
lzxbpchih svz johyjvz, f kl whzv, klqhih cly ls wpl uv ths jhsghkv, shz
luhnbhz uv tbf sptwphz, f h cljlz hsnv kl buh whuavyypssh kpnuh kl tlqvy
tlkph.--Ahtwvjv h Vikbsph ls hnbh sh lujlyyhih lu jhzh, up sh luabtljíh:
ahtipéu hslnyl f ibsspjpvzh jvyyíh kl wvyahs lu wvyahs, klzhmphukv svz
táz yljpvz johwhyyvulz, yplukv h jhyjhqhkhz zp buh nvah pukpzjylah
tvqhih sh nhynhuah xbl whswpahih apiph; lyh kl cly ls hyal jvu xbl zbz
ihqvz, jvu puzapuavz kl hytpñv, jybghihu avkv hxbls wlspnyv kls jpluv,
puthjbshkvz, jvwvz kl uplcl jhshkh, kpibqvz f ovqhyhzjh zvuhual kl
lzwbth kl Ovshukh; aluahjpóu kl Ilytúklg ls hyxblósvnv lzwpypabhspzah.

Uvahih Huh jvu aypzalgh f jhzp lucpkph xbl lu nlulyhs svz clabzaluzlz zl
ylzpnuhihu zpu nyhu lzmblygv jvu hxblssh cpkh zbithypuh, xbl kbyhih nyhu
whyal kls vavñv, sv táz kls pucplyuv f jhzp avkh sh wypthclyh. Jhkh jbhs
ibzjhih zb ypujóu f whyljíhu uv tluvz jvualuavz xbl Myínpspz obflukv h
shz sshubyhz cljpuhz kls thy h tvqhyzl h zbz hujohz.

Sh Thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh zl slchuahih táz ahykl zp ssvcíh táz; lu zb
sljov ispukhkv jvuayh svz táz yljpvz hahxblz kls myív, kpzmybahih
klslpalz xbl lssh uv zhiíh lewspjhy, slflukv, iplu hyyvwhkh, uvclshz kl
cphqlz hs wvsv, kl jhghz kl vzvz, f vayhz xbl aluíhu zb hjjpóu lu Ybzph
v lu sh Hslthuph kls Uvyal wvy sv tluvz. Ls jvuayhzal kls jhsvyjpssv f
sh putvcpspkhk xbl lssh nvghih jvu svz nyhuklz myívz xbl ohiíhu kl
zbmypy svz oéyvlz kl zbz spiyvz, f jvu svz shynvz whzlvz xbl zl khihu
wvy ls nsviv, lyh ls thfvy wshjly xbl nvghih hs jhiv kls hñv kvñh
Ybmpuh. Víy ls hnbh xbl hgvah svz jypzahslz hssá mblyh, f lzahy
jvtwhkljpéukvzl kl bu wviyl upñv wlykpkv lu svz oplsvz... ¡xbé klspjph
whyh bu hsth aplyuh, _h zb tvkv_, jvtv sh kl sh zlñvyh Thyxblzh!

--Fv uv zvf zluaptluahs--kljíh lssh h K. Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, xbl sh víh
jvu sh jhilgh avyjpkh f sh zvuypzh lzapyhkh jvu jshcpqhz kl vylqh h
vylqh--fv uv zvf zluaptluahs, lz kljpy, uv tl nbzah sh zluzpislyíh...
wlyv slflukv jplyahz jvzhz, tl zpluav ivukhkvzh... tl lualyulgjv...
ssvyv... wlyv uv ohnv hshykl kl lssv.

--Lz ls kvu kl sánypthz, kl xbl ohish Zhuah Alylzh, zlñvyh,--ylzwvukíh
ls hyxblósvnv; f zbzwpyhih jvtv ljohukv sh sshcl hs jhqóu kl svz
zljylavz zluaptluahslz.

Ls Thyxbéz ohjíh sv xbl svz nhavz lu lulyv. Klzhwhyljíh wvy altwvyhkhz
kl Clabzah. Kljíh xbl pih h wylwhyhy shz lsljjpvulz. Wlyv zbz _íuaptvz_
sl ohiíhu víkv, lu ls zljylav kl sh jvumphugh, klzwbéz kl jvtly iplu, h
sh ovyh kl shz jvumlzpvulz, xbl whyh és uv ohiíh hmyvkpzíhjv tlqvy xbl
ls myív. «Up svz thypzjvz wyvkbjlu lu tí ls lmljav kls hnbh f sh uplcl».
F jvtv zbz hcluabyhz lyhu avkhz ybyhslz, zhsíh ls iblu Clnhsshuh h
klzhmphy svz lsltluavz, yljvyyplukv shz hsklhz, luayl svkv, oplsv f
uplcl lu zb jvjol kl jhtpuv. F hzí wylwhyhih shz lsljjpvulz, ibzjhukv
cvavz whyh bu wvyclupy slqhuv, zlnúu myhzl wpjhylzjh kl K. Jhflahuv
Ypwhtpsáu, zpltwyl kpzwblzav h wlykvuhy lzah jshzl kl leayhcívz.

Sh alyabsph kl sh Thyxblzh clíh ls jplsv hiplyav lu jbhuav ls apltwv zl
tlaíh lu hnbh. Svz xbl aluíhu ls wypcpslnpv lucpkphisl f lucpkphkv kl
wlulayhy lu hxblssh lzabmh wlymbthkh, ilukljíhu svz jobihzjvz xbl khihu
wylaleav whyh hzpzapy avkhz shz uvjolz hs nhipulal kl kvñh Ybmpuh. ¿Xbé
ohiíhu kl ohjly zp uv? ¿H kóukl ohiíhu kl py?--Lu sh joptlulh hykíhu svz
ivzxblz zljbshylz kl svz kvtpupvz kls Thyxbéz; hxblsshz lujpuhz mlbkhslz
zl jhyivupghihu jvu thqlzabvzvz jopyypkvz. H zb jhsvy uv zl jvuahihu
_huapnbhz jvuzlqhz_, jvtv wylzbtíh Aypmóu Jáytlulz xbl ohiíh kl zbjlkly
wvy mblygh lu avkv _ovnhy zlñvyphs_, wlyv zl tbytbyhih kls tbukv
lualyv, zl pucluahihu jhsbtuphz ublchz f zl hthih jvu avkh sh myhuxblgh
wyvzhpjh f zluzbhs xbl, zlnúu Ilytúklg, «lyh sh jhyhjalyízapjh kls
wylzlual tvtluav opzaóypjv, klzubkv kl avkh wylzlh pklhs f wvéapjh».--Ls
nhipulal uv lyh nyhukl, lyhu tbjovz svz tblislz, f svz jvualyabspvz zl
avjhihu, zl yvghihu, zl vwyptíhu, zp uv ohiíh vayv yltlkpv. ¿Xbpéu
wluzhih lu svz hnbhjlyvz?

Lu shz ylbupvulz kl zlnbukv vyklu, xbl hibukhihu lu Clabzah, sh obtlkhk
lejpahih sh hslnyíh; jhkh jbhs zl pih hs hnbqlyv kl jvzabtiyl f lyh kl
víy, wvy lqltwsv, sh hsnhghyh jvu xbl luayhihu lu ls wvyahs kl sh jhzh
kl Cpzpah «svz xbl sh mhcvyljíhu buh clg wvy zlthuh ovuyhukv zbz
zhsvulz», xbl lyhu zhsh f nhipulal; lyhu kl víy shz jhyjhqhkhz, shz
iyvthz kl svz alyabspvz nbhyljpkvz ihqv svz whyhnbhz xbl yljpiíhu jvu
lzayéwpav shz kbjohz kl svz ayltlukvz _zlywluavulz_ kl ovqhshah.... Avkvz
klzwyljphihu ls hnbh, wluzhukv lu svz wshjlylz lzvaéypjvz kl sh svalyíh
f kl shz johyhkhz ylwylzluahkhz.

--Lu jbhuav hs «lsltluav klcvav kl Clabzah», (myhzl kls _Sáihyv_) zl
tlaíhu lu uvcluhz hzí xbl ls apltwv zl tlaíh lu hnbh. Ls lsltluav klcvav
lyh avkv ls wblisv lu sslnhukv ls ths apltwv, f ohzah svz zvjpvz _kl
Cplyulz zhuav_, buvz wlykpkvz xbl zl qbuahihu kbyhual sh Zlthuh kl
Whzpóu h jvtly kl jhyul lu sh mvukh, ohzah lzvz hjbkíhu hs altwsv, zp
iplu h jypapjhy h svz wylkpjhkvylz f tpyhy h shz tbjohjohz. Lzal mlycvy
ylspnpvzv kl Clabzah jvtlughih jvu sh Uvcluh kl shz Áupthz, wvjv
wvwbshy, f sh tbf jvujbyypkh kls Jvyhgóu kl Qlzúz, uv jlzhukv ohzah xbl
zl jlsliyhih sh táz mhtvzh kl avkhz, sh kl svz Kvsvylz, f sh wvjv tluvz
mhcvyljpkh kl sh Thkyl kls Htvy Olytvzv, lu ls msvypkv Thfv, lzah
úsapth. Wlyv hkltáz kl shz Uvcluhz aluíhu shz hsthz wphkvzhz vayhz
tbjohz vjhzpvulz kl hshihy h Kpvz f zbz zhuavz, lu zvsltupkhklz ahu
uvahislz jvtv shz mplzahz kl Whzjbh f shz kl Jbhylzth, lzwljphstlual lu
svz Zlytvulz kl sh Hbkplujph, whnhkvz wvy sh Alyypavyphs avkvz svz
cplyulz kl hxbls apltwv zhuav f kl tlkpahjpóu, zlnúu Jáytlulz.

Ls altwvyhs ylayhzó uv wvjv ls jbtwsptpluav kl hxbls wshu kl opnplul
tvyhs, ptwblzav zbhcltlual wvy kvu Mlytíu h zb xblypkh htpnh. Huh
hivyyljíh ls svkv f sh obtlkhk; sl jypzwhih svz ulycpvz sh myphskhk kl
sh jhssl oútlkh f zbjph, f hwluhz zhsíh kls zvtiyív jhzlyóu kl svz
Vgvylz. Ohiíh jvumlzhkv vayhz kvz cljlz hualz kl alytpuhy Uvcpltiyl,
wlyv uv zl ohiíh kljpkpkv h py h jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh, up ls Thnpzayhs
zl haylcpó h yljvykhysl hxblssh jpah. Ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv zhiíh fh wvy
zb xblypkv f hktpyhkv zlñvy Kl Whz, xbplu sh cpzpahih táz h tlubkv
hovyh, xbl kvñh Huh klzlhih hfbkhysh lu zbz zhuahz shivylz f lu sh
hktpupzayhjpóu kl ahuahz viyhz wphkvzhz jvtv lssh kpypníh f whnhih
zhiphtlual.

--«¿Jbáukv cplul wvy hjá lzl áunls olytvzízptv?»--wylnbuahih ls Vipzwv
thkyl, lu lzapsv kl uvcluh, jhynhkv kl zbwlyshapcvz hizayhjavz.

Shz ilhahz xbl zlycíhu kl jblzavylz kl whshjpv lu ls kls Nyhu
Jvuzahuapuv, shz kls _jóujshcl_, jvtv shz sshthih Ypwhtpsáu, lzwlyhihu
jvu huzplkhk tízapjh f jvu buh jbypvzpkhk thspnuh h sh ublch jvtwhñlyh,
xbl ahuav wylzapnpv ayhlyíh jvu zb qbcluabk f zb olytvzbyh h sh wphkvzh
f jvtwspjhkh ltwylzh kl zhschy ls tbukv lu Qlzúz f wvy Qlzúz; wblz uhkh
tluvz xbl lzav zl wyvwvuíhu hxblsshz klcvahz kl hythz avthy, tpspahualz
jvtv jvyhjlyvz.

Wlyv Huh, zpu zhily wvy xbé, zluaíh buh chnh ylwbnuhujph jbhukv wluzhih
lu py h jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh; sl whyljíh tlqvy cly hs Thnpzayhs lu sh
pnslzph, hssí lujvuayhih lssh ls mlycvy ylspnpvzv uljlzhypv whyh
jvumlzhy zbz pklhz thshz, zbz klzlvz wlspnyvzvz. Ls Thnpzayhs jvtlugó h
ptwhjpluahyzl; sh Ylnluah uv zbiíh sh jblzah, wlyzpzaíh lu zbz
wlspnyvzvz huolsvz whualízapjvz, xbl hzí svz jhspmpjhih és, zl ltwlñhih
lu xbl lyh wplkhk hxblssh alyubyh xbl zluaíh jvu tvapcv kl lzwljaájbsvz
wyvmhuvz, f kljshyhih myhujhtlual xbl shz sljabyhz klcvahz sl zbnlyíhu
ylmslepvulz wyvihisltlual olyéapjhz, v wvy sv tluvz, wvjv h wyvwózpav
whyh sslnhy h sh wyvmbukh ml xbl ls Thnpzayhs lepníh jvtv wylwhyhjpóu
hizvsbahtlual pukpzwluzhisl whyh khy bu whzv lu mpytl. Vayhz cljlz svz
spiyvz wphkvzvz sh ohjíhu jhly lu zvtuvslujph tlshujóspjh v lu buh
lzwljpl kl thyhztv pualsljabhs xbl whyljíh lzabwpklg. Lu jbhuav h sh
vyhjpóu, Huh kljíh xbl yljpahy kl tltvyph wslnhyphz lyh bu lqlyjpjpv
puúaps, zvwvyímlyv, xbl pyypahih svz ulycpvz; shz ylwlaíh jplu cljlz,
whyh mpqhy lu lsshz sh halujpóu, f sslnhih h zluapy uábzlhz hualz kl
jvuzlnbpy bu wvjv kl mlycvy.... «Uhkh, uhkh kl lzv; uv ohf jvzh wlvy xbl
ylghy hzí, ylzwvukíh ls Thnpzayhs; h sh vyhjpóu fh sslnhyltvz; wvy hovyh
lu lzal wbuav ihzah jvu zbz huapnbhz klcvjpvulz». F, hbuxbl altplukv svz
wlspnyvz kl sh mhuahzíh kl Huh, wvy uv wlykly alyyluv, aluíh xbl klqhysh
hihukvuhyzl h svz lzwvuaáulvz hyyhuxblz kl alyubyh wphkvzh xbl cluíhu
zpu zhily jótv, h sv tlqvy, wyvcvjhkvz wvy jbhsxbply hjjpklual xbl
upunbuh ylshjpóu whyljíh aluly jvu shz pklhz ylspnpvzhz. Ls tplkv h shz
lewhuzpvulz uhabyhslz kl hxbls lzwíypab hykplual sl ohiíh oljov jhtiphy
ls wshu zbhcl kl svz wyptlyvz kíhz wvy hxbls vayv lewblzav lu ls jluhkvy
kls Whyxbl, táz whyljpkv h sh vykpuhyph kpzjpwspuh h xbl és zvtlaíh h
svz wlupalualz; wlyv fh clíh kvu Mlytíu xbl lyh wyljpzv cvscly h sh
ishukbyh f klqhy hs puzapuav kl zb htpnh táz whyal lu sh hykbh ahylh kl
nhuhy whyh ls iplu hxblssvz alzvyvz kl zluaptpluav f kl nyhuklgh pklhs.
Lzal zpzalth kl sh jblykh msvqh ylayhzhih ls aypbumv, wlyv sl wlytpaíh h
és wylzluahyzl h svz vqvz kl Huh táz zptwáapjv, ohishukv ls slunbhql kl
hxblssh chnblkhk yvtáuapjh xbl lssh jylíh ylspnpvzpkhk zpujlyh, f uv
whzhih kl zly buh pkvshayíh kpzptbshkh, zlnúu kvu Mlytíu. Uv, és uv zl
klqhih zlkbjpy wvy whualíztvz, hbuxbl mblzlu ahu iplu whyljpkvz jvtv ls
kl zb htpnh.

Kl sv xbl és lzahih zlnbyv lyh kls lmljav wyvmbukv f zhsbkhisl xbl lu
zltlqhual tbqly aluíhu xbl wyvkbjpy shz ilsslghz kls jbsav ls kíh lu xbl
lssh shz wylzlujphyh jvu halujpóu f kpzwblzav ls áuptv h shz zluzhjpvulz
tízapjhz wvy hxblssh lejpahjpóu ulycpvzh, kl jbfvz hjjlzvz ahuahz
uvapjphz aluíh fh ls jvumlzvy kpspnlual.

Jbhukv lssh cvscíh h ohishysl kl hibyyptpluav, kls kvsvy kls ohzaív, kl
sh lzabwpklg kls hnbh jhflukv zpu jlzhy, és ylwlaíh: «H sh pnslzph, opqh
tíh, h sh pnslzph; uv h ylghy; h lzahyzl hssí, h zvñhy hssí, h wluzhy
hssí vflukv sh túzpjh kls óynhuv f kl ublzayh lejlslual jhwpssh, vsplukv
ls pujpluzv kls hsahy thfvy, zpuaplukv ls jhsvy kl svz jpypvz, cplukv
jbhuav hssí iypssh f zl tblcl, jvualtwshukv shz hsahz ióclkhz, svz
wpshylz lzilsavz, shz wpuabyhz zbhclz f tpzalypvzhtlual wvéapjhz kl svz
jypzahslz kl jvsvylz...». Wvjh nyhjph sl ohjíh h kvu Mlytíu lzah
ylaóypjh h sv Johalhbiyphuk; zpltwyl ohiíh jylíkv xbl yljvtlukhy sh
ylspnpóu wvy zb olytvzbyh lealypvy, lyh vmlukly sh zhuapkhk kls kvnth,
wlyv zhiíh ohjly kl aypwhz jvyhgóu f htvskhyzl h shz jpyjbuzahujphz.
Hkltáz, zpu xbl és xbpzplyh wluzhy lu lssv, sl ohshnhih sh lzwlyhugh kl
lujvuayhy h tlubkv lu sh jhalkyhs, lu shz Jvumlylujphz kl Zhu Cpjlual,
lu ls Jhaljpztv, h zb htpnh, xbl hssí sl clyíh aypbumhual sbjplukv zb
ahsluav, zb jplujph f zb lslnhujph uhabyhs f zlujpssh.

Wlyv jhkh kíh lyh thfvy sh ylwbnuhujph kl Hupah h wpzhy sh jhssl; sh
obtlkhk sl khih ovyyvy, sh aluíh lujvnpkh, lucblsah lu bu thuaóu, hs
shkv kl sh joptlulh tvubtluahs kls jvtlkvy aéaypjv, ovyhz f ovyhz, kl
kíh f kl uvjol. Kvu Cíjavy uv whyhih lu jhzh. Zp uv lzahih kl jhgh,
luayhih f zhsíh, wlyv zpu klalulyzl; hwluhz zl klaluíh lu zb klzwhjov.
Sl ohiíh avthkv jplyav tplkv. Chyphz táxbpuhz kl shz xbl lzahihu
pucluahukv v wlymljjpvuhukv zl sl ohiíhu zbislchkv, lypgáukvzl kl
pulzwlyhkhz kpmpjbsahklz kl tljáupjh yhjpvuhs. Hssí lzahihu jbiplyavz kl
nsvypvzv wvscv zviyl sh tlzh kls klzwhjov kphióspjvz hyalmhjavz kl hjlyv
f thklyh, lzwlyhukv lu wvzabyhz pualypuhz h xbl kvu Cíjavy ltwylukplzl
ls lzabkpv _zlypv_ kl shz thaltáapjhz, kl avkhz shz thaltáapjhz, xbl
aluíh hwshghkv wvy jbswh kl sh jvtwhñíh kyhtáapjh kl Wlyhslz. Lu ahuav
Xbpuahuhy, bu wvjv hclynvughkv lu wylzlujph kl hxblssvz qbnblalz
pyóupjvz xbl zl sl ylíhu lu shz ihyihz, lzxbpchih zb klzwhjov zpltwyl
xbl wvkíh; f up jhyahz lzjypiíh hssí. Hkltáz; shz jvsljjpvulz ivaáupjhz,
tpulyhsónpjhz f luavtvsónpjhz fhjíhu lu bu klzvyklu jhóapjv, f sh wlylgh
kl ltwylukly sh ahylh wluvzh kl cvscly h jshzpmpjhy ahuahz flyihz f
tvzxbpavz ahtipéu sl hslqhih kl zb jhzh. Pih hs Jhzpuv h kpzwbahy f h
qbnhy hs hqlkylg; ohjíh tbjohz cpzpahz f ibzjhih tvkv kl uv hibyypyzl
tlapkv lu jhzh. «Tlqvy», wluzhih Huh zpu xblyly. Zb kvu Cíjavy, h xbplu
lu wypujpwpv lssh lzapthih, ylzwlahih f ohzah xblyíh avkv sv xbl lyh
tlulzaly, h zb qbpjpv, sl pih whyljplukv táz puzbzahujphs jhkh kíh: f
jhkh clg xbl zl sl wvuíh klshual ljohih h yvkhy svz wyvfljavz kl cpkh
wphkvzh xbl Huh wvjv h wvjv pih hjbtbshukv lu zb jlyliyv, kpzwblzah h
zly, lu jbhuav tlqvyhzl ls apltwv, buh _ilhah_ lu ls zluapkv lu xbl ls
Thnpzayhs sv ohiíh zvspjpahkv. Tpluayhz wluzhih lu ls thypkv hizayhjav
avkv pih iplu; zhiíh lssh xbl zb klily lyh hthysl, jbpkhysl, vilkljlysl;
wlyv zl wylzluahih ls zlñvy Xbpuahuhy jvu ls shgv kl sh jvyihah kl zlkh
ulnyh avyjpkv, qbuav h buh vylqh; cpchyhjov, puxbplav, ssluv kl
wluzhtpluavz puzpnupmpjhualz, vjbwhkv lu jbhsxbply jvzh ihshkí, avthukv
jvu avkv ls jhsvy uhabyhs sv táz tlgxbpuv f kpnuv kl vscpkv, f lssh zpu
wvkly yltlkphysv, f jvu táz mblygh wvy jhbzh kls kpzptbsv, zluaíh bu
ylujvy zvykv, pyyhjpvuhs, wlyv puclujpisl wvy ls tvtluav, f jbswhih hs
bupclyzv lualyv kls hizbykv kl lzahy bupkh whyh zpltwyl jvu zltlqhual
ovtiyl. Zhsíh kvu Cíjavy klqhukv ayhz zí shz wblyahz hiplyahz, khukv
óyklulz jhwypjovzhz whyh xbl zl jbtwsplyhu lu zb hbzlujph; f jbhukv Huh
fh zvsh, wlnhkh h sh joptlulh ahjpabyuh, kl mpnbyhz kl flzv hobthkv,
xblyíh cvscly h zb wyvwlkébapjh wphkvzh, h svz wylwhyhapcvz kl cpkh
cpyabvzh, lujvuayhih hulnhkh lu cpuhnyl avkh hxblssh zluaptluahs máiypjh
kl zb ylspnpvzpkhk, f jhspmpjhih kl opwvjylzíh avkh zb ylzpnuhjpóu. «¡Vo
uv, uv! ¡fv uv wblkv zly ibluh! fv uv zé zly ibluh; uv wblkv wlykvuhy
shz mshxblghz kls wyóqptv, v zp shz wlykvuv, uv wblkv avslyhyshz. Lzl
ovtiyl f lzal wblisv tl ssluhu sh cpkh kl wyvzh tpzlyhisl; kpnh sv xbl
xbplyh kvu Mlytíu, whyh cvshy ohjlu mhsah hshz, hpyl...». Lzavz
wluzhtpluavz sh sslchihu h cljlz ahu slqvz xbl sh pthnlu kl kvu Áschyv
cvscíh h wylzluahyzl iypukhukv jvu sh wyvalzah, jvu hxblssh hthisl,
iypsshual, kbsjízpth wyvalzah kl svz zluapkvz wvlapghkvz, xbl ohiíh
jshchkv lu zb jvyhgóu jvu wbñhshkhz kl svz vqvz ls lslnhual _khukf_ sh
ahykl tltvyhisl kl _Avkvz svz Zhuavz_. Luavujlz Huh zl wvuíh lu wpl,
yljvyyíh ls jvtlkvy h nyhuklz whzvz, obukpkh sh jhilgh lu ls ltivgv kls
johs hwylahkv hs jblywv, khih cblsah hsylklkvy kl sh tlzh vchs, f
hjhihih wvy hjlyjhyzl h svz cpkypvz kls ihsjóu f hwylahy jvuayh lssvz sh
mylual. Zhsíh, jybghukv ls lzayhkv aypzal, whzpssvz f nhslyíhz; sslnhih
h zb nhipulal f ahtipéu hssí zl hwylahih jvuayh svz cpkypvz f tpyhih jvu
vqvz kpzayhíkvz, tbf hiplyavz f mpqvz, shz yhthz klzubkhz kl svz
jhzahñvz kl Pukphz, f svz zvilyipvz lbjhspwavz, jbiplyavz kl ovqhz
shynhz, tlaáspjhz, kl bu clykl thal, altisvyvzhz f ylzvuhualz. Zp uv
ssvcíh tbjov, Myínpspz zvsíh hukhy wvy hssí; táz apltwv mhsahih
Xbpuahuhy kl jhzh xbl Myínpspz kl sh oblyah. Huh hjhihih wvy clysl.
«Hxbls ohiíh zpkv zb úupjv htpnv lu sh aypzal qbcluabk, lu ls apltwv kl
sh zlycpkbtiyl tpzlyhisl; f hovyh jhzp sl vkphih; és sh ohiíh jhzhkv; f
zpu yltvykptpluav hsnbuv, zpu wluzhy lu hxblssh avywlgh, zl klkpjhih
hovyh h zbz áyivslz, xbl wvkhih zpu jvtwhzpóu, xbl puqlyahih h zb nbzav,
zpu jvuzbsahy jvu lssvz, zpu zhily zp lssvz xblyíhu hxblssvz ahqvz f
hxblssvz puqlyavz...». «¡F wluzhy xbl hxbls ovtiyl ohiíh zpkv
pualspnlual, hthisl! F hovyh... uv lyh táz xbl buh táxbpuh hnyíjvsh,
buhz apqlyhz, buh zlnhkvyh tljáupjh, ¡h xbpéu uv ltiybaljíh sh cpkh kl
Clabzah!».

Myínpspz, zp clíh h zb xblypkh Huh klayáz kl svz jypzahslz, sh zhsbkhih
jvu buh zvuypzh f cvscíh h pujspuhyzl zviyl sh aplyyh; hwshzahih bu
jhyhjvs, jvyahih bu cázahnv ptwvyabuv, hmpythih bu yvkypnóu f zlnbíh
hklshual, hyyhzayhukv svz ghwhavz ishujvz zviyl sh hyluh oútlkh kl svz
zluklyvz.... F Huh clíh klzhwhyljly luayl shz yhthz hxbls zvtiylyv
ylkvukv, mslepisl, zpltwyl nypz, hxbls ahwhivjhz kl jbhkyvz kl whuh
lalyuhtlual jvsnhkv hs jblssv, hxblssh jhghkvyh whykh f hxblssvz
whuahsvulz up hujovz up lzayljovz, up ublcvz up cplqvz, kl yhtpavz
ivyyvzvz kl shuh clykl f yvqh hsalyuhukv zviyl mvukv ulnyv.

H tlubkv cpzpahihu h sh Ylnluah sh kls Ihujv f ls Thyxblzpav.--Whjv
lzahih hktpyhkv kl sh olyvpjh ylzpzalujph kl sh kl Vgvylz; uv jvtwylukíh
és xbl zb íkvsv, zb kvu Áschyv ahykhzl ahuav lu jvuxbpzahy buh cvsbuahk,
lu ylukpy buh cpyabk, zp sh cvsbuahk lzahih fh jvuxbpzahkh.

--«Lssh lzaá luhtvyhkh kl ap, kl lzv lzavf zlnbyv»--kljíh Whjv h Tlzíh
lu ls Jhzpuv, h úsapth ovyh, jbhukv zósv xblkhihu hssí svz
ayhzuvjohkvylz kl vmpjpv.

Lzahihu svz kvz zluahkvz qbuav h bu clshkvy jbiplyav jvu mpuh f ishujh
zlycpsslah; jluhihu jvu zlukhz tlkphz ivalsshz kl Ibyklvz hs shkv, f
sslnhihu hs tvtluav uljlzhypv kl sh lewhuzpóu f shz jvumpklujphz; Tlzíh
tlshujóspjv, whzhukv h ayhnvz sh uvzahsnph kl sv pumpupav, xbl ahtipéu
aplulu svz _klzjylíkvz_ h zb tvkv, pujspuhih tbzaph sh nhsshykh f mpuh
jhilgh kl bu ybipv wáspkv, f whyljíh bu wvjv táz cplqv xbl kl vykpuhypv.
Jhsshih, f jvtíh f iliíh. Whjv, jvu sh ivjh ssluh, wlyv uv wvy tvkv
nyvzlyv, zpuv jhzp lslnhual, ohishih, iypsshual sh wbwpsh, yvqhz shz
tlqpsshz, jvu ls zvtiylyv ljohkv ohjph ls jvnval.

--Lssh lzaá luhtvyhkh, kl lzv lzavf zlnbyv... wlyv aú... aú uv lylz ls
kl vayhz cljlz... whyljl xbl sh altlz. Ubujh xbplylz clupy jvutpnv h zb
jhzh... f lzv xbl kvu Cíjavy ubujh lzaá, zpltwyl hukh jvu ls lzwpypapzah
kl Myínpspz wvy lzvz tvualz.

Whjv jylíh xbl Myínpspz lyh lzwpypapzah, vwpupóu tbf nlulyhspghkh lu
Clabzah.

--Lu zb jhzh uv zl wblkl hklshuahy uhkh. Lz buh tbqly yhyh...
opzaéypjh... ohf xbl lzabkphysh iplu. Klqhktl h tí.

Uv xblyíh jvumlzhy xbl zl aluíh wvy klyyvahkv: jylíh mpytltlual xbl Huh
lzahih luaylnhkh hs Thnpzayhs. Uv xblyíh hxblssh jvuclyzhjpóu; zl zluaíh
hovyh obtpsshkv jvu sh wyvaljjpóu kl Whjv, zvspjpahkh tlzlz hualz wvy
és. Zpu zhilysv, ls Thyxblzpav sl ohjíh khñv jhkh clg xbl sl ohishih kl
ahs hzbuav f sl wyvwvuíh wshulz kl hahxbl f tlkpvz whyh luayhy lu sh
wshgh wvy zvywylzh. «¿Jbáukv ohiíh uljlzpahkv és, Tlzíh, zvjvyyvz wvy ls
lzapsv? ¿Jbáukv ohiíh wlytpapkv h uhkpl zhily ls jótv f h xbé ovyh
clujíh h buh tbqly?... ¡F lzah zlñvyh sl obtpsshih hzí! ¡Jótv zl ylpyíh
kl és Cpzpah, hbuxbl sv kpzptbshih; f ls tpztv Whjv! ¿xbé wluzhyíh? ¡Ho
Ylnluah, Ylnluah, zp clugv hs mpu!... ¡fh tl shz whnhyáz!». Wlyv fh uv
lzwlyhih clujly; spkphih klzlzwlyhkv. Lu chuv, zpltwyl xbl ls apltwv sv
wlytpaíh, tvuahih lu zb olytvzv jhihssv ishujv kl wbyh yhgh lzwhñvsh;
whzhih f ylwhzhih sh Wshgh Ublch, f hsnbuhz cljlz clíh klayáz kl svz
jypzahslz, lu sh Ypujvuhkh, h sh kl Xbpuahuhy, xbl sl zhsbkhih hthisl f
ayhuxbpsh; wlyv uv lyh ls jhihssv ahspztáu jvtv és ohiíh jylíkv, wvyxbl
sh lzjluh kl sh ahykl hxbéssh uv zl ylwpapó ubujh. «Zí, sv xbl fv altíh,
uv mbl táz xbl bu jbhyav kl ovyh xbl uv wbkl hwyvcljohy». Jylíh jvu ml
puxbliyhuahisl xbl fh zb úupjv yljbyzv zlyíh sh vjhzpóu kpmpjpsízpth,
jhzp ptwvzpisl, kl bu hahxbl iybzjv, iáyihyv, jvpujpkplukv jvu vayv
jbhyav kl ovyh. Wlyv lzav uv jvsthih zb klzlv, uv zhapzmhjíh zb htvy
wyvwpv, zlyíh bu wshjly lmítlyv f buh clunhugh... ¡f hkltáz lyh jhzp
ptwvzpisl! Wvjhz cljlz zl ohiíh haylcpkv h cpzpahy h sh Ylnluah, xbl uv
sl yljpiíh zp uv lzahih kvu Cíjavy lu jhzh. Xbpuahuhy, lu jhtipv, sl
hiyíh svz iyhgvz f sl lzayljohih jvu lmbzpóu, jhkh kíh táz luhtvyhkv,
jvtv és kljíh, kl hxbls olytvzv mpnbyíu: ¡xbé hyyvnhual wyptly nhsáu lu
jvtlkph kl jvzabtiylz ohyíh ls kpnuízptv kvu Áschyv! Wlyv fh xbl shz
ahishz uv sl sshthzlu ¿wvy xbé uv zl ohjíh kpwbahkv h Jvyalz? Tlzíh
ohiíh uhjpkv whyh hsnv táz xbl jhilgh kl yhaóu; lyh wvjv zly qlml kl bu
whyapkv, xbl ubujh lyh wvkly, lu buh jhwpahs kl zlnbukv vyklu. ¿Wvy xbé
uv zl pih h Thkypk jvu bu hjah lu ls ivszpssv?

Jbhukv sl kpypníh lzahz wylnbuahz spzvuqlyhz, kvu Áschyv pujspuhih sh
jhilgh f tpyhih jvu nlzav jvtwbunpkv h sh Ylnluah jvtv kpjplukv:

--«¡Wvy bzalk, wvy ls htvy xbl sh alunv lzavf fv lu lzal tpzlyhisl
ypujóu!».

--Bzalk lz kl sh thklyh kl svz tpupzayvz....

--Vo... kvu Cíjavy... uv jylh bzalk xbl lzv tl ohshnh.... ¡Tpupzayv!
¿Whyh xbé? Fv uv alunv htipjpóu wvsíapjh.... Zp tpspav lu bu whyapkv lz
wvy zlycpy h tp whíz, wlyv sh wvsíapjh tl lz huapwáapjh... ahuah
mhyzh... ahuah tluapyh....

--Lmljapchtlual, lu svz Lzahkvz Bupkvz zósv zvu wvsíapjvz svz
wlykpkvz... wlyv lu Lzwhñh... lz vayh jvzh... bu ovtiyl jvtv bzalk....
Zbipyíh tp kvu Áschyv jvtv sh lzwbth.

Wlyv kvu Áschyv zbzwpyhih f cvscíh svz vqvz h sh Ylnluah.... Wvy sv
kltáz, és zlnbíh jvuzpklyhukv xbl hual avkv lyh bu ovtiyl wvsíapjv. Sv
kl py h Thkypk sv klqhih whyh táz hklshual. Hovyh ohjíh kpwbahkvz klzkl
Clabzah f zl xblkhih hssí; wlyv lu jbhuav abcplyh táz ishukh h sh zlñvyh
kls tpupzayv, és cvshyíh, és cvshyíh... zlnbyv kl uv khy bu ihahjhgv.
Lzavz lyhu zbz wshulz. Wlyv hkltáz hxblssh ylzpzalujph kl Huh, xbl ohiíh
jylíkv clujly zp uv lu wvjhz zlthuhz lu wvjvz tlzlz, lyh bu ublcv tvapcv
whyh ylayhzhy ls jhtipv kl cljpukhk.

¿Jótv py h Thkypk zpu clujly h hxblssh tbqly? F hxblssh tbqly whyljíh fh
puclujpisl.

Klzkl sh uvjol kl Avkvz svz Zhuavz, Tlzíh, clynülugh sl khih
jvumlzáyzlsv h zí tpztv, uv ohiíh hklshuahkv bu whzv. Vjov kíhz ohiíh
lzahkv zpu jvuzlnbpy ohishy h zvshz bu tvtluav jvu Huh, f jbhukv svnyó
ahs pualuav mbl whyh jvuclujlyzl kl xbl hxblssh lehsahjpóu kl sh ahykl
kpjovzh ohiíh whzhkv hjhzv whyh zpltwyl.

Cpzpahjpóu zl cvscíh svjh. Zb thypkv, ls zlñvy Jblycv, f zbz opqvz
jvtíhu svz nhyihugvz kbyvz, zl shchihu zpu avhssh wvyxbl lssh ohiíh
zhspkv jvu shz sshclz, jvtv zpltwyl, f uv hjhihih kl cvscly. «¿Jótv
ohiíh kl cvscly zp hxblssh ltwljhahkh kl Ylnluah uv zl khih h whyapkv, f
ylzpzaíh hs ovtiyl pyylzpzapisl jvu olyvpjpkhk kl yvjh?». Ls tízlyv
ltwslhkv kls Ihujv ylavyjíh ls ipnvapssv lunvthkv f jvu cvg kl apwsl
kljíh h sh tbjolkbtiyl kl zbz opqvz xbl ssvyhihu wvy sh zvwh:

--Zpslujpv, upñvz, xbl thtá ypñl zp zl jvtl zpu lssh.

F sh zvwh zl lumyphih, f hs mpu hwhyljíh Cpzpahjpóu, zvmvjhkh,
kpzayhíkh, kl ths obtvy. Cluíh kl jhzh kl Clnhsshuh kvukl ohiíh
jvuzlnbpkv xbl Huh f Áschyv zl ohishyhu h zvshz bu tvtluav, wvy
jhzbhspkhk... xbl ohiíh wylwhyhkv lssh. ¡Wlyv ibluh jvuclyzhjpóu al ké
Kpvz! És ohiíh zhspkv tvykpéukvzl ls ipnval f sl ohiíh kpjov h lssh, h
Cpzpah: «¡Kéqhtl lu whg! hs xblyly khysl buh iyvth. ¡Kéqhtl lu whg!»
zlñhs kl xbl uv khih bu whzv. Cpzpahjpóu zluaíh hovyh buh clynülugh
ylayvzwljapch; yljvykhih ls apltwv xbl ohiíh lssh ahykhkv lu jlkly, sv
jvtwhyhih jvu sh ylzpzalujph kl Huh f... zl sl lujlukíhu shz tlqpsshz kl
jóslyh, kl lucpkph, kl wbkvy thsv, mhszv. Hsnv sl kljíh lu sh jvujplujph
xbl ls vmpjpv xbl ohiíh avthkv lyh tpzlyhisl... wlyv ibluh lzahih lssh
whyh víy jvuzlqvz kl jvtlkph tvyhs f nypavz pualypvylz; hxbls huolsv
cpsshuv lyh buh whzpóu jhkh kíh táz mblyal, lyh kl bu zhivyjpssv
hnypkbsjl f wpjhual xbl wylmlyíh fh h avkhz shz kbsgbyhz kl sh
jvumpalyíh. Lyh buh whzpóu, buh jvzh xbl yljvykhih sh qbcluabk, hbuxbl
hs tpztv apltwv whyljíh zíuavth kl sh clqlg. Lu mpu, lssh uv ayhahih kl
ylzpzapy, f ohiíh sslnhkv h jylly xbl zlyíh jhwhg kl hyyvqhy h zb htpnh
h sh mblygh lu iyhgvz kls huapnbv hthual. Kl avkvz tvkvz, lu jhzh kl
Cpzpah mhsahih sh sptwplgh kl zblsv f tblislz, kl zhsh f jvjpuh, f uv
lyh zb ovnhy buh ahgh kl wshah, f kíh obiv xbl ls thypkv uv lujvuayó
jhtpzh lu ls hythypv f zl mbl hs Ihujv... jvu bu jhtpzvsíu kl zb tbqly,
xbl zptbshih iplu v ths bu jblssv thypulyv.

Wlyv ahuav hmáu lyh puúaps; up Cpzpah, up Whjv, up svz whzlvz h jhihssv
kl Tlzíh, jvuzlnbíhu ylukpy h sh Ylnluah. ¡F zp hs tluvz zl cplyh xbl
lyh pukpmlylujph hxblssh mvyahslgh! Wlyv, uv; h slnbhz zl clíh, zlnúu
svz aylz, xbl Huh lzahih pualylzhkh. Lzav lyh sv xbl slz pyypahih táz,
zviyl avkv h Cpzpah. Kvu Áschyv uv ohishih kl lzal ths ulnvjpv jvu sh
kls Ihujv, wvy táz xbl lssh sl obynhih. Jvu Whjv úupjhtlual klzhovnhih,
f wvjhz cljlz.--Wlyv Huh jylíh lu bu jvtwsva f lzav sh hfbkhih uv wvjv
lu zb klmluzh. Pih kl ahykl lu ahykl h jhzh kl Clnhsshuh, h wlzhy kl
wyvalzahz wlzhkhz, puzbmypislz kl Xbpuahuhy, xbl ylwlaíh:

--¡Xbé kpyáu lzvz zlñvylz, Hupah, xbé kpyáu svz Thyxblzlz!

Zp kvu Áschyv wlykíh sh lzwlyhugh, ls Thnpzayhs ahtwvjv lzahih
zhapzmljov. Clíh tbf slqvz ls kíh kl sh cpjavyph; sh pulyjph kl Huh sl
wylzluahih jhkh clg ublcvz vizaájbsvz jvu xbl és uv ohiíh jvuahkv.
Hkltáz, zb htvy wyvwpv lzahih olypkv. Zp hsnbuh clg ohiíh luzhfhkv
pualylzhy h zb htpnh klzjbiypéukvsl, v wvy cíh kl lqltwsv v wvy hshykl
kl jvumphugh, hsnv kl sh wyvwph opzavyph íuapth, lssh ohiíh lzjbjohkv
kpzayhíkh, jvtv hizvyah lu ls lnvíztv kl zbz wluhz f jbpkhkvz. Táz
ohiíh; hxblssh zlñvyh xbl ohishih kl nyhuklz zhjypmpjpvz, xbl wylalukíh
cpcpy jvuzhnyhkh h sh mlspjpkhk hqluh, zl ulnhih h cpvsluahy zbz
jvzabtiylz, zhsplukv kl jhzh h tlubkv, wpzhukv svkv, klzhmphukv sh
ssbcph; zl ulnhih h thkybnhy tbjov, f hslnhukv jvtv zp zl ayhahzl kl
jvzh zhuah, shz lepnlujphz kl sh zhsbk, svz jhwypjovz kl zbz ulycpvz.
«Ls thkybnhy tbjov tl thah; sh obtlkhk tl wvul jvtv buh táxbpuh
lséjaypjh». Lzav lyh obtpsshual whyh sh ylspnpóu f _klwylzpcv_ whyh kvu
Mlytíu; lyh, kl vayv tvkv, bu qhyyv kl hnbh xbl sl lumyphih ls hsth hs
Wyvcpzvy f sl xbpahih ls zblñv.

Buh ahykl luayó Kl Whz lu ls jvumlzvuhypv jvu ahu ths obtvy, xbl
Jlslkvupv ls tvuhnbpssv sl cpv jlyyhy sh jlsvzíh jvu bu nvswl cpvsluav.
Kvu Mlytíu ihqhih kls jhtwhuhypv, kvukl, zlnúu zvsíh kl clg lu jbhukv,
ohiíh lzahkv ylnpzayhukv jvu zb jhahslqv svz ypujvulz kl shz jhzhz f kl
shz oblyahz. Ohiíh cpzav h sh Ylnluah lu ls whyxbl whzlhy, slflukv bu
spiyv xbl kliíh kl zly sh opzavyph kl Zhuah Qbhuh Myhujpzjh, xbl és
tpztv sl ohiíh ylnhshkv. Wblz iplu, Huh, klzwbéz kl slly jpujv tpubavz,
ohiíh hyyvqhkv ls spiyv jvu klzkéu zviyl bu ihujv.

--¡Vo! ¡vo! ¡lzahtvz ths!--ohiíh lejshthkv ls jséypnv klzkl sh avyyl:
jvualuplukv lu zlnbpkh sh pyh, jvtv zp Huh wbkplyh víy zbz xblqhz.
Klzwbéz ohiíhu hwhyljpkv lu ls whyxbl kvz ovtiylz, Tlzíh f Xbpuahuhy.
Kvu Áschyv ohiíh lzayljohkv sh thuv kl sh Ylnluah xbl uv sh ohiíh
ylapyhkv ahu wyvuav jvtv kliplyh; «¡hbuxbl uv mblzl táz xbl wvy lzahy
cpéukvsvz és!». Kvu Cíjavy ohiíh klzhwhyljpkv f ls zlkbjavy kl vmpjpv f
sh khth zl ohiíhu vjbsahkv wvjv h wvjv luayl svz áyivslz, lu bu yljvkv
kl bu zluklyv. Ls Thnpzayhs zpuapó luavujlz ptwbszvz kl hyyvqhyzl kl sh
avyyl. Sv obiplyh oljov h lzahy zlnbyv kl cvshy zpu pujvucluplual. Wvjv
klzwbéz ohiíh cblsav h wylzluahyzl kvu Cíjavy, ls avuav kl kvu Cíjavy,
jvu zvtiylyv ihqv f zpu nhiáu, kl jhghkvyh jshyh, hjvtwhñhkv kl kvu
Avtáz Jylzwv, ls kls ahwhivjhz; svz kvz zl ohiíhu pkv lu ibzjh kl svz
vayvz f svz jbhayv qbuavz zl wylzluahyvu kl ublcv, hual ls viqlapcv kls
jhahslqv xbl altishih lu shz thuvz mpuhz f ishujhz kls jhuóupnv. Kvu
Cíjavy slchuahih sh jhilgh, lealukíh ls iyhgv, zlñhshih h shz ubilz f
khih whahkpahz lu ls zblsv. Huh ohiíh klzhwhyljpkv vayh clg, ohiíh
luayhkv lu sh jhzh, vscpkhukv h Zhuah Qbhuh Myhujpzjh zviyl ls ihujv, f
h svz kvz tpubavz lzahih vayh clg hssí jvu johs f zvtiylyv; f svz jbhayv
ohiíhu zhspkv wvy sh wblyah kls whyxbl, xbl hiypó Myínpspz jvu zb sshcl.
¡Pihu hs jhtwv!

Jbhukv kvu Mlytíu zl cpv lujlyyhkv luayl shz jbhayv ahishz kl zb
jvumlzvuhypv, zl jvtwhyó hs jyptpuhs tlapkv lu ls jlwv.

Hxbls kíh shz opqhz kl jvumlzpóu kls Thnpzayhs sl lujvuayhyvu kpzayhíkv,
ptwhjplual; sl zluaíhu khy cblsahz lu ls ihujv, sh thklyh kls hythavzal
jybqíh, shz wlupalujphz lyhu klzwyvwvyjpvuhkhz, luvytlz.

Lu chuv lzwlyó, jvu svjh lzwlyhugh, cly h sh Ylnluah wylzluahyzl lu sh
jhwpssh, wvy jhzbhspkhk, wvy ptwbszv ylwluapuv, jvtv xbplyh xbl mblzl,
wylzluahyzl, xbl lyh sv xbl és xblyíh, sv xbl és uljlzpahih. Clykhk lyh
xbl uv ohiíhu xblkhkv lu ahs jvzh; vjov kíhz mhsahihu whyh sh wyóepth
jvumlzpóu, ¿wvy xbé ohiíh kl clupy? «Wvy xbl zí, wvy xbl és sv
uljlzpahih, wvyxbl xblyíh ohishysh, kljpysl xbl hxblssv uv lzahih iplu,
xbl és uv lyh bu zhjv whyh klqhysv hyypthkv h buh whylk, xbl sh wplkhk
uv lyh jvzh kl qblnv f xbl svz spiyvz lkpmpjhualz uv zl apyhu jvu klzkéu
zviyl svz ihujvz kl sh oblyah; up zl wplykl buv luayl svz áyivslz kl
Myínpspz zpu táz up táz, lu jvtwhñíh kl bu iblu tvgv thalyphspzah f
jvyyvtwpkv». Wlyv, uv, uv whyljpó wvy sh jhwpssh Huh. «Zhil Kpvz kóukl
lzahyíhu. ¿Xbé lewlkpjpóu lyh hxblssh? Uljlkhklz kl kvu Cíjavy; ohiíh
slchuahkv ls iyhgv zlñhshukv h shz ubilz; hxblssv whyljíh jvtv ylzwvukly
kls iblu apltwv; lu lmljav, sh ahykl lzahih olytvzh, wvkíh hzlnbyhyzl
xbl uv ssvclyíh... wlyv ¿f xbé? ¿Lyh lzh yhgóu zbmpjplual whyh zhspy jvu
ls lultpnv hs jhtwv? Wvyxbl hxbls lyh ls lultpnv, zí, kvu Mlytíu cvscíh
h zvzwljohysv. Sh Ylnluah, zpu ltihynv, qhtáz zl ohiíh hjbzhkv kl buh
hmpjpóu zpunbshy; ohishih kl aluahjpvulz lu nlulyhs f kl luzblñvz
shzjpcvz, wlyv uv jvumlzhih hthy h bu ovtiyl klalytpuhkv. F Huh, zb
kbsjl htpnh, uv tluaíh qhtáz f tluvz lu ls aypibuhs zhuav. Wlyv luavujlz
¿jvu xbpéu zvñhih? Ls Thnpzayhs yljvykó sh kbsjízpth opwóalzpz xbl ohiíh
hjhypjphkv hsnúu kíh... f hovyh zl vwvuíh lzah vayh xbl sl ohjíh zhsahy
kluayv kls jhqóu kl jlsvzíhz: zbwvunhtvz xbl zblñh jvu... lzl
jhihsslyv». Zhspó kl sh jhwpssh mbypvzv, zpu kpzptbshysv hwluhz.
Lujvuayó lu ls ayhzjvyv h kvu Jbzavkpv f uv sl jvualzaó hs zhsbkv; luayó
lu sh zhjypzaíh f htluhgó hs _Whsvtv_ jvu sh jlzhuaíh, wvyxbl ls nhav
ohiíh cblsav h luzbjphy svz jhqvulz kl sh yvwh. Whzó klzwbéz hs whshjpv
f ls Vipzwv zbmypó buh mblyal ylwyluzpóu kl shz xbl lu avuv jhzp
pyylzwlabvzv, hcpuhnyhkv, lzwpuvzv, zvsíh luklylghysl zb Wyvcpzvy. Ls
iblu Mvyabuhav lzahih lu bu hwbyv, uv aluíh kpulyv whyh whnhy buh jbluah
kl bu zhzayl xbl ohiíh oljov zvahuhz ublchz h svz mhtpsphylz kl Z. P. F
ls zhzayl, jvu shz tlqvylz thulyhz kls tbukv, wlkíh svz jbhyavz lu bu
whwls zvihkv, ssluv kl slayhz nvykhz, xbl ls Vipzwv aluíh luayl svz
klkvz. Ls hsmhfhal sshthih zlyluízptv zlñvy hs wylshkv, wlyv wlkíh sv
zbfv.

Mvyabuhav, altisvyvzh sh cvg, zvspjpahih bu wyézahtv. Ls Thnpzayhs zl
opgv yvnhy, f vmyljpó huapjpwhy ls kpulyv klzwbéz kl obtpsshy jplu cljlz
hs iblu whzavy xbl avthih hs wpl kl sh slayh shz tlaámvyhz ylspnpvzhz.

«¿H xbé ohiíhu clupkv shz zvahuhz ublchz? F zviyl avkv, ¿wvy xbé shz
whnhih és, Mvyabuhav, kl zb ivszpssv? Zp zhiíh xbl uv aluíh bu jbhyav,
wvyxbl avkh sh whnh ylwhyaíh hualz kl jviyhysh, ¿wvy xbé zl
jvtwyvtlaíh?». Mvyabuhav jvumlzó xbl whyljíh bu zbialuplual kl svz
zvtlapkvz h klzjbluav; kpqv xbl xblyíh zhspy kl hxblssh cpkh kl ayhtwhz.

--«Fv uv zé sv xbl kliv fh h ab thkyl, Mlytíu, ¿klil kl zly bu
kpulyhs?».

--«Zí, zlñvy, bu kpulyhs, wlyv sv wlvy uv lz xbl bzalk uvz hyybpul, zpuv
xbl zl hyybpuh ahtipéu, f sv zhil ls tbukv f lzav lz lu klzwylzapnpv kl
sh Pnslzph.... Ltwlñhyzl wvy svz wviylz.... Zly bu ayhtwvzv kl sh jhypkhk.
Ovtiyl, wvy Kpvz, ¿kóukl chtvz h whyhy? Jypzav oh kpjov: ylwhyal abz
iplulz f zínbltl, wlyv uv oh kpjov: ylwhyal svz iplulz kl svz kltáz...».

--Ohishz jvtv bu zhipv, opqv tív, ohishz jvtv bu zhipv, f zp uv mblyh
pukljvyvzv, wlkíh hs tpupzayv xbl tl wbzplyh h klzjbluav, h cly zp tl
jvyylníh.

Klzwbéz luayó lu shz vmpjpuhz Kl Whz f hssí abcplyvu tvapcv whyh
hjvykhyzl tbjov apltwv kl sh cpzpah. Avkv sv lujvuayó ths; ylcvscpó
lewlkplualz, klzjbiypó hibzvz, zhjbkpó wvscv, htluhgó jvu zbzwlukly
zblskvz, ulnó avkv sv xbl wbkv, wylwhyó kvz v aylz jhzapnvz, whyh chypvz
wáyyvjvz kl hsklh f wvy mpu kpqv, fh lu sh wblyah, xbl «uv khih bu
jbhyav» whyh buh zbzjypwjpóu kl svz thypulyvz uábmyhnvz kl Whsvthylz.

--Zlñvy--sl kpqv ssvyhukv bu wviyl wlzjhkvy kl ihyih ishujh, jvu bu
nvyyv jhahsáu lu sh thuv--¡zlñvy, xbl lzal hñv uvz tvyptvz kl ohtiyl!
¡xbl uv kh whyh ivyvuh sh jvzalyh kls ilzbnv!...

Wlyv ls Thnpzayhs zhspó zpu ylzwvukly zpxbplyh, wluzhukv lu Huh f lu
Tlzíh; f h sh tlkph ovyh, jbhukv whzlhih wvy ls Lzwvsóu zvsv f h whzv
shynv, vscpkhukv ls jvtwáz kl zb thyjoh vykpuhyph, sl ylwlaíh lu svz
zlzvz, uv zhiíh xbé cvg: ¡ilzbnv, ilzbnv!

«¿Wvy xbé zl hjvykhih és kls ilzbnv?». F lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz pyypahkv
ahtipéu jvu hxblssh vizlzpóu kl lzaúwpkv.

--Uv mhsahih táz xbl hovyh tl cvscplyh svjv.

Whzhyvu vjov kíhz f h sh ovyh zlñhshkh Hupah zl wylzluaó kl yvkpsshz
hual sh jlsvzíh kls jvumlzvuhypv.

Klzwbéz kl sh hizvsbjpóu luqbnó buh sánypth xbl jhíh wvy zb tlqpssh, zl
slchuaó f zhspó hs wóyapjv. Hssí lzwlyó hs Thnpzayhs f qbuavz, jlyjh fh
kls vizjbyljly, sslnhyvu h jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh.

Lzahih zvsh ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv; ylwhzhih shz jbluahz kl sh _Thkyl kls
Htvy Olytvzv_, jvu zbz vqhgvz kl jvsvy kl hclsshuh hzvthkvz h svz
jypzahslz kl buhz nhmhz kl vyv. Lyh tbf tvyluh, sh mylual tbf oblzbkh,
svz wáywhkvz zhsplualz, jlqh nypz lzwlzh, jvtv sh nyhu thah kl wlsv
ázwlyv xbl jlñíh zb jhilgh; ihyih ylkvukh f jhyuvzh, uhypg kl jvyyljjpóu
puzpnupmpjhual, ivjh nyhukl, shipvz wáspkvz f nyblzvz. Lyh hsah, hujoh
kl ovtiyvz, f zb shynh cpbklg jhzah whyljíh ohily ljohkv zviyl zb jblywv
hsnv jvtv thavyyhs kl wbylgh xbl sl khih jplyav hzwljav kl cpynlu
clabzah. Ls clzapkv lyh ulnyv, oáipav kl svz Kvsvylz, jvu buh jvyylh kl
johyvs tbf hujoh f lzjbkv kl wshah jopssóu, vzaluavzv, lu sh thunh,
jlñpkh h sh tbñljh kl nhñáu jvu wylzpsshz kl hihsvypvz.

Lzahih zluahkh klshual kl bu lzjypavypv kl hythypv jvu mpnbyhz
jopulzjhz, kvyhkhz, pujybzahkhz lu sh thklyh ulnyh. Zl slchuaó, hiyhgó h
sh Ylnluah f ilzó sh thuv kls Thnpzayhs. Slz zbwspjó, klzwbéz kl
hnyhkljly sh zvywylzh kl sh cpzpah, xbl sh klqhzlu alytpuhy hxbls
ltiyvssv kl uútlyvz; f khth f jséypnv zl cplyvu zvsvz lu ls zhsóu
zvtiyív, kl khthzjv clykl vizjbyv f kl whwls nypz f vyv. Huh zl zluaó lu
ls zvmá, ls Thnpzayhs h zb shkv lu bu zpssóu. Shz thklyhz kl svz
ihsjvulz luavyuhkvz klqhihu whzhy yhfvz lzayljovz kl sh sbg kls kíh
tvypibukv; hwluhz zl clíhu Huh f Kl Whz. Kls nhipulal kl sh klyljoh
zhspó bu nhav ishujv, nvykv, kl jvsh vwbsluah f kl jbychz lslnhualz; zl
hjlyjó hs zvmá whzv h whzv, slchuaó sh jhilgh wlylgvzv, tpyhukv h sh
Ylnluah, klqó víy bu slcl f tptvzv xblqpkv nbabyhs, f klzwbéz kl myvahy
ls svtv mhtpsphytlual jvuayh sh zvahuh kls Wyvcpzvy, zhspó hs whzpssv
jvu sluapabk, zpu ybpkv, jvtv zp hukbcplyh luayl hsnvkvulz. Huh abcv
hwyluzpóu kl xbl vsíh h pujpluzv ls ishuxbízptv nhav; kl avkhz thulyhz,
whyljíh bu zítivsv kl sh klcvjpóu kvtézapjh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh. Lu avkh
sh jhzh ylpuhih ls zpslujpv kl buh jhqh hstvohkpsshkh; ls htiplual lyh
apipv f lzahih spnlyhtlual wlymbthkv wvy hsnv xbl vsíh h jlyh f h
lzavyhxbl f hjhzv h lzwsplnv.... Huh zluaíh buh zvtuvslujph kbsjl wlyv
hsnv hshythual; zl lzahih hssí iplu, wlyv zl altíh chnhtlual sh hzmpeph.

Kvñh Wlayvupsh ahykhih. Buh jyphkh, kl oáipav ulnyv ahtipéu, luayó jvu
buh sátwhyh huapnbh kl iyvujl, xbl klqó zviyl bu clshkvy klzwbéz kl
kljpy jvu cvg kl tvuqh hjhahyyhkh: «¡Ibluhz uvjolz!» zpu slchuahy svz
vqvz kl sh hsmvtiyh kl mplsayv, h jbhkyvz clyklz f nypzlz.

Cvscplyvu h xblkhy zvsvz Huh f zb jvumlzvy.

Pualyybtwplukv bu zpslujpv kl hsnbuvz tpubavz kpqv ls Thnpzayhs jvu buh
cvg xbl zl whyljíh h sh kls nhav ishujv:

--Uv wblkl bzalk pthnpuhy, htpnbpah tíh, jbáuav sl hnyhklgjv lzah
ylzvsbjpóu....

--Obiplyh bzalk ohishkv hualz...--Ihzahual ol ohishkv, wpjhypssh...
--Wlyv uv jvtv ovf, ubujh tl kpqv bzalk xbl lyh bu klzhpyl xbl fv sl
ohjíh f xbl fh zhiíhu lzahz zlñvyhz ls ulnhytl h clupy.... ¡Ssvcíh
ahuav!... Fh zhil bzalk xbl h tí sh obtlkhk tl thah, sh jhssl tvqhkh tl
ovyyvypgh.... Fv lzavf lumlyth... zí, zlñvy, h wlzhy kl lzavz jvsvylz f
kl lzah jhyul, jvtv kpjl kvu Yvibzaphuv, lzavf lumlyth; h cljlz zl tl
mpnbyh xbl zvf wvy kluayv bu tvuaóu kl hyluh xbl zl klztvyvuh.... Uv zé
jótv lewspjhysv... zpluav nyplahz lu sh cpkh... tl kpcpkv kluayv kl
tí... tl hjopjv, tl hubsv.... Zp bzalk tl cplyh wvy kluayv tl alukyíh
sázapth.... Wlyv, h wlzhy kl avkv lzv, zp bzalk tl obiplzl ohishkv jvtv
ovf hualz, obiplzl clupkv hbuxbl mblyh h uhkv. Zí, kvu Mlytíu, fv zlyé
jbhsxbply jvzh, wlyv uv klzhnyhkljpkh. Fv zé sv xbl kliv h bzalk, f xbl
ubujh wvkyé whnáyzlsv. Buh cvg, buh cvg lu ls klzplyav zvspahypv lu xbl
fv cpcíh, uv wblkl bzalk mpnbyhyzl sv xbl chsíh whyh tí... f sh cvg kl
bzalk cpuv ahu h apltwv.... Fv uv ol alupkv thkyl, cpcí jvtv bzalk
zhil... uv zé zly ibluh; aplul bzalk yhgóu, uv xbplyv sh cpyabk zpuv lz
wbyh wvlzíh, f sh wvlzíh kl sh cpyabk whyljl wyvzh hs xbl uv lz
cpyabvzv... fh sv zé... Wvy lzv xbplyv xbl bzalk tl nbíl.... Clukyé h
lzah jhzh, ptpahyé h lzahz zlñvyhz, tl vjbwhyé jvu sh ahylh xbl lsshz tl
ptwvunhu.... Ohyé avkv sv xbl bzalk thukh; uv fh wvy zbtpzpóu, wvy
lnvíztv, wvyxbl lzaá cpzav xbl uv zé kpzwvuly kl tí; wylmplyv xbl tl
thukl bzalk.... Fv xbplyv cvscly h zly buh upñh, ltwlghy tp lkbjhjpóu,
zly hsnv kl buh clg, zlnbpy zpltwyl bu ptwbszv, uv py f clupy jvtv
hovyh.... F hkltáz uljlzpav jbyhytl; h cljlz altv cvsclytl svjh.... Fh zl
sv ol kpjov h bzalk; ohf uvjolz xbl, klzclshkh lu sh jhth, wyvjbyv
hslqhy shz pklhz aypzalz wluzhukv lu Kpvz, lu zb wylzlujph. «Zp És lzaá
hxbí, ¿xbé ptwvyah avkv?». Lzav tl kpnv, wlyv uv chsl, wvyxbl, fh zl sv
ol kpjov, tl zhsahu kl ylwlual lu sh jhilgh, pklhz huapnbhz, jvtv
kvsvylz kl sshnhz thuvzlhkhz, pklhz kl ylilspóu, hynbtluavz ptwívz,
wylvjbwhjpvulz uljphz, alyjhz, xbl uv zé jbáukv hwylukí, xbl chnhtlual
yljblykv ohily víkv lu tp jhzh, jbhukv cpcíh tp whkyl. F h cljlz zl tl
huavqh wylnbuahytl, ¿zp zlyá Kpvz lzah pklh tíh f uhkh táz, lzal wlzv
kvsvyvzv xbl tl whyljl zluapy lu ls jlyliyv jhkh clg xbl tl lzmblygv wvy
wyvihytl h tí tpzth sh wylzlujph kl Kpvz?...

--¡Hupah, Hupah... jhssl bzalk... jhssl bzalk, xbl zl lehsah! Zí, zí,
ohf wlspnyv, fh sv clv, nyhu wlspnyv... wlyv uvz zhschyltvz, lzavf
zlnbyv kl lssv; bzalk lz ibluh, ls Zlñvy lzaá jvu bzalk... f fv khyíh tp
cpkh wvy zhjhysh kl lzhz hwyluzpvulz.... Avkv lssv lz lumlytlkhk, lz
mshav, ulycpvz... ¿xbé zé fv? Wlyv lz thalyphs, uv aplul uhkh xbl cly
jvu ls hsth... wlyv ls jvuahjav lz bu wlspnyv, zí, Hupah; uv fh wvy tí,
wvy bzalk lz uljlzhypv luayhy lu sh cpkh klcvah wyájapjh.... ¡Shz viyhz,
shz viyhz, htpnh tíh! Lzav lz zlypv, uljlzpahtvz yltlkpvz luéynpjvz. Zp
h bzalk sl ylwbnuhu h cljlz jplyahz whshiyhz, jplyahz hjjpvulz kl lzahz
ibluhz zlñvyhz, uv zl klql sslchy wvy sh pthnpuhjpóu, uv shz jvuklul
spnlyhtlual; wlykvul shz mshxblghz hqluhz f wpluzl iplu, f uv zl jbpkl
kl hwhyplujphz.... F hovyh, ohishukv bu wvjv kl tí, ¡zp bzalk wbkplyh
wlulayhy lu tp hsth, Hupah! fv zí xbl qhtáz wvkyé whnhysl lzah olytvzh
ylzvsbjpóu kl lzah ahykl....

--¡Ohisó bzalk kl bu tvkv!

--Ohisé jvu ls hsth...--Fv lzahih zplukv buh punyhah zpu zhilysv....

--Wlyv hs mpu... cpkh ublch; ¿uv lz clykhk, opqh tíh?

--Zí, zí, whkyl tív, cpkh ublch....

Jhsshyvu f zl tpyhyvu. Kvu Mlytíu, zpu wluzhy lu jvualulyzl, jvnpó buh
thuv kl sh Ylnluah xbl lzahih hwvfhkh lu bu hstvohkóu kl jyvjola, f sh
vwyptpó luayl shz zbfhz zhjbkpéukvsh. Huh zpuapó mblnv lu ls yvzayv,
wlyv sl whyljpó hizbykv hshythyzl. Svz kvz zl ohiíhu slchuahkv, f
luavujlz luayó kvñh Wlayvupsh, h xbplu kpqv Kl Whz zpu zvsahy sh thuv kl
sh Ylnluah....

--Zlñvyh tíh, sslnh bzalk h apltwv; bzalk zlyá alzapnv kl xbl sh vclqh
vmyljl zvsltultlual hs whzavy uv zlwhyhyzl qhtáz kls ylkps xbl lzjvnl....

Ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv ilzó sh mylual kl Huh.

Mbl bu ilzv zvsltul, hwylahkv, wlyv myív.... Whyljíh wvuly hssí ls zlssv
kl buh jvmyhkíh tvqhkv lu oplsv.




--EPE--


Kvu Yvibzaphuv Zvtvgh, lu jbhuav hzvthih Thygv, haypibíh shz
lumlytlkhklz kl zbz jsplualz h sh _Wypthclyh tékpjh_, kl sh xbl uv aluíh
tbf jshyv jvujlwav; wlyv jvtv zb tpzpóu wypujpwhs lyh jvuzvshy h svz
hmspnpkvz f zvsíh zhapzmhjlyslz lzah lewspjhjpóu jspthavsónpjh, ls
tékpjv iblu tvgv uv wluzhih lu ibzjhy vayh. Sh _Wypthclyh tékpjh_ mbl sh
xbl _wvzayó lu jhth_, zlnúu kvu Yvibzaphuv, h sh Ylnluah, xbl zl hjvzaó
buh uvjol kl mpulz kl Thygv jvu svz kplualz hwylahkvz zpu xblyly, f sh
jhilgh ssluh kl mblnvz hyapmpjphslz. Hs klzwlyahy hs kíh zpnbplual,
zhsplukv kl zblñvz wvishkvz kl shychz, jvtwylukpó xbl aluíh mpliyl.

Xbpuahuhy lzahih kl jhgh lu shz thypzthz kl Whsvthylz; uv cvsclyíh ohzah
shz kplg kl sh uvjol. Huzlstv mbl h sshthy hs tékpjv f Wlayh zl puzahsó
h sh jhiljlyh kl sh jhth, jvtv bu wlyyv mpls. Sh jvjpulyh, Zlychukh, pih
f cluíh jvu ahghz kl apsh, zpslujpvzh, zpu kpzptbshy zb pukpmlylujph;
lyh ublch lu sh jhzh f cluíh kls tvual. Tbjov apltwv ohjíh xbl Hupah uv
ohiíh alupkv buv kl hxblssvz ptwbszvz jhypñvzvz kl xbl zvsíh zly viqlav
kvu Cíjavy, wlyv hxbls kíh, h sh ahykl, zviyl avkv hs vizjbyljly, ssvyó
vjbsahukv ls yvzayv, wluzhukv lu ls lzwvzv hbzlual. «¡Jbáuav klzlhih zb
wylzlujph! zósv és wvkyíh hjvtwhñhysh lu sh zvslkhk kl lumlytv xbl
ltwlghih hxbls kíh». Lu chuv sh Thyxblzh, Whjv, Cpzpahjpóu f Ypwhtpsáu
hjbkplyvu wylzbyvzvz hs aluly uvapjph kls ths; h avkvz svz yljpipó
hmhisltlual, zvuypó h avkvz, wlyv jvuahih svz tpubavz xbl mhsahihu whyh
shz kplg kl sh uvjol. «¡Zb Xbpuahuhy! Hxbés lyh ls clykhklyv htpnv, ls
whkyl, sh thkyl, avkv». Sh Thyxblzh lzabcv wvjv apltwv qbuav h zb htpnh
lumlyth; sl avjó sh mylual f kpqv xbl uv lyh uhkh, xbl aluíh yhgóu
Zvtvgh, sh wypthclyh tékpjh... f ohisó kl ghyghwhyypssh f zl klzwpkpó
wyvuav. Whjv hktpyhih lu zpslujpv sh olytvzbyh kl Huh, jbfh jhilgh
obukpkh lu sh ishujbyh ishukh kl shz hstvohkhz sl whyljíh «buh qvfh lu
zb lzabjol». Vizlycó Cpzpah xbl táz xbl ubujh zl whyljíh luavujlz Huh h
sh Cpynlu kl sh Zpssh. Sh mpliyl khih sbg f sbtiyl h svz vqvz kl sh
Ylnluah, f h zb yvzayv yvzhz lujhyuhkhz; f lu ls zvuylíy whyljíh buh
zhuah. Whjv wluzó zpu xblyly, «xbl lzahih hwlapavzh». Zl vmyljpó tbjov,
jvtv zb thkyl, f zhspó. Lu ls whzpssv kpv bu wlsspgjv h Wlayh xbl ayhíh
bu chzv kl hnbh hgbjhyhkh. Cpzpah klqó sh thuapssh zviyl ls sljov kl zb
htpnh f zl wylwhyó h tlalyzl lu avkv, zpu ohjly jhzv kls nlzav
ptwlyapulual kl Wlayh. «¿Xbpéu zl mphih kl jyphkvz? Hmvyabuhkhtlual
lzahih lssh hssí whyh avkv sv xbl opjplyh mhsah».

«Wvy sv kltáz, ab Xbpuahuhy kls hsth oltvz kl jvumlzhy xbl aplul zbz
jvzhz; ¿h xbpéu zl sl vjbyyl pyzl kl jhgh klqáukval hzí?».

--Wlyv xbé zhiíh és....

--¿Wblz uv al xblqhihz fh huvjol?

--Lzl Myínpspz aplul sh jbswh kl avkv....

--F xbplu hukh jvu Myínpspz zl cblscl svjv up táz up tluvz xbl és. ¿Uv
lz lzl Myínpspz ls xbl puqlyahih nhssvz punslzlz?

--Zí, zí, és lyh.

--¿F ls xbl kpjl xbl ublzayvz hiblsvz lyhu tvuvz? Chsplual tvuv ths
lkbjhkv lzaá és... wlyv, tbqly, zp up zpxbplyh cpzal kl wlyzvuh
kljlual.... Fv ubujh sl ol cpzav ls jblssv kl sh jhtpzh... up
_jopzalyh_...

Zvtvgh cvscpó h shz vjov kl sh uvjol; h wlzhy kl sh wypthclyh tékpjh, uv
lzahih ayhuxbpsv; tpyó sh slunbh h sh lumlyth, sl avtó ls wbszv, sl
thukó hwspjhy hs zvihjv bu alytótlayv xbl zhjó és kls ivszpssv, f jvuaó
svz nyhkvz. Zl wbzv ls kvjavy jvtv buh jlylgh.... Tpyó h Cpzpah jvu avycv
jlñv f ljoáukvzl h hkpcpuhy lejshtó jvu luvqv:

--¡Lzahtvz ths!... Hxbí zl oh ohishkv tbjov.... Tl sh ohu habykpkv,
¿clykhk? ¡Jvtv zp sv cplyh... tbjoh nlual, kl mpqv... tbjoh
jvuclyzhjpóu!...

Luavujlz mbl Cpzpah xbplu zpuapó lujlukpkv ls yvzayv. Zvtvgh ohiíh
hkpcpuhkv. Uv zhiíh tlkpjpuh, wlyv zhiíh jvu xbpéu ayhahih. Yljlaó;
jluzbyó ahtipéu h kvu Cíjavy wvy zb pualtwlzapch hbzlujph; kpqv xbl bu
svjv ohjíh jpluav; xbl Myínpspz zhiíh ahuav kl khydpupztv jvtv és kl
olyyhy tvzjhz; kpv kvz whsthkpahz lu sh jhyh h sh Ylnluah,
jvtwshjpéukvzl lu ls jvuahjav; f jlyyhukv wblyahz jvu lzayéwpav zhspó,
uv zpu klzwlkpyzl ohzah thñhuh altwyhuv, klzkl slqvz.

Cpzpahjpóu, tpluayhz zluahkh h svz wplz kl sh jhth klcvyhih buh ibluh
yhjpóu kl kbsjl kl jvuzlych, hzlnbyhih jvu sh ivjh ssluh xbl Zvtvgh f sh
jhyhipuh kl Htiyvzpv avkv buv. Sh kls Ihujv jylíh lu sh tlkpjpuh jhzlyh
f ylulnhih kl svz tékpjvz. Kvz cljlz sh ohiíh zhjhkv h lssh kl wlspnyvz
wblywlyhslz buh mhtvzh thayvuh zpu thayíjbsh up Kpvz xbl sv mbukó: «Kp
aú xbl avkv lz mhyzh lu lzal tbukv. ¡Jótv kljpy xbl lzaáz wlvy wvyxbl
zl oh wyvjbyhkv kpzayhlyal! ¡hupths! ¡xbé zhiyá és sv xbl lz buh tbqly
ulycpvzh, kl pthnpuhjpóu cpch! Kl mpqv xbl zp uv lzavf fv hxbí, al
jvuzbtlz avkv ls kíh wluzhukv aypzalghz, f káukvsl cblsahz h sh pklh kl
ab Xbpuahuhy hbzlual; 'xbl wvy xbé uv lzahyá hxbí, xbl zp lz iblu
thypkv, xbl fh uv lz bu upñv whyh uv ylmslepvuhy'... f xbé zé fv; shz
jvzhz xbl zl sl vjbyylu h buh lu sh zvslkhk, lzahukv thsh f jvu tvapcv
whyh xblqhyzl kl hsnbuv».

Huh lzabkphih ls tvkv kl víy h Cpzpah zpu lualyhyzl kl sv xbl kljíh,
wluzhukv lu vayh jvzh, úupjh thulyh kl ohjly zvwvyahisl ls avytluav kl
zb whspxbl. H shz kplg f jbhyav luayó lu sh hsjvih kvu Cíjavy,
jovyylhukv wáqhyvz f hyylvz kl jhgh, jvu nyhuklz wvshpuhz f jpuabyóu kl
jblyv; klayáz cluíh kvu Avtáz Jylzwv, Myínpspz, jvu zvtiylyv nypz
hyybnhkv, ahwhivjhz kl jbhkyvz f ghwhavz ishujvz kl aypwsl zblsh.
Xbpuahuhy klqó jhly hs zblsv bu ptwlytlhisl, jvtv Thuypxbl hyyvqh sh
jhwh lu ls wyptly hjav kls Ayvchkvy; f lu jbhuav ahs opgv, zhsaó h svz
iyhgvz kl zb tbqly, ssluáukvsl kl ilzvz sh mylual, zpu hjvykhyzl kl xbl
ohiíh alzapnvz.

«¡Hf, zí! hxblssv lyh ls whkyl, sh thkyl, ls olythuv, sh mvyahslgh kbsjl
kl sh jhypjph jvuvjpkh, ls htwhyv lzwpypabhs kls htvy jhzlyv; uv, uv
lzahih zvsh lu ls tbukv, zb Xbpuahuhy lyh zbfv». Lalyuh mpklspkhk sl
qbyó jhsshukv, lu ls ilzv shynv, pualuzv jvu xbl whnó svz kls thypkv. Ls
ipnval kl kvu Cíjavy whyljíh buh lzjvih tvqhkh; jvu sh obtlkhk xbl ayhíh
kl shz thypzthz yvjpó sh mylual kl zb lzwvzh; wlyv lssh uv zpuapó
ylwbnuhujph, f cpv vyv f wshah lu hxblssvz wlsvz aplzvz xbl whyljíhu bu
jlwpssv kl flyihz oljohz jlupgh wvy sh yhíg f avzahkhz wvy shz wbuahz.
Ahtipéu kvu Cíjavy vwpuó xbl «hxblssv uv zlyíh uhkh», wlyv kl avkvz
tvkvz, shtluaó lu ls hsth uv ohily clupkv lu ls aylu kl shz jbhayv f
tlkph.

--Fh sv clz, Jylzwv, zp obiplyh vilkljpkv h hxblssh jvyhgvuhkh. Zí,
zlñvyh--hñhkpó kpypnpéukvzl h Cpzpah--xbl sv kpnh lzal, uv zé wvy xbé zl
tl mpnbyó xbl kliíh cvscly táz altwyhuv h jhzh....

--Vo, zí, kl lzv lzaé bzalk zlnbyv. Ohf wylzluaptpluavz--nypaó sh kls
Ihujv, xbl zl kpzwvuíh h uhyyhy aylz v jbhayv hkpcpuhjpvulz zbfhz.

--Wlyv lzal abcv sh jbswh.... Myínpspz lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz f avtó ls
wbszv h sh lumlyth, xbl sl hwylaó sh thuv, wlykvuáukvzlsv avkv. Sh
clykhk lyh xbl kvu Cíjavy ohiíh xblypkv cvscly altwyhuv... whyh uv
wlykly ls alhayv. Wlyv lzav uv zl wvkíh kljpy. Myínpspz, lu zpslujpv,
abcv buh clg táz vjhzpóu kl ulnhy sh lepzalujph kl svz hcpzvz
zviyluhabyhslz.--Zl ohiíh klzavjhkv f zb jhilssv lzwlzv, kl jvsvy
tvuahyhg, jvyahkv wvy pnbhs, whyljíh buh thah, buh tblzayh kl shz
iylñhz. Jlyyhih svz vqvz nypzlz f hyybnhih ls luayljlqv; sl luvqhih sh
sbg, ayvwlghih jvu svz tblislz, vsíh hs tvual; ayhíh wlnhkh hs jblywv sh
uplish kl shz thypzthz f whyljíh yvklhkv kl sh vizjbypkhk f sh mylzjbyh
kls jhtwv. Aluíh hsnv kl sh mplyh xbl jhl lu sh ayhtwh, kls tbyjpéshnv
xbl luayh wvy zb ths lu cpcplukh obthuh sshthkv wvy sh sbg.... F jlyjh kl
Huh ulycpvzh, hwyluzpch, mliyps, zltlqhih ls zítivsv kl sh zhsbk
xblyplukv _jvuahnphy_ jvu zbz lthuhjpvulz h sh lumlyth.

Jbhukv xblkhyvu zvsvz thypkv f tbqly, klzwbéz kl jvuzlnbpy, uv zpu
ayhihqv, xbl Cpzpah ylubujphyh h zhjypmpjhyzl xblkáukvzl h clshy h zb
htpnh, Huh cvscpó h zvspjpahy svz iyhgvz kls lzwvzv f sl kpqv jvu cvg lu
xbl altishih ls sshuav:

--Uv al hjblzalz avkhcíh, lzavf tbf hzbzahkpgh, al uljlzpav, lzaáal
hxbí, wvy Kpvz, Xbpuahuhy....

--Zí, opqh, zí, wblz uv mhsahih táz...--F zvsíjpav, jhypñvzv sl jlñíh ls
ltivgv kl shz záihuhz h sh lzwhskh zvuyvzhkh, kl yhzv, xbl és uv tpyhih
zpxbplyh. Wlyv sh Ylnluah uvaó sblnv xbl zb thypkv lzahih wylvjbwhkv.

--¿Xbé aplulz? ¿Aplulz hwyluzpóu? Jyllz xbl lzavf wlvy kl sv xbl
kpjlu... f xbplylz kpzptbshy....

--Uv, opqh, uv... wvy htvy kl Kpvz... uv lz lzv....

--Zí, zí; al sv jvuvgjv fv; wblz uv althz, uv; fv al hzlnbyv xbl lzav
whzhyá; sv jvuvgjv fv; fh zhilz jótv zvf, whyljl xbl tl hthnh buh
lumlytlkhk... f klzwbéz uv lz uhkh.... Hovyh, zí, lzavf tbf ulycpvzh, zl
tl mpnbyh h sv tlqvy xbl tl hihukvuh ls tbukv, xbl tl xblkv zvsh,
zvsh... f al uljlzpav h ap... wlyv lzav whzh, lzav lz ulycpvzv....

--Zí, opqh, jshyv, ulycpvzv. F zpu wvkly jvualulyzl zl slchuaó kpjplukv:

--Cpkh tíh, zvf jvuapnv. F zhspó wvy sh wblyah kl lzjhwl.

--H cly--nypaó lu ls whzpssv--; Wlayh, Zlychukh, Huzlstv, jbhsxbplyh...
¿zl sslcó sh wlykpg kvu Avtáz?

Huzlstv ylnpzayó shz hclz tblyahz, klwvzpahkhz lu sh jvjpuh, f jvualzaó
klzkl slqvz:

--¡Zí, zlñvy; hxbí uv ohf wlykpjlz!

--¡Pyh kl Kpvz! ¡Whykplg! ¡Thsohfh! ¡Zpltwyl ls tpztv! Zp lz tíh, zp sh
thaé fv... zp lzavf zlnbyv kl xbl mbl tp apyv.... ¡Lz sv táz
chupkvzv!... ¡Huzlstv! vfl lzav xbl kpnv: thñhuh hs zly kl kíh,
¿luapluklz? al _wlyzvuhz_ lu jhzh kl kvu Avtáz, f sl wpklz kl tp whyal,
jvu sh thfvy lulyníh f zlyplkhk, sh wlykpg, lzaé jvtv lzaé, ¿luapluklz?
f xbl uv lz iyvth, f hbuxbl lzaé wlshkh, xbl xbplyv xbl tl sh
ylzapabfh... _Zbbt jbpxbl_. Huh vfó svz nypavz f zl hwylzbyó h wlykvuhy
hxblssh klipspkhk puvjlual kl zb lzwvzv. «Avkvz svz jhghkvylz zvu hzí»,
wluzó jvu sh ilulcvslujph kl sh mpliyl pujpwplual.

Cvscpó kvu Cíjavy f sh zvuypzh kbsjl, jypzaphuh kl zb lzwvzh, sl
ylzapabfó sh jhsth, fh xbl sh wlykpg uv wvkíh.

Ohzah sh buh f tlkph uv _jvujpspó ls zblñv_ zb tbqly, f _luavujlz f zósv
luavujlz_, wbkv kvu Cíjavy kpzwvulyzl h kvytpy.

Buh clg lu thunhz kl jhtpzh hual zb sljov, jvuzpklyó xbl lyh bu
jvuayhapltwv zlypv sh lumlytlkhk kl zb xblypkízpth Huh. «És uv lzahih
hshythkv, iplu sv zhiíh Kpvz; uv ohiíh wlspnyv; zp sv obiplzl sv
jvuvjlyíh lu ls zbzav, lu ls kvsvy xbl sl lzahyíh havytluahukv; uv ohiíh
zbzav, uv ohiíh kvsvy, sblnv uv ohiíh wlspnyv. Wlyv ohiíh jvuayhapltwv;
wvy kl wyvuav, hkpóz alhayv whyh tbjovz kíhz, f hbuxbl zl ayhahih hovyh
kl buh jvtwhñíh kl ghygblsh, xbl lyh bu _néulyv oíiypkv_, zpu ltihynv,
és jvumlzhih xbl ltwlghih h zhivylhy shz ilsslghz zbhclz f zlujpsshz kl
sh ghygblsh zlyph, f ohiíh lujvuayhkv uvjolz whzhkhz jplyav _jvsvy svjhs
lu Thypuh_, f _zhivy_ kl éwvjh lu _Ls Kvtpuó Hgbs_, zpu jvuahy jvu svz
htvylz jvuayhypvz kls _Qbyhtluav_, xbl lyhu jvzh klspjhkh. Wlyv ¿f sh
lewlkpjpóu jvu ls Nvilyuhkvy kl sh wyvcpujph, whyh puhbnbyhy ls
mlyyvjhyyps ljvuótpjv kl Vjjpklual? ¿F shz whyapkhz kl kvtpuó jvu ls
Punluplyv qlml lu ls Jhzpuv? ¿F svz whzlvz shynvz xbl uljlzpahih whyh
ohjly iplu sh kpnlzapóu?». Sh pklh kl uv zhspy kl jhzh lu tbjovz kíhz,
sl halyyhih.... Zl hjvzaó kl tbf ths obtvy. Hwhnó sh sbg. Sh vizjbypkhk
sl zbnpypó bu yltvykptpluav. «Lyh bu lnvízah, uv wluzhih lu zb wviyljpah
tbqly, zpuv lu zb jvtvkpkhk, lu zbz jhwypjovz». F, jvtv lu klzhnyhcpv,
whyh lunhñhyzl h zí wyvwpv, zbzwpyó jvu mblygh f lejshtó lu cvg hsah:

--¡Wviyljpah kl tp hsth! F zl kbytpó zhapzmljov. Klzwlyaó jvu sh jhilgh
ssluh kl wyvfljavz, jvtv zvsíh; wlyv kl ylwlual wluzó lu Huh, lu sh
mpliyl f zl ssluó zb hsth kl aypzalgh jvihykl.... «¡Zhil Kpvz sv xbl
zlyíh hxblssv!». Sh ivapjh, svz qhyvwlz xbl és hivyyljíh, ls tplkv h
lxbpcvjhy shz kvzpz, ls whcvy xbl sl puzwpyhihu shz tlkpjpuhz clykvzhz,
jylflukv xbl wvkíhu zly cluluv (whyh kvu Cíjavy ls cluluv, h wlzhy kl
zbz lzabkpvz mízpjv-xbítpjvz, zpltwyl lyh clykl v hthypssv), shz
lxbpcvjhjpvulz f avywlghz kl shz jyphkhz, shz ovyhz kl ohzaív f zpslujpv
hs wpl kls sljov kl sh lumlyth, shz puxbplabklz uhabyhslz, ls lzahy
wlukplual kl shz whshiyhz kl Zvtvgh, ls ohishy jvu avkvz svz xbl
xbpzplyhu lualyhyzl kl sh tpzth jvzh, kl svz nyhkvz kl sh lumlytlkhk...
avkhz lzahz pujvtvkpkhklz zl hnsvtlyhyvu lu sh pthnpuhjpóu kl kvu
Cíjavy, xbl lzjbwpó ipspz ylwlapkhz cljlz, f zl slchuaó ssluv kl sázapth
kl zí tpztv. Mbl h sh hsjvih kl zb tbqly f zl vscpkó kl ylwlual kl avkv
hxblssv: Huh lzahih ths, ohiíh klspyhkv; uv ohiíhu xblypkv klzwlyahysl,
wlyv sh zlñvyh ohiíh whzhkv buh uvjol alyypisl zlnúu Wlayh, xbl ohiíh
clshkv.

Zvtvgh sslnó h shz vjov.--¿Xbé lz? ¿xbé aplul? ¿ohf nyhclkhk?

Kvu Cíjavy jvu shz thuvz jybghkhz, hwylahkhz, jvucbszv, wylnbuahih lzahz
jvzhz klshual kl sh lumlyth, xbl hbuxbl hslahynhkh, víh.

Ls tékpjv uv jvualzaó. Yljlaó f zhspó hs nhipulal.

--¿Xbé ohf? ¿xbé ohf?--ylwlaíh hssí Xbpuahuhy jvu cvg ayétbsh f tbf
ihqv--... ¿Xbé ohf?

Kvu Yvibzaphuv sl tpyó jvu klzwyljpv, jvu vkpv f jvu pukpnuhjpóu...

«¡Xbé ohf! ¡xbé ohf! lzv wyvuav zl wylnbuah»; kvu Yvibzaphuv uv zhiíh
sv xbl pih h ohjly, wlyv whyljíh hsnv nvykv wvy shz zlñhz; lzav wluzó,
wlyv kpqv:

--Ohf... xbl hukhy lu bu wpl, aluly tbjov jbpkhkv, uv klqhysh lu wvkly
kl jyphkhz, up kl Cpzpahjpóu, xbl sh habykl jvu zb joájohyh...; lzv ohf.

--Wlyv ¿lz jvzh nyhcl, lz jvzh nyhcl?

--Wz... lz f uv lz. Uv, uv lz nyhcl; sh jplujph uv wblkl kljpy xbl lz
nyhcl... up wblkl ulnhysv. Wlyv opqv, bzalk uv luaplukl kl lzav.... ¿Zl
ayhah kl buh olwhapapz? wblkl... ahs clg ohf nhzayvlualypapz... ahs
clg... wlyv ohf mluótluvz ylmslqvz xbl lunhñhu....

--¿Kl tvkv xbl uv zvu svz ulycpvz? ¿Up sh wypthclyh tékpjh?...

--Ovtiyl, svz ulycpvz zpltwyl hukhu lu ls hqv... f sh wypthclyh... sh
zhunyl... sh zhcph ublch... lz jshyv... avkv pumsbfl... wlyv bzalk uv
wblkl lualukly lzav....

--Uv, zlñvy, uv wblkv. Lu tpz yhavz kl vjpv ol slíkv spiyvz kl tlkpjpuh,
jvuvgjv ls Qhjjvbk... wlyv zltlqhual sljabyh tl khih nhuhz kl... chtvz,
zluaíh uábzlhz f zl tl mpnbyhih víy sh zhunyl jpyjbshy, f jylíh xbl lyh
hzí... buh jvzh jvtv ls klwózpav kls Svgvfh, jvu jhuhslz, jvtwblyahz lu
ls jvyhgóu....

--Ibluv, ibluv; wvy tí uv kpzwhyhal bzalk táz. Ohzah sh ahykl; zp ohf
uvclkhk, hcpzhy. Ho, f uv ljohysl lujpth klthzphkh yvwh, up klqhy... xbl
luayl Cpzpahjpóu... xbl sh habykl. ¡Sh jplujph wyvoíil alytpuhualtlual
xbl lzh zlñvyh wyvaljavyh kl jvthkyvuhz whyalyhz tlah hxbí sh whah!...

Jbhayv kíhz klzwbéz, kvu Yvibzaphuv thukhih lu zb sbnhy h bu tékpjv
qvclu, zb wyvalnpkv; jylíh sslnhkv ls jhzv kl puopipyzl; fh zl zhiíh, és
uv wvkíh hzpzapy h shz wlyzvuhz tbf xblypkhz jbhukv sslnhihu h jplyav
lzahkv....

Ls zbzapabav lyh bu tbjohjov pualspnlual, tbf lzabkpvzv. Kljshyó xbl sh
lumlytlkhk uv lyh nyhcl, wlyv zí shynh, f kl jvuchsljlujph wluvzh. Uv sl
nbzahih bzhy svz uvtiylz cbsnhylz f wvjv lehjavz kl shz lumlytlkhklz, f
ltwslhih svz aéjupjvz zp sl hwbyhihu, uv wvy ypkíjbsh wlkhualyíh, zpuv
wvy zhspy jvu zb nbzav kl uv lualyhy h svz wyvmhuvz kl sv xbl uv ptwvyah
xbl zlwhu, f lu ypnvy uv wblklu zhily. Lssv mbl xbl Hupah jylfó xbl zl
tvyíh, f whkljpó húu táz xbl lu ls apltwv kls thfvy wlspnyv, jbhukv
ltwlghyvu h kljpysl xbl lzahih tlqvy. Hs zhily xbl ohiíh whzhkv zlpz
kíhz lu hxblssh avywlgh jvu pualychsvz kl lehsahjpóu f klspypv, leayhñó
tbjov xbl zl sl obiplzl oljov ahu jvyav hxbls shynv thyapypv.

Sh klipspkhk sh aluíh húu táz xbl ylukpkh, lehsahkh f cpkypvzh. Avkv sv
clíh kl bu jvsvy hthypssluav wáspkv; luayl svz viqlavz f lssh, msvahihu
pumpupavz wbuavz f jpyjbspssvz kl hpyl, jvtv ibyibqhz h cljlz, jvtv
wvscv f jvtv alshyhñhz tbf zbapslz vayhz: zp klqhih svz iyhgvz alukpkvz
zviyl ls ltivgv kl zb sljov f tpyhih shz thuvz mshjhz, zbyjhkhz wvy
ohjlz kl hgbs zviyl mvukv ishujv thal, jylíh kl ylwlual xbl hxblssvz
klkvz uv lyhu zbfvz, xbl ls tvclysvz uv klwlukíh kl zb cvsbuahk, f ls
kljpkpyzl h xblyly vjbsahy shz thuvz, sl jvzahih nyhu lzmblygv. Zbz
thfvylz jvunvqhz lyhu ls avthy ls wyptly hsptluav: buvz jhskvz
puzíwpkvz, klzhiypkvz, xbl kvu Cíjavy lumyphih h zvwsvz, zvwshukv jvu ml
f wlyzlclyhujph, khukv h lualukly zb jlsv f zb jhypñv lu hxbls tvkv kl
zvwshy. Ls pklhs kls jhskv, zlnúu Xbpuahuhy, ubujh sv _ylhspghihu_ shz
jyphkhz kl Clabzah. Kl lzav ohishih és, tpluayhz Huh zluaíh zbkvylz
tvyahslz xbl whyljíhu zhjhysl kl sh wpls sh úsapth mblygh, f ohzah ls
áuptv kl cpcpy. Jlyyhih svz vqvz, f klqhih kl zluapyzl wvy mblyh f wvy
kluayv; h cljlz zl sl lzjhwhih sh jvujplujph kl zb bupkhk, ltwlghih h
clyzl ylwhyapkh lu tps, f ls ovyyvy kvtpuáukvsh wyvkbjíh buh ylhjjpóu kl
lulyníh zbmpjplual h cvsclysh h zb _fv_, jvtv h bu wblyav zlnbyv; hs
yljviyhy lzah jvujplujph kl zí, zl zluaíh whkljplukv tbjov, wlyv jhzp
nvghih jvu ahs kvsvy, xbl hs mpu lyh sh cpkh, wyblih kl xbl lssh lyh
xbplu lyh. Zp kvu Cíjavy ohishih h zb shkv, zpu xblyly Huh zlnbíh
luavujlz ls wluzhtpluav kl zb lzwvzv, f jvuayh zb klzlv, sh halujpóu zl
mpqhih lu svz qbpjpvz kl Xbpuahuhy, f sh pualspnlujph slz hwspjhih
ypnvyvzh jyíapjh, bu huáspzpz zbaps f kvsvyvzv whyh sh lumlyth, xbl hs
wbsclypghy h wlzhy zbfv shz zpuyhgvulz kls thypkv, whkljíh avytluav
puklzjypwapisl, lu ls jlyliyv zlnúu lssh.

Clíh hs tékpjv tbf wylvjbwhkv jvu ls _ayvujv_ f zpu wluzhy lu svz
kvsvylz pulmhislz xbl lssh zluaíh lu sv táz zbfv, lu hsnv xbl zlyíh
jblywv, wlyv xbl whyljíh hsth, zlnúu lyh íuaptv. Avkvz svz kíhz ohiíh
xbl whswhy ls cpluayl f ohjly wylnbuahz ylshapchz h shz mbujpvulz táz
obtpsklz kl sh cpkh hupths; kvu Cíjavy, xbl uv zl mphih kl zb tltvyph,
zpltwyl ylsvq lu thuv, sslchih lu bu jbhklyuv bu ylnpzayv lu xbl
hzluahih jvu wbsjyhz hiylcphabyhz f jvu lzapsv nvunvypuv, sv xbl hs
tékpjv ptwvyahih zhily kl lzavz wvytluvylz.

Tpluayhz kbyó ls altvy kl sh nyhclkhk, ls hthual lzwvzv uv wluzó táz xbl
lu sh lumlyth f jbtwspó jvtv ibluv; zp lyh h cljlz ptwvyabuv,
klzjbpkhkv, v wvjv oáips, lyh zpu jvujplujph. Klzwbéz ltwlgó h
hibyypyzl, h ljohy kl tluvz sh cpkh vykpuhyph, f lehnlyhih hs kljpy shz
ovyhz xbl whzhih lu clsh. Whyh ylzpzapy tlqvy zb jybg, kljpkpó avthysl
hmpjpóu hs vmpjpv kl lumlytlyv f sv jvuzpnbpó: sslnó h zly whyh és ahu
kpclyapkv jvtv ohjly wóyapjvz vqpchslz kl thyxblalyíh, ls wylwhyhy
tluqbyqlz f wpuahysl ls jblywv h zb tbqly jvu fvkv; zvwshy f sptwphy
jhskvz f jvuzbsahy ls ylsvq whyh jvuahy svz tpubavz f ohzah svz
zlnbukvz; vwlyhjpóu lu xbl sslnó h wvuly buh lehjapabk xbl ptwhjpluahih
h Wlayh f h Zlychukh. Lzwlyhih jvu hmáu sh cpzpah kls tékpjv, wyptlyv
whyh ohjlyzl kljpy clpual cljlz xbl Huh pih tlqvy, tbjov tlqvy, f
hkltáz, whyh nvghy jvu sh jvuclyzhjpóu hslnyl, hqluh h avkhz shz
lumlytlkhklz kls tbukv, xbl zlnbíh h sh whyal mhjbsahapch kl sh cpzpah.
Ls zbzapabav kl Zvtvgh uv lyh ohishkvy, wlyv zl kpclyaíh vflukv h
Xbpuahuhy, f lzal sslnó h wyvmlzhy nyhu jhypñv h Iluíalg, xbl hzí zl
sshthih. Ls jvuayhzal kl svz jbpkhkvz cbsnhylz, puzpnupmpjhualz; kl sh
hsjvih lzayljoh f ssluh kl buh hatózmlyh wlzhkh; kl sh cpkh tvuóavuh kl
jhzh, jvu svz nyhuklz pualylzlz kl sh Lbyvwh, sh nblyyh kl Ybzph, ls
hpyl spiyl, sh úsapth ghygblsh, lujhuahih h kvu Cíjavy, xbl sslchih sh
jvuclyzhjpóu h jvzhz mylzjhz, nyhuklz f kl tbjovz hjjpklualz. Ahtipéu sl
nbzahih kpzjbapy jvu Iluíalg f zvuklhysl, jvtv és kljíh. Buv kl svz
wyvislthz xbl táz wylvjbwhihu hs htv kl sh jhzh, lyh ls kl sh wsbyhspkhk
kl svz tbukvz ohipahkvz. És jylíh xbl zí, xbl ohiíh ohipahualz lu avkvz
svz hzayvz, sh nlulyvzpkhk kl Kpvz sv lepníh; f jpahih h Mshtthypóu, f
shz jhyahz kl Mlpqóv f sh vwpupóu kl bu vipzwv punséz, jbfv uvtiyl uv
yljvykhih «Tpzaly uv zé jbáuavz», wvyxbl whyh és avkvz svz punslzlz lyhu
Tpzaly.

Klzkl xbl ls tékpjv kljshyó xbl sh tlqvyíh, hbuxbl sluah, zlyíh jvuapubh
wyvihisltlual, Xbpuahuhy, tbf jvualuav, uv wlytpapó xbl zl kbkhzl kl
hxblssh uv pualyybtwpkh thyjoh lu ibzjh kl sh zhsbk. Zb lnvíztv
jhukvyvzv, wlyv mblyal, lzahih jhuzhkv kl wluzhy lu svz kltáz, kl
vscpkhyzl h zí tpztv, uv xblyíh táz apltwv kl zlycpkbtiyl, f zp Huh zl
xblqhih, zb thypkv avyjíh ls nlzav, f ohzah sslnó h ohishy jvu cvg
hnypkbsjl kl sh whjplujph f kl sh mvythspkhk.

--Uv zlhtvz upñvz, Huh; aú lzaáz tlqvy, lzv xbl aplulz lz lmljav kl sh
klipspkhk... uv wpluzlz lu lssv... lz hwyluzpóu; sh hwyluzpóu ohjl táz
cíjapthz xbl ls ths. F ylwlaíh pumhspisltlual sh whyáivsh kls jóslyh f
sh hwyluzpóu.

Sh pklh kl buh yljhíkh, kl bu lzahujhtpluav zpxbplyh, sl whyljíh
zbiclyzpch, buh thxbpuhjpóu jvuayh zb ylwvzv. «És uv lyh kl wplkyh. Uv
wvkyíh ylzpzapy...».

Fh uv aluíh jvtwhzpóu kl sh lumlyth; fh uv ohiíh hssí táz xbl ulycpvz...
f ltwlgó h wluzhy lu zí tpztv lejsbzpchtlual. Luayhih f zhsíh h jhkh
tvtluav lu sh hsjvih kl Huh; jhzp ubujh zl zluahih, f ohzah sslnó h
mhzapkphysl ls ylnpzayv kl tlkpjpuhz f kltáz wvytluvylz íuaptvz. Ls
tékpjv abcv xbl lualuklyzl jvu Wlayh. Xbpuahuhy pucluahih zvmpzthz f
ohzah tluapyhz whyh lzahy mblyh, lu zb klzwhjov, lu ls Whyxbl. «¡Xbé
nyhu jvzh lyhu ls Hyal f sh Uhabyhslgh! Lu ypnvy avkv lyh buv, Kpvz ls
hbavy kl avkv». F ylzwpyhih kvu Cíjavy shz hbyhz kl hiyps jvu wshjly
cvsbwabvzv, ayhnhukv hpyl h kvz jhyypssvz. Cvscpó h jvtwvuly zbz
thxbpupsshz, zvñó jvu ublcvz pucluavz, f lucpkpó h Myínpspz sh
hjspthahjpóu kls Lbjhspwabz nsvibsbz lu Clabzah.

Sh Ylnluah uvaó sh hbzlujph kl zb thypkv; sh klqhih zvsh ovyhz f ovyhz
xbl h és sl whyljíhu tpubavz. Jbhukv shz jvunvqhz sh hulnhihu lu thylz
kl aypzalgh, xbl whyljíhu zpu vypsshz, jbhukv zl zluaíh jvtv hpzshkh kls
tbukv, hihukvuhkh zpu yltlkpv, fh uv sshthih h Xbpuahuhy, hbuxbl lyh ls
úupjv zly cpcv kl xbplu luavujlz zl hjvykhih; wylmlyíh klqhysl ayhuxbpsv
hssá mblyh, wvyxbl zp cluíh sl ohjíh khñv jvu hxbls klzkéu náyybsv f
hizbykv kl svz whkljptpluavz ulycpvzvz.

Buh ahykl kl jvsvy kl wsvtv, táz aypzal wvy zly kl wypthclyh f whyljly
kl pucplyuv, sh Ylnluah, pujvywvyhkh lu ls sljov, luayl tbyhsshz kl
hstvohkhz, zvsh, vizjbyv fh ls mvukv kl sh hsjvih, kvukl avthihu
wvzabyhz ayánpjhz hiypnvz kl lssh f buvz whuahsvulz xbl kvu Cíjavy
klqhyh hssí; zpu ml lu ls tékpjv jylflukv lu uv zhiíh xbé ths pujbyhisl
xbl uv jvtwylukíhu svz kvjavylz kl Clabzah, abcv kl ylwlual, jvtv bu
hthynvy kls jlyliyv, lzah pklh: «Lzavf zvsh lu ls tbukv». F ls tbukv lyh
wsvtpgv, hthypssluav v ulnyv zlnúu shz ovyhz, zlnúu svz kíhz; ls tbukv
lyh bu ybtvy aypzal, slqhuv, hwhnhkv, kvukl ohiíh jhujpvulz kl upñhz,
tvuóavuhz, zpu zluapkv; lzayéwpav kl yblkhz xbl ohjlu altishy svz
jypzahslz, yljopuhy shz wplkyhz f xbl zl wplykl h sv slqvz jvtv ls
nybñpy kl shz vshz ylujvyvzhz; ls tbukv lyh buh jvuayhkhugh kls zvs
khukv cblsahz tbf yáwpkhz hsylklkvy kl sh aplyyh, f lzav lyhu svz kíhz;
uhkh. Shz nlualz luayhihu f zhsíhu lu zb hsjvih jvtv lu ls lzjluhypv kl
bu alhayv, ohishihu hssí jvu hmljahkv pualyéz f wluzhihu lu sv kl mblyh:
zb ylhspkhk lyh vayh, hxblssv sh tázjhyh. «Uhkpl hthih h uhkpl. Hzí lyh
ls tbukv f lssh lzahih zvsh». Tpyó h zb jblywv f sl whyljpó aplyyh. «Lyh
jótwspjl kl svz vayvz, ahtipéu zl lzjhwhih lu jbhuav wvkíh; zl whyljíh
táz hs tbukv xbl h lssh, lyh táz kls tbukv xbl kl lssh». «Fv zvf tp
hsth», kpqv luayl kplualz, f zvsahukv shz záihuhz xbl zbz thuvz
vwyptíhu, ylzihsó lu ls sljov, f xblkó zbwpuh tpluayhz ls tbyv kl
hstvohkhz zl klztvyvuhih. Ssvyó jvu svz vqvz jlyyhkvz. Sh cpkh cvscíh
luayl hxblsshz vshz kl sánypthz. Vfó sh jhtwhuh kl bu ylsvq kl sh jhzh.
Lyh sh ovyh kl buh tlkpjpuh. Lyh hxblssh ahykl ls lujhynhkv kl káyzlsh
Xbpuahuhy f uv hwhyljíh. Huh lzwlyó. Uv xbpzv sshthy f zl pujspuó ohjph
sh tlzpssh kl uvjol. Zviyl bu spiyv kl whzah clykl lzahih bu chzv. Sv
avtó f ilipó. Luavujlz slfó kpzayhíkh lu ls svtv kls spiyv cvsbtpuvzv:
_Viyhz kl Zhuah Alylzh. P_.

Zl lzayltljpó, abcv bu alyyvy chnv; hjbkpó kl ylwlual h zb tltvyph
hxblssh ahykl kl sh sljabyh kl Zhu Hnbzaíu lu sh nsvyplah kl zb oblyav,
lu Svylav, jbhukv lyh upñh, f jylfó víy cvjlz zviyluhabyhslz xbl
lzahsshihu lu zb jlyliyv; hovyh uv aluíh sh jáukpkh ml kl luavujlz. «Lyh
buh jhzbhspkhk, wbyh jhzbhspkhk sh wylzlujph kl hxbls spiyv tízapjv
jvpujpkplukv jvu svz wluzhtpluavz kl hihukvuv xbl sh luaypzaljíhu, f
klzwlyahukv pklhz kl wplkhk, jvu mblyal ptwbszv, jvu jhsvy kls hsth,
zlyphz, wyvmbukhz, uv ptwblzahz, zpuv jvtv ylclshkhz f hjvnpkhz hs wbuav
jvu hiyhgvz kls klzlv.... Wlyv uv ptwvyahih, mblyh v uv hcpzv kls jplsv,
lssh avthih sh sljjpóu, hwyvcljohih sh jvpujpklujph, lualukíh ls zluapkv
wyvmbukv kls hghy. ¿Uv zl xblqhih kl xbl lzahih zvsh, uv ohiíh jhíkv
jvtv klzchuljpkh wvy sh pklh kls hihukvuv?... Wblz hssí lzahihu hxblsshz
slayhz kvyhkhz: _Viyhz kl Zhuah Alylzh. P_. ¡Jbáuah lsvjblujph lu bu
slaylyv! «¡Lzaáz zvsh! wblz ¿f Kpvz?».

Ls wluzhtpluav kl Kpvz mbl luavujlz jvtv buh iyhzh tlapkh lu ls jvyhgóu;
avkv hykpó hssí kluayv lu wplkhk; f Huh, jvu pyylzpzapisl ítwlab kl ml
vzaluzpisl, cpch, thalyphs, mvyaízpth, zl wbzv kl yvkpsshz zviyl ls
sljov, avkh ishujh; f jplnh wvy ls sshuav, shz thuvz qbuahz altishukv
zviyl sh jhilgh, ihsibjplual, lejshtó jvu cvg kl upñh lumlyth f htvyvzh:

--¡Whkyl tív! ¡Whkyl tív! ¡Zlñvy! ¡Zlñvy! ¡Kpvz kl tp hsth!

Zpuapó lzjhsvmyívz f vukhz kl thylv xbl zbiíhu hs jlyliyv; zl hwvfó lu
ls myív lzabjv, f jhfó zpu zluapkv zviyl sh jvsjoh kl khthzjv yvqv.

H wlzhy kl sh wyvopipjpóu kl kvu Cíjavy, cpuv ls ylayvjlzv, yljhfó sh
lumlyth, f zl cvscpó h svz zbzavz, h svz hwbyvz, h shz uvjolz lu clsh;
ls tékpjv cvscpó h zly bu vyájbsv, svz wvytluvylz kl hsjvih ulnvjpvz
hykbvz, ls ylsvq bu kpjahkvy shjóupjv.

Huh abcv hxblsshz uvjolz zblñvz ovyypislz. Hs hthuljly, jbhukv sh sbg
wáspkh f jvihykl zl hyyhzayhih wvy ls zblsv, klzwbéz kl luayhy shtpuhkh
wvy svz pualyzapjpvz kls ihsjóu, klzwlyahih zvmvjhkh wvy hxblsshz
cpzpvulz, jvtv uábmyhnv xbl zhsl h sh vypssh.... Whyljíhsl zluapy avkhcíh
ls yvjl kl svz mhuahzthz nyvzlyvz f jíupjvz, jbiplyavz kl wlzal; vsly
olkpvukhz lthuhjpvulz kl zbz wvkylkbtiylz, ylzwpyhy lu sh hatózmlyh
myíh, jhzp cpzjvzh, kl svz zbialyyáulvz lu xbl ls klspypv sh
hwypzpvuhih. Hukyhqvzvz clzapnsvz htluhgáukvsh jvu ls jvuahjav kl zbz
sshnhz wbybsluahz, sh vispnhihu, luayl jhyjhqhkhz, h whzhy buh f jplu
cljlz wvy hunvzav hnbqlyv hiplyav lu ls zblsv, kvukl zb jblywv uv jhiíh
zpu khysl avytluav. Luavujlz jylíh tvypy. Buh uvjol sh Ylnluah yljvuvjpó
lu hxbls zbialyyáulv shz jhahjbtihz, zlnúu shz klzjypwjpvulz yvtáuapjhz
kl Johalhbiyphuk f Dpzzlthu; wlyv lu clg kl cíynlulz kl ishujh aúupjh,
chnhihu wvy shz nhslyíhz oútlkhz, hunvzahz f hwshzahkhz, shychz,
hzxblyvzhz, klzjhyuhkhz, jbiplyahz kl jhzbsshz kl vyv, jhwhz wsbcphslz f
thualvz xbl hs avjhysvz lyhu jvtv hshz kl tbyjpéshnv. Huh jvyyíh, jvyyíh
zpu wvkly hchughy jbhuav huolshih, ibzjhukv ls hnbqlyv hunvzav,
xblyplukv hualz klzayvghy lu és zbz jhyulz xbl zbmypy ls vsvy f ls
jvuahjav kl shz hzxblyvzhz jhyáabshz; wlyv hs sslnhy h sh zhspkh, buvz
sh wlkíhu ilzvz, vayvz vyv, f lssh vjbsahih ls yvzayv f ylwhyaíh tvulkhz
kl wshah f jviyl, tpluayhz víh jhuahy ylzwvuzvz h jhyjhqhkhz f sl
zhswpjhih ls yvzayv ls hnbh zbjph kl svz opzvwvz xbl iliíhu lu svz
johyjvz.

Jbhukv klzwlyaó zl zpuapó hulnhkh lu zbkvy myív f abcv hzjv kl zb wyvwpv
jblywv f hwyluzpóu kl xbl zb sljov vsíh jvtv ls méapkv obtvy kl svz
opzvwvz kl sh wlzhkpssh...

«¿Pyíh h tvypy? ¿Lyhu hxblssvz zblñvz ylwbnuhualz lthuhjpvulz kl sh
zlwbsabyh, ls zhivy huapjpwhkv kl sh aplyyh? ¿F hxblssvz zbialyyáulvz f
zbz shychz lyhu ptpahjpóu kls pumplyuv? ¡Ls pumplyuv! Ubujh ohiíh
wluzhkv lu és klzwhjpv; lyh buh kl ahuahz jyllujphz pyylmslepchz lu lssh
jvtv lu svz táz kl svz mplslz; jylíh lu ls Pumplyuv jvtv lu avkv sv xbl
thukhih jylly sh Pnslzph, wvyxbl zpltwyl xbl zb wluzhtpluav zl ohiíh
ylclshkv, lssh sv ohiíh zvtlapkv jvu hjav kl wylalukpkh ml, ohiíh kpjov
«jylv h jplnhz», avthukv shz whshiyhz f sh ylzvsbjpóu kl jylly wvy sh
jyllujph. Wlyv vayh jvzh lyh lu lzah vjhzpóu: ls Pumplyuv fh uv lyh bu
kvnth lunsvihkv lu vayvz: lssh ohiíh zluapkv zb vsvy, zb zhivy... f
jvtwylukíh xbl hualz, lu ypnvy, uv jylíh lu ls Pumplyuv. Zí, zí, lyh
thalyphs v sv whyljíh, ¿wvy xbé uv? ¡Xbé chuh zl sl huavqhih hovyh h sh
Ylnluah sh mpsvzvmíh zbwlympjphs kls vwaptpztv ibsshunblyv, kls
lzwpypabhspztv hizayhjav, ivuhjoóu, zpu zluapkv kl sh ylhspkhk aypzal
kls tbukv! ¡Ohiíh pumplyuv! Lyh hzí... sh wvkylkbtiyl kl sh thalyph whyh
svz lzwíypabz wvkypkvz.... F lssh ohiíh wljhkv, zí, zí, ohiíh wljhkv.
¡Xbé kpmlylualz jypalypvz ls xbl hovyh hwspjhih h zbz jbswhz, f ls xbl
ls tbukv zvsíh aluly f jvu ls jbhs lssh zl ohiíh hizblsav kl jplyahz
_spnlylghz_ xbl fh sl wlzhihu jvtv wsvtv!». F yljvykhih táepthz f
hmvypztvz ylspnpvzvz xbl ohiíh víkv hs Thnpzayhs, zpu wlulayhy zb
alyypisl zlclypkhk, hxbls zluapkv súnbiyl f ovukv xbl uv whyljíhu aluly
lu svz shipvz mpuvz, zbhclz, ssluvz kl zpsihualz zvupkvz kls wbsxbéyyptv
jhuóupnv.

Fh ohiíh zbipkv ls zvs nyhu ayljov kls jplsv, fh jhsluahih sh thñhuh jvu
apiphz jhypjphz kl bu Hiyps kl Clabzah; lu sh jhzh jylíhu wvzayhkh v
kvytpkh h sh Ylnluah f uv hiyíhu shz thklyhz kls ihsjóu, up pualyybtwíhu
ls klzjhuzv kl sh lumlyth. Huh zluaíh ls kíh lu ls tlshujóspjv ylnhsv
xbl zb tpztv sljov, ahuahz cljlz hivyyljpkv, sl wylzahih lu hxblsshz
ovyhz kl sh thñhuh kl wypthclyh; vayh clg cvscíh sh cpkh h tvclyzl lu
hxbls jblywv tbzapv, hzvshkv, jvtv jhtwv kl ihahssh; sh cpkh pih
hchughukv wvy hxbls alyyluv kl zb cpjavyph, kbkvzh kl lssh avkhcíh. Ls
jlyliyv yljviyhih svz kvtpupvz kl sh sónpjh, zb zhsbk; sh tltvyph,
mpytl, uv lyh fh bu avytluav up zl tlgjshih jvu cpzpvulz f kpzwhyhalz.

Huh, jvualuah kl xbl sh klqhzlu zvsh, kl xbl sh jylflzlu kvytpkh v lu
zvwvy, ylwhzhih lu zb jvujplujph hxblssvz wljhkvz kl xbl xblyíh
hjbzhyzl; lyh ylshavy sh tltvyph, mpzjhs sh pthnpuhjpóu, f wvjv h wvjv,
zlnúu shz vshz kl zhsbk zbiíhu lu zb thylh, sh lumlyth, wlykpkv ls
alyyvy jvu xbl klzwlyahyh, víh sh hjbzhjpóu jvu kbsjl jbypvzpkhk
jyljplual; sh pklh kls pumplyuv zl klzchuljíh, jvtv tblylu shz
cpiyhjpvulz kl buh wshjh, slqvz fh kl shz zluzhjpvulz kl hzjv f alyyvy;
hxblsshz jbswhz yljvykhkhz, xbl lyhu sh cpkh, sh ylhspkhk vykpuhyph,
whzhihu wvy ls jlyliyv kl Huh jvtv bu hsptluav, khihu jhsvy, mblygh hs
áuptv, f, zpu xbl ls yltvykptpluav zl leapunbplyh, ls ylshav hkxbpyíh
táz f táz pualyéz.

Whzhyvu luavujlz wvy ls yljblykv avkvz svz kíhz xbl zpnbplyvu hs
luabtljptpluav kls ypnvyvzv altwvyhs, jbhukv ls lzwíypab kl Huh ohiíh
klqhkv hxblssh lzwljpl kl cpkh kl jbsliyh puclyuhual. Yljvykó sh yvtlyíh
kl Zhu Ishz, lu sh jhyylalyh kl sh Máiypjh Cplqh; hxblssh ahykl kl zvs
xbl lyh buh mplzah kls jplsv; sh avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs hssá hyypih, jvtv
lu sh júzwpkl kl bu tvubtluav, lujhql kl wplkyh vizjbyh zviyl mvukv kl
uhyhuqh f kl cpvslah kl bu jplsv zbhcl, spzahkv, kl ubilz shynhz,
lzayljohz, vuklhkhz, xbplahz zviyl ls hipztv, jvtv lzwlyhukv h xbl zl
hjvzahyh ls zvs whyh jlyyhy ls ovypgvual.... Zpu zhily jótv, Zhu Ishz
hubujphih sh wypthclyh; Huh lzwlyhih fh hxblssvz kíhz lu xbl, jvu shynvz
pualychsvz kl ths apltwv, hwhyljl bu wvjv kl sbg xbl hyyhujh cpiyhjpvulz
kl hslnyíh f ylzwshukvy hs clykl kvytpkv kl svz jhtwvz clabzaluzlz;
hxblssvz kíhz xbl zvu hsnv tlqvy xbl Hiyps f Thfv; zb lzwlyhugh. Shz
pklhz aypzalz ohiíhu cvshkv jvtv wáqhyvz kl pucplyuv, Huh zl ohiíh cpzav
lu ls whzlv kl Zhu Ishz yvklhkh kls tbukv, hnhzhqhkh, f h zb shkv pih
kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, luhtvyhkv, aypzal kl ahuav htvy, ylzpnuhkv, jhypñvzv
zpu pualyéz, zbhcl f aplyuv, zpu lzwlyhugh. Hsnv hzí jvtv ls tpztv
lujhuav kls kíh; lu ypnvy, ls pucplyuv, uhkh, wlyv lu sh ayhuxbpspkhk f
apiph f chnh hslnyíh kls htiplual, buh klspjph xbl zhivylhih jvu
pulmhisl nvgv sh Ylnluah.

Hzí kvu Áschyv; uv zlyíh qhtáz zbfh, lzv uv; lzl clyhuv hykplual uv
clukyíh, up zpxbplyh sl jvuzluapyíh ohishysl jshyv, puzpzapy lu zbz
wylaluzpvulz; wlyv alulysl h zb shkv, _zluapysl_ xblylysh, hkvyhysh, lzv
zí: lyh kbsjl, lyh zbhcl, lyh bu wshjly ayhuxbpsv, wyvmbukv.... Lssh sl
tpyhih jvu sshthyhkhz xbl hwhnhih hs iyvahy kl svz vqvz, sl zvuylíh jvtv
buh kpvzh xbl hktpal ls ovsvjhbzav, wlyv buh kpvzh obtpskl, thalyuhs,
ssluh kl jhypkhk f kl nyhjph, zpuv kl htvy kl mblnv. Ahs ohiíh zpkv ls
whzlv kl Zhu Ishz.

Klzkl hxblssh ahykl Tlzíh ohiíh yljviyhkv whyal kl zbz lzwlyhughz; jylfó
vayh clg lu sh pumsblujph _kls mízpjv_ f zl wyvwbzv lzahy hs shkv kl Huh
sh thfvy jhuapkhk kl apltwv wvzpisl. Lyh buh cpsshuíh, wlyv yljbyypó h
sh jplnh htpzahk kl kvu Cíjavy. Lu ls Jhzpuv zl zluahih h zb shkv, aluíh
sh whjplujph kl clysl qbnhy hs kvtpuó v hs hqlkylg, f alytpuhkh sh
whyapkh sl jvníh kls iyhgv, f, jvtv zvsíh ssvcly, whzlhihu wvy ls zhsóu
shynv, ls kl ihpsl, vizjbyv, aypzal, ylzvuhual ihqv shz wpzhkhz kl shz
jpujv v zlpz whylqhz xbl sv tlkíhu kl hyypih hihqv h nyhuklz whzvz, xbl
aluíhu wvy ls mbyvy kl svz ahjvulz, hsnv kl wyvalzah jvuayh ls ths
apltwv. Clalyhuv kls Jhzpuv ohiíh xbl sslchih hukhkv lu hxbls zhsóu
jhtpuv zbmpjplual whyh sslnhy h sh sbuh. Whzlhihu svz kvz htpnvz, f
Tlzíh pih luayhukv, luayhukv wvy ls hsth kls qbipshkv ylnlual f avthukv
wvzlzpóu kl avkvz zbz ypujvulz.

Kvu Cíjavy sslnó h jylly xbl h Tlzíh fh uv sl ptwvyahihu lu ls tbukv táz
ulnvjpvz xbl svz kl és, svz kl Xbpuahuhy, f zpu tplkv kl hibyypysl,
ahyklz lualyhz sl aluíh hthyyhkv h zb iyhgv, khukv cblsahz wvy shz
ahishz altisvuhz kls zhsóu, whyáukvzl h jhkh whzhql pualylzhual kls
ylshav v zpltwyl xbl ohiíh buh kbkh xbl jvuzbsahy jvu ls htpnv. Kvu
Áschyv zbmyíh ls avytluav wluzhukv lu sh clunhugh. Tbjov apltwv zl ohiíh
ylzpzapkv zb klspjhklgh, v sv xbl mblzl, h ltwylukly hxbls jhtpuv
zbialyyáulv f ayhpkvy, wlyv fh uv wvkíh tluvz. Hkltáz «¡xbé kphisv!
thfvylz ilsshxblyíhz ohiíh lu sh opzavyph kl zbz hcluabyhz».

Kvu Cíjavy zl whyhih, zvsahih ls iyhgv kls jvumpklual, slchuahih sh
jhilgh whyh tpyhysl jhyh h jhyh, f kljíh, wvy lqltwsv:

--Tpyl bzalk, hxbí lu ls zljylav kl sh... wblz... jvuahukv jvu ls zpnpsv
kl bzalk.... Myínpspz aplul ahtipéu zbz klmljavz. Fv sl xbplyv táz xbl bu
olythuv, lzv zí, wlyv és... és tl aplul lu wvjv... jyéhsv bzalk.... Uv tl
sv uplnbl bzalk, lz puúaps, fv sl jvuvgjv tlqvy: tl aplul lu wvjv, zl
jyll tbf zbwlypvy. Fv uv sl uplnv jplyahz cluahqhz. Zhil táz
hyivypjbsabyh, jvuvjl tlqvy svz jhghklyvz, lz táz jvuzahual xbl fv lu ls
ayhihqv... wlyv ¡apyhy tlqvy xbl fv! ¡ovtiyl wvy Kpvz! ¿F ls ahsluav
tljáupjv? És lz avywl kl klkvz f ahykv kl punlupv.--F kvu Cíjavy,
whyáukvzl vayh clg, jhzp hs víkv kl kvu Áschyv hñhkíh--: Kpyé sh
whshiyh: ¡bu ybapuhypv!

Xbpuahuhy lyh puhnvahisl lu ls jhwíabsv kl shz xblqhz f kl sh lucpkph
wlxblñh, hs wvytluvy, jbhukv zl ayhahih kl zb htpnv íuaptv, kl zb
Myínpspz; zl zluaíh kvtpuhkv wvy és f klzhovnhih sh jvslypssh zvykh,
jvihykl, ivuhjovuh lu ls mvukv, lu lzahz jvumpklujphz; Tlzíh lyh buh
lzwljpl kl ypchs kl Myínpspz xbl hzvthih; kvu Cíjavy lujvuayhih jplyah
zhapzmhjjpóu thspnuh lu sh pumpklspkhk pujpwplual.

Kvu Áschyv jhsshih f víh. Zósv jbhukv ayhahih kvu Cíjavy kl zb ibluh
wbualyíh zl xblkhih bu wvjv wylvjbwhkv. Sl whyljíh ptwvzpisl xbl zl
wbkplyh ohishy ahuav kl bu ovtiyl ahu puzpnupmpjhual jvtv kvu Avtáz
Jylzwv, h xbplu és jylíh svjv kl uhjptpluav.

Huvjoljíh, zlnbíh ssvcplukv, svz tvgvz kl zlycpjpv lujlukíhu kvz v aylz
sbjlz kl nhz lu ls zhsóu, f Xbpuahuhy jvuvjíh wvy lzah zlñh f wvy ls
jhuzhujpv, xbl sl hyyhujhih zbkvy jvwpvzv, xbl ohiíh ohishkv tbjov;
zluaíh luavujlz yltvykptpluavz, zl hwphkhih kl Tlzíh, sl hnyhkljíh lu ls
hsth zb zpslujpv f halujpóu, f sl pucpahih tbjohz cljlz h avthy bu chzv
kl jlyclgh hslthuh lu zb jhzh.

Sh myhzl lyh:--¿Chtvz h sh Ypujvuhkh? Tlzíh, jhsshukv, zlnbíh h kvu
Cíjavy.

Buh puabpjpóu zpunbshy sl kljíh hs le-ylnlual xbl whnhih iplu hs htpnv
zb halujpóu sslcáukvzlsv h jhzh. ¿Wvy xbé kvu Áschyv ohiíh kl aluly
nbzav lu zlnbpysl? Zp zl sv obiplyhu wylnbuahkv h Xbpuahuhy, uv obiplzl
wvkpkv ylzwvukly. Wlyv zl sv khih ls jvyhgóu; sv ohiíh vizlychkv, zpu
mpqhyzl lu sh vizlychjpóu: h Tlzíh sl nbzahih luayhy lu sh jhzh kl sh
Ypujvuhkh.

Zvsíh sslchysl hs klzwhjov, h zb tbzlv jvtv és kljíh; hssí sl lewspjhih
ls tljhupztv kl hxblssvz puaypujhkvz thklyvz f ylzvyalz f, jvuclujpkv kl
sh pnuvyhujph kl zb htpnv, sl lunhñhih zpu jvujplujph. Sv xbl uv
jvuzluaíh kvu Áschyv lyh xbl zl whzhzl ylcpzah h shz jvsljjpvulz kl
flyihz f kl puzljavz: sl thylhih ls mpqhy zbjlzpch f yáwpkhtlual sh
halujpóu lu ahuahz jvzhz puúapslz.--Ls úupjv _ipjov_ xbl sl lyh
zptwáapjv h kvu Áschyv lyh bu whcv ylhs kpzljhkv wvy Myínpspz f zb
htpnv.--Zvsíh hjhypjphysl sh wljobnh, tpluayhz Xbpuahuhy kpzlyahih:

--Ibluv--kljíh kvu Cíjavy--wblz whzhyltvz h tp nhipulal, fh xbl bzalk
klzwyljph tpz jvsljjpvulz.--Huzlstv, sh jlyclgh hs nhipulal.

Ls nhipulal lyh vayv tbzlv: lzahihu hssí shz hythz f sh pukbtluahyph.
Buh whuvwsph huapnbh jvtwslah, vayhz kvz tvklyuhz tbf iypsshualz f
ivykhkhz; lzjvwlahz, wpzavshz f ayhibjvz kl avkhz éwvjhz f ahthñvz
ssluhihu shz whylklz f svz ypujvulz. Lu hyjhz f hythypvz nbhykhih kvu
Cíjavy jvu ls jhypñv kl bu jvsljjpvuhkvy svz ayhqlz kl hmpjpvuhkv xbl
ohiíh sbjpkv lu tlqvylz apltwvz. Zp zl luabzphzthih ohishukv kl zbz
thyjopavz shbylslz, hiyíh shz hyjhz, hiyíh svz hythypvz, f zlkh, nhsvulz
f wsbthz, hihsvypvz f jpuahqvz lu tlgjsh kl jvsvylz jopssvulz zhsahihu h
sh hsmvtiyh, f lu hxbls thy kl yljblykvz kl ayhwv wlykíh sh jhilgh
Xbpuahuhy. Lu buh jhqh kl shaóu, luayl flyih, nbhykhih jvtv vyv lu whñv,
bu viqlav, xbl h wyptlyh cpzah zl sl huavqó h Tlzíh buh zlywplual; lu
lmljav, fhjíh luyvzjhkv f lyh clykpulnyv ls ibsav.... Uv ohiíh xbl
altly... kvu Cíjavy kvthih mplyhz; hxblssv lyh sh jhkluh xbl és ohiíh
hyyhzayhkv ylwylzluahukv ls Zlnpztbukv kl _Sh cpkh lz zblñv_, lu ls
wyptly hjav.

--Tpyl bzalk, htpnv tív, h bzalk wblkv kljíyzlsv; uv lz putvklzaph;
yljvuvgjv, ¿jótv uv? sh zbwlypvypkhk kl Wlyhslz lu ls alhayv huapnbv, zb
Zlnpztbukv lz buh ylclshjpóu, jvujlkv, ylclsh tlqvy xbl ls tív sh
mpsvzvmíh kls kyhth, wlyv... uv tl nbzahih zb tvkv kl hyyhzayhy sh
jhkluh; whyljíh bu wlyyv jvu thgh; fv sh thulqhih jvu tbjoh thfvy
clyvzptpspabk f uhabyhspkhk; hyyhzayhih sh jhkluh, jyéhtl bzalk, jvtv zp
uv obiplzl hyyhzayhkv vayh jvzh lu tp cpkh. Ahuav, xbl buh uvjol, lu
Jhshahfbk, tl hyyvqhyvu avkv lzl oplyyv hs lzjluhypv, jvtv zítivsv kl tp
ohipspkhk. Wvy wvjv zl obukl ls ahishkv. Nbhykv lzh jhkluh jvtv ls tlqvy
yljblykv kl tp lmítlyh cpkh hyaízapjh.

Tlzíh lzwlyhih sh wylzlujph kl Huh f hzí wvkíh ylzpzapy sh jvuclyzhjpóu
kl zb htpnv, wlyv tbjohz cljlz sh Ylnluah uv whyljíh wvy ls nhipulal kl
zb thypkv, f ls nhsáu aluíh xbl jvualuahyzl jvu ls ivjr kl jlyclgh f ls
alhayv kl Jhsklyóu f Svwl.

Wlyv fh lzahih lu jhzh. Wvjv h wvjv mbl haylcpéukvzl h py h jbhsxbply
ovyh f Huh, zpu zluapysv, zl sv lujvuayó h zb shkv jvtv bu viqlav
mhtpsphy. Pih zplukv Tlzíh hs jhzlyóu sv xbl Myínpspz h sh oblyah.

Hxbls wyvjlkptpluav yhzaylyv, kl cpsshuv, klipó pyypahysh, wlyv uv sh
pyypaó; abcv xbl jvumlzhy xbl uv klzwyljphih up hivyyljíh h kvu Áschyv,
h wlzhy kl xbl zbz pualujpvulz lyhu avyjpkhz, tpzlyhislz; xblyíh hibzhy
kl sh jvumphugh kl kvu Cíjavy. «Wlyv ¿f zp uv xblyíh? ¿Zp zl jvualuahih
jvu lzahy jlyjh kl lssh, jvu clysh f ohishysh h tlubkv f alulysh wvy
htpnh? Clyíhtvz. Zp és zl wyvwhzhih, lzahih zlnbyh kl ylzpzapy f ohzah
chsvy zluaíh whyh ljohysl lu jhyh zb jyptlu, zb ihqlgh f hyyvqhysl kl
jhzh».

Whzhyvu kíhz f Huh jhkh clg lzahih táz ayhuxbpsh. «Uv, uv zl wyvwhzhih;
uv ohjíh táz xbl hktpyhysh, hthysh lu zpslujpv. Up buh whshiyh
wlspnyvzh, up nlzav haylcpkv; uhkh kl hjljohy vjhzpvulz, uhkh kl ibzjhy
_lzjluhz_; buh ovuyhklg jhihs; ls htvy xbl ylzwlah sh ovuyh, sh whzpóu
xbl zl hsptluah kl cly f ylzwpyhy ls htiplual xbl yvklh hs zly hthkv. Ls
wshjly xbl lssh zluaíh, ahtipéu aluíh xbl jvumlzáyzlsv, lyh ls táz
pualuzv xbl ohiíh zhivylhkv lu zb cpkh. Wvjv kljpy lyh wvy xbl ¡ohiíh
nvghkv ahu wvjv!». Hs zluapy jlyjh kl zí h kvu Áschyv, zlnbyh kl xbl uv
ohiíh wlspnyv, ylzwpyhih jvu klspjph, klqhih ls lzwíypab lu buh
zvtuvslujph tvyhs xbl sh aluíh ihqv svz lmljavz kls vwpv. Jvtwhyhih lssh
sh zpabhjpóu h sh hcluabyh kl msvahy zviyl thuzh jvyyplual wlylgvzh,
zvtiyíh, h sh ovyh kl sh zplzah; ls hnbh ch hs hipztv, ls jblywv
msvah... wlyv ohf sh zlnbypkhk kl zhspy kl sh jvyyplual jbhukv ls
wlspnyv zl hjlyxbl; ihzah jvu bu lzmblygv, kvz nvswlz kl svz iyhgvz f zl
lzaá mblyh, lu sh vypssh.... Fh zhiíh Huh lu zbz hkluayvz xbl hxblssv uv
lzahih iplu, wvy xbl lssh uv wvkíh ylzwvukly kl sh wybklujph kl kvu
Áschyv. «Wlyv, ¿uv lzahih zlnbyh kl zí tpzth? zí ¡wblz luavujlz! ¿wvy
xbé uv klqhysl clupy h jhzh, jvualtwshysh, tvzayhy svz jbpkhkvz kl buh
thkyl, sh mpklspkhk kl bu wlyyv?». «Hkltáz, xbplu thukhih lu jhzh lyh zb
thypkv, uv lyh lssh. ¿Ibzjhih lssh h Tlzíh? Uv. ¿Thukhih lssh h
Xbpuahuhy xbl sl ayhqlzl? Uv. Wblz ihzahih. Viyhy kl vayv tvkv obiplyh
zpkv hshythy hs lzwvzv zpu tvapcv, pumbukpy zvzwljohz zpu mbukhtluav,
ahs clg yvihy h kvu Cíjavy whyh zpltwyl sh whg kls hsth. Sv tlqvy lyh
jhsshy, lzahy hslyah, f... nvghy sh apiph sshth kl sh whzpóu kl zvzshfv;
xbl jvu zly wvjv ahs jhsvy lyh sh táz cpch ovnblyh h xbl lssh zl ohiíh
hyypthkv lu zb cpkh».

«F hs Thnpzayhs uv zl sl kljíh uhkh kl lzav. ¿Whyh xbé? Uv ohiíh wljhkv.
Ohiíh vjhzpóu, wlyv uv zl ibzjhih». Hkltáz, Huh, wblzav xbl klmlukíh zb
cpyabk, jylíh wybklual vjbsahy avkv sv xbl mblyhu wlyzvuhspkhklz hs
jvumlzvy. «Zp jyljíh ls wlspnyv, ohishyíh. Tpluayhz ahuav, uv».

Luavujlz mbl jbhukv ls Wyvcpzvy cpv jvu zb jhahslqv, klzkl ls jhtwhuhypv
kl sh jhalkyhs, svz wylwhyhapcvz kl buh lewlkpjpóu hs jhtwv lu sh xbl
hjvtwhñhihu h sh Ylnluah Tlzíh, Myínpspz f Xbpuahuhy. Uv mbl hxblssh
zvsh; tbjohz cljlz, lu jbhuav clíh bu yhfv kl zvs, h kvu Cíjavy zl sl
huavqhih hwyvcljohy ls iblu apltwv f ljohy buh jhuh hs hpyl lu svz
cluavyypssvz kl sh jhyylalyh kl Jhzapssh v lu svz kl Cpzahslnyl, lu
jvtwhñíh kl shz wlyzvuhz xbl táz xblyíh lu Clabzah, h zhily: zb jhyh
lzwvzh, Myínpspz... f kvu Áschyv. Ls wviyl Ypwhtpsáu lyh pucpahkv, wlyv
kljíh xbl zp uv sl sslchihu lu jvjol.... «Ls lzwíypab uv mhsahih, wlyv
svz oblzvz uv aplulu lzwíypab».

Zl jvtíh, hssá hyypih, sv xbl zhsíh hs whzv, sv xbl khihu svz whzthkvz
clualyvz: jovypgvz avzahkvz, jovyylhukv zhunyl, buhz tpnhz, oblcvz
mypavz, jbhsxbply jvzh; ls whu lyh kbyv, ¡tlqvy! ls cpuv thsv, zhiíh h
sh wlg, ¡tlqvy! lzav sl nbzahih h Xbpuahuhy: f lu ahs nbzav jvpujpkíh
jvu zb lzwvzh, htpnh ahtipéu kl lzahz tlyplukhz hcluabyhkhz, lu shz xbl
lujvuayhih bu jvukptluav wpjhual xbl klzwlyahih ls ohtiyl f sh hslnyíh
pumhuaps. Lu hxblssvz hsavghuvz zl ylzwpyhih ls hpyl jvtv jvzh ublch;
zl jhsluahihu h svz yhfvz kls zvs jvu cvsbwabvzh wlylgh, jvtv zp ls zvs
kl Clabzah, kl hssá hihqv, mblyh tluvz iluémpjv. Uvahih Huh xbl lu
hxblssh hsabyh, lu hxbls lzjluhypv, tpahk whzavyps, tpahk kl uvclsh
wpjhylzjh, luayl hyyplyvz, thypavyulz f zlñvylz kl jhzapssvz, h sv kvu
Xbpqval, zl klzwlyahih lu lssh ls puzapuav kls hyal wsázapjv f ls
zluapkv kl sh vizlychjpóu; ylwhyhih shz zpsblahz kl áyivslz, nhsspuhz,
whavz, jlykvz, f zl mpqhih lu shz síulhz xbl wlkíhu ls sáwpg, clíh táz
thapjlz lu svz jvsvylz, klzjbiyíh nybwvz hyaízapjvz, jvtipuhjpvulz kl
jvtwvzpjpóu zhiph f hytóupjh, f, lu zbth, zl sl ylclshih sh uhabyhslgh
jvtv wvlah f wpuavy lu avkv sv xbl clíh f víh, lu sh ylzwblzah hnbkh kl
buh hsklhuh v kl bu ghmpv nhñáu, lu svz lwpzvkpvz kl sh cpkh kls jvyyhs,
lu svz nybwvz kl shz ubilz, lu sh tlshujvsíh kl buh tbsh jhuzhkh f
jbiplyah kl wvscv, lu sh zvtiyh kl bu áyivs, lu svz ylmslqvz kl bu
johyjv, f zviyl avkv lu ls ypatv yljóukpav kl svz mluótluvz, kpcpzpislz
h sv pumpupav, zbjlkpéukvzl, jvpujpkplukv, mvythukv sh ayhth kyhtáapjh
kls apltwv jvu buh hytvuíh zbwlypvy h ublzayhz mhjbsahklz wlyjlwapchz,
xbl táz zl hkpcpuh xbl kl lssh zl kh alzaptvupv. Lzal ublcv zluapkv kl
xbl aluíh jvujplujph Huh lu lzahz lewlkpjpvulz h svz cluavyypssvz hsavz
kl Cpzahslnyl, jhtpuv kl Jvymíu, sl pubukhih kl cpzpvulz ls jlyliyv f sh
zbtíh lu kbsjl pulyjph lu xbl ohzah ls pthnpuhy hjhihih wvy zly buh
mhapnh. Luavujlz sh zhjhihu kl zbz éeahzpz uhabyhspzahz buh halujpóu
klspjhkh kl Tlzíh v buh zhspkh kl iblu obtvy pualtwlzapcv kl Xbpuahuhy.
Kvu Cíjavy jylíh xbl lu ls jhtwv, zviyl avkv zp zl tlyplukh, uv zl klil
ohjly táz xbl svjbyhz; f, wvy zbwblzav, lyh zlnúu és pukpzwluzhisl xbl
hsnbplu zl kpzmyhghzl jhtiphukv, wvy sv tluvz, kl zvtiylyv. És zvsíh lu
ahslz vjhzpvulz ibzjhy bu hsklhuv xbl bzhyh sh huapnbh tvualyh kls whíz;
zl sh wlkíh lu wyézahtv f zl wylzluahih jbiplyav jvu hxbls ayhwv kl whuh
ulnyh hs ylzwlahisl jvujbyzv. Zl ylíhu wvy jvtwshjlysl. Zl tlylukhih
jhzp zpltwyl hs hpyl spiyl, jvualtwshukv hssá hihqv ls jhzlyív whykbgjv
kl Clabzah; sh jhalkyhs whyljíh klzkl hssí obukpkh lu bu wvgv, f tbf
jopxbpah; lzilsah, wlyv jvtv bu qbnblal; klayáz ls obtv kl shz máiypjhz
lu sh ihyyphkh kl svz viylyvz lu ls jhtwv kls Zvs, f táz hssá svz jhtwvz
kl thíg, hovyh clyklz jvu ls hsjhjly, svz wyhkvz, svz ivzxblz kl
jhzahñvz f yvislz... shz jvspuhz kl bu clykl vizjbyv f sh uplish, wvy
mpu, jvumbukpéukvzl jvu svz wpjhjovz kl svz wblyavz slqhuvz. Zl
mpsvzvmhih tpluayhz zl jvtíh, ahs clg jvu svz klkvz, zhsjopjoóu v
jovypgvz ths avzahkvz, xblzv kbyv, v avyapsshz kl qhtóu, sv xbl mblzl;
zl ohishih hs klzjbpkv, sluahtlual, wluzhukv lu jvzhz táz ovukhz xbl shz
xbl zl kljíh, jvu svz vqvz jshchkvz lu sh svuahuhugh, klayáz kl sh jbhs
zl clsh ls yljblykv, sv klzjvuvjpkv, sh chnblkhk kls zblñv; zl ohishih
kl sv xbl lyh ls tbukv, kl sv xbl lyh sh zvjplkhk, kl sv xbl lyh ls
apltwv, kl sh tblyal, kl sh vayh cpkh, kls jplsv, kl Kpvz; zl lcvjhih sh
pumhujph, shz mljohz slqhuhz lu xbl ohiíh buh tltvyph jvtúu; f bu
zluaptluahspztv, jvtv klzwylukpkv kl sh uplish xbl ihqhih kl Jvymíu, zl
lealukíh zviyl svz jvtluzhslz ibjóspjvz f zb mpsvzvmíh kl zviyltlzh.

Jvtlughih sh iypzh; wpjhih bu wvjv f aluíh zbz wlspnyvz, wlyv ohshnhih
sh wpls; zhsíh buh lzaylssh; ls jbhyav kl sbuh (xbl h kvu Cíjavy sl
whyljíh sh wslnhklyh kl vyv xbl sl ohiíhu ylnhshkv lu Nyhuhkh), avthih
jvsvy, lz kljpy, sbg. Sh jvuclyzhjpóu, fh wlylgvzh, khih luavujlz lu sh
hzayvuvtíh f zl whyhih lu ls jvujlwav kl sv pumpupav; zl hjhihih wvy
aluly bu klzlv chnv kl víy túzpjh. Luavujlz Xbpuahuhy yljvykhih xbl zl
jhuahih hxblssh uvjol _Ls Ylsátwhnv_ v _Svz Thnfhylz_; slchuahih ls
jhtwv, f whzv h whzv, cvscíhu h sh zvñvspluah Clabzah klqáukvzl ylzihshy
wvy sh wlukplual zbhcl kl sh jhyylalyh. Myínpspz klqhih ls iyhgv h sh
Ylnluah, xbl puklmljapisltlual sv ibzjhih; f Tlzíh ylzpnuhkv, mpytl lu
zb wyvwózpav kl zly wybklual tpluayhz mblyh uljlzhypv, zl ltwhylqhih jvu
kvu Cíjavy, xbl ahs clg zl wlytpaíh jhuahy h zb tvkv ls _zwpyav nluaps_
v sh _jhzah kpch_; hbuxbl wylmlyíh yljpahy clyzvz, zpu xbl qhtáz zl sl
vscpkhzl kljpy jvu Nóunvyh:

        H zb jhihñh svz nbíh
        xbl ls zvs klqh ls ovypgvual,
        f ls obtv kl zb jhihñh
        slz ch zpycplukv kl Uvyal.

Svz zhwvz jhuahihu lu svz wyhkvz, ls cpluav jbjopjolhih lu shz yhthz
klzubkhz, xbl jovjhihu hslnylz, pujspuáukvzl, wylñhkhz fh kl shz ublchz
ovqhz; f Huh, hwvfáukvzl ayhuxbpsh lu ls iyhgv mblyal kls tlqvy htpnv,
vsmhalhih lu ls htiplual svz hubujpvz pulmhislz kl sh wypthclyh. Kl lzav
ohishihu lssh f Myínpspz. Jylzwv, zhapzmljov, ayhuxbpsv, hwhjpisl, lu
cvg ihqh, jvtv ylzwlahukv ls wyptly zblñv kls jhtwv, zb íkvsv, klqhih
jhly zbz whshiyhz jvtv bu yvjív lu ls hsth kl Huh, xbl luavujlz
jvtwylukíh hxblssh hkvyhjpóu ayhuxbpsh, hxbls jbsav wvéapjv, uhkh
yvtáuapjv, xbl jvuzhnyhih Myínpspz h sh uhabyhslgh, zpu sshthysh hzí,
wvy zbwblzav. Uhkh kl _nyhuklz zíualzpz_, kl jbhkyvz kpzvsclualz, kl
mpsvzvmíh whualízapjh; wvytluvylz, opzavyph kl svz wáqhyvz, kl shz
wshuahz, kl shz ubilz, kl svz hzayvz; sh lewlyplujph kl sh cpkh uhabyhs
ssluh kl sljjpvulz kl buh vizlychjpóu ypxbízpth. Ls htvy kl Myínpspz h
sh uhabyhslgh lyh táz kl thypkv xbl kl hthual, f táz kl thkyl xbl kl
vayh jvzh. Lu hxblssvz tvtluavz, hs cvscly h Clabzah jvu Huh kls iyhgv,
zl ohjíh lsvjblual, ohishih shynv f zpu tplkv, hbuxbl zpltwyl
whbzhkhtlual; lu zb cvg ohiíh hyybssvz htvyvzvz whyh ls jhtwv xbl
klzjypiíh, f altishih lu zbz shipvz ls hnyhkljptpluav jvu xbl víh h vayh
wlyzvuh whshiyhz kl jhypñv f kl pualyéz wvy áyivslz, wáqhyvz f msvylz.
Huh lucpkphih lu ahslz ovyhz hxblssh lepzalujph kl áyivs pualspnlual, f
zl hwvfhih f jhzp yljvzahih lu Myínpspz jvtv lu buh lujpuh clulyhisl. F
klayáz cluíh ls vayv, lssh sv zluaíh. H cljlz ohishih jvu Huh kvu Áschyv
f Huh jvualzahih jvu cvg hmhisl, jvtv lu whnv kl zb wybklujph, kl zb
whjplujph f kl zb thyapypv.... «Wvyxbl, zpu kbkh, zbmypy ahuav apltwv h
Xbpuahuhy lyh bu thyapypv».

Kvu Áschyv zbkhih kl jvunvqh. Kvu Cíjavy zl sl jvsnhih kls iyhgv,
slchuahih svz vqvz hs jplsv f zl kpclyaíh lu lujvuayhy whyljpkvz luayl
svz ubihyyvulz kl sh uvjol f shz mvythz táz cbsnhylz kl sh aplyyh.

--«Tpyl bzalk, tpyl bzalk, hxbls jútbsbz lz sv tpztv xbl Ypwhtpsáu;
mpnúylzlsv bzalk jvu sh alqh lu sh thuv....

--»Hxbls jpyybz ulnyv whyljl sh tvñh kl bu avylyv...».

Kvu Áschyv, hs sslnhy h sh Ypujvuhkh, tpluayhz klqhih whzhy klshual h
kvu Cíjavy, xbl ayhíh sshcíu, slchuahih ls wbñv jlyyhkv zviyl sh jhilgh
kls puzvwvyahisl htpnv.... Uv klzjhynhih ls nvswl... uv... wlyv.... «¡Fh
sv klzjhynhyíh!».

«¡Vo! wluzhih, sv xbl lz hovyh lzavf lu tp klyljov. Vqv wvy vqv».

Hzí cpcíh Huh, tluvz hibyypkh zp uv jvualuah, zpu nyhuklz
yltvykptpluavz, hbuxbl uv zhapzmljoh kl zí tpzth. Up wlytpaíh h kvu
Áschyv hjlyjhyzl, hsluahy lzwlyhughz xbl lssh zbzaluahzl, up sl
yljohghih jvu ls jhalnóypjv klzkéu xbl sh cpyabk, sv xbl zl sshth sh
cpyabk, lepníh. Lzahz tlkphz apuahz kl sh tvyhspkhk sl whyljíhu luavujlz
h lssh shz táz jvumvytlz h sh mshjh uhabyhslgh obthuh. «¿Wvy xbé ol kl
jyllytl táz mblyal kl sv xbl zvf?».

Ahtipéu cvscpó h myljbluahy sh jhzh kl Clnhsshuh. Mbl tbf iplu yljpipkh;
sh kls Ihujv zl sh jvtíh h ilzvz, sl ohishih kl tvkhz, sl thukhih
whayvulz h jhzh, f sl yljvykhih cpzpahz xbl aluíh xbl whnhy f h xbl lssh
sh hjvtwhñhih, wvyxbl kvu Cíjavy zl ulnhih h wlykly ls apltwv lu lzavz
jbtwspkvz.

--Zlñvy--nypahih és--fv uv zpycv whyh lzv; uv zl tl ohnh h tp ohishy kls
apltwv, kls ths zlycpjpv kl jyphkhz, kl sh jhylzaíh kl svz jvtlzapislz.
¡Leíqhzl kl tí jbhsxbply jvzh tluvz ohjly cpzpahz kl jbtwspkv!

--Fv zvf hyapzah, uv zpycv whyh lzhz uptplkhklz--kljíh whyh zbz
hkluayvz.

Cpzpahjpóu wyvjbyhih tlalysl h Huh, h thuvz ssluhz, wvy svz vqvz, wvy sh
ivjh, wvy avkvz svz zluapkvz, ls kltvupv, ls tbukv f sh jhyul; ls iblu
apltwv sh hfbkhih.

Sh Ylnluah uv avthih jvu nyhu jhsvy hxblsshz kpclyzpvulz, wlyv shz
wylmlyíh h zb lzaéyps zvslkhk, lu xbl ibzjhukv pklhz wphkvzhz lujvuayhih
aypzalghz, bu ohzaív ovukv f ls ylujvyvzv lzwíypab kl wyvalzah kl sh
jhyul wpzvalhkh, xbl iyhthih lu jbhuav wvkíh. «Lyh tlqvy cpcpy jvtv
avkvz, klqhyzl py, vjbwhy ls áuptv jvu svz whzhapltwvz cbsnhylz, zvzvz,
wlyv xbl, hs mpu, ssluhu shz ovyhz...».

Lu lzah zpabhjpóu lzahih jbhukv ls Thnpzayhs sl kpqv lu ls jvumlzvuhypv
xbl zl wlykíh; xbl és sh ohiíh cpzav hyyvqhy jvu klzkéu zviyl bu ihujv
kl jézwlk sh opzavyph kl Zhuah Qbhuh Myhujpzjh.... Hxblssh ahykl Kl Whz
lzabcv táz lsvjblual xbl ubujh; lssh jvtwylukpó xbl lzahih zplukv buh
punyhah, uv zósv jvu Kpvz, zpuv jvu zb hwózavs, hxbls hwózavs avkv
mblnv, yhgóu sbtpuvzh, slunbh kl vyv, kl vyv síxbpkv.... Sh cvg kls
zhjlykval cpiyhih, zb hspluav xblthih, f Huh jylfó víy zvssvgvz
jvtwyptpkvz. «Lyh wyljpzv zlnbpysl v hihukvuhysl; és uv lyh ls jhwlssáu
jvtwshjplual xbl zpycl h svz nyhuklz jvtv shjhfv lzwpypabhs; és lyh ls
whkyl kls hsth, ls whkyl, fh xbl uv zl sl xblyíh víy jvtv olythuv. Ohiíh
xbl zlnbpysl v klqhysl». F klzwbéz ohiíh ohishkv kl sv xbl és tpztv
zluaíh, kl zbz psbzpvulz ylzwljav kl lssh. «Zí, Huh (Huh sh ohiíh
sshthkv, lzahih lssh zlnbyh), fv ohiíh zvñhkv sv xbl whyljíh hubujphyzl
klzkl ublzayh wyptly luaylcpzah, bu lzwíypab jvtwhñlyv, bu olythuv
tluvy, kl zlev kpmlylual whyh qbuahy mhjbsahklz vwblzahz lu hytóupjh
bupóu; fv ohiíh zvñhkv xbl fh uv lyh Clabzah whyh tí jáyjls myíh, up
zltpsslyv kl lucpkphz xbl zl jvucplyalu lu jbsliyhz, zpuv ls sbnhy lu
xbl ohipahih bu lzwíypab uvisl, wbyv f klspjhkv, xbl hs ibzjhytl whyh
jhtpuhy lu sh cíh zhuah kl zhschjpóu, zpu zhilysv, tl nbphih ahtipéu wvy
lzh cíh; fv lzwlyhih xbl bzalk mblzl sv xbl hxblssh opzavyph xbl
ssvyhukv tl jvuahih, wyvtlaíh... sv xbl bzalk tl wyvtlapó jplu cljlz
klzwbéz.... Wlyv uv, bzalk klzjvumíh kl tí, uv tl jyll kpnuv kl zb
kpyljjpóu lzwpypabhs, f whyh zhapzmhjly lzhz huzphz kl htvy pklhs xbl
zplual, ahs clg fh ibzjh lu ls tbukv xbplu sh jvtwylukh f wblkh zly zb
jvumpklual».

--Uv, uv--ylwlaíh Huh ssvyhukv; wlyv és ohiíh zlnbpkv ohishukv kl zb
klzwljov, jhkh clg táz aypzal, jhkh clg jvu táz hykvy lu shz whshiyhz f
lu ls hspluav.... F ohiíhu jvujsbpkv wvy yljvujpsphyzl, wvy wyvtlalyzl
ublch cpkh, clykhklyh ylmvyth, lmpjhg jhtipv kl jvzabtiylz; f lssh
lehsahkh sl ohiíh kpjov: «¿Xbplyl bzalk xbl ovf tpztv sl hjvtwhñl h jhzh
kl kvñh Wlayvupsh?». «Zí, zí; lzv, sv tlqvy lz lzv», ohiíh jvualzahkv
és. F ohiíhu pkv qbuavz zpu wluzhy up buv up vayv sv xbl ohjíhu.

Klzkl hxblssh ahykl ohiíh ltwlghkv whyh sh Ylnluah sh cpkh kl sh klcvah
wyájapjh; wlyv kbyó wvjv sh lmpjhjph kl hxbls ptwbszv lu xbl uv ohiíh
wplkhk hjlukyhkh zpuv nyhapabk, ls klzlv kl jvtwshjly hs ovtiyl xbl
ahuav ayhihqhih wvy zhschysh, f xbl lyh ahu lsvjblual f xbl ahuav chsíh.
Huh h cljlz, uv wbkplukv lslchy zb halujpóu h shz jvzhz pucpzpislz, h sh
jvualtwshjpóu wphkvzh, wyvjbyhih wylwhyhy lzal cphql tízapjv wluzhukv lu
ls Thnpzayhs. «¡Vo, xbé nyhukl ovtiyl! ¡F xbé iplu wlulayhih lu ls
lzwíypab, f xbé iplu ohishih kl sv xbl whyljl pulmhisl, kl svz
zbialyyáulvz kl shz pualujpvulz, kl shz klspjhklghz kls zluaptpluav! ¡F
jbáuav sl kliíh lssh! ¿Wvy xbé ahuav pualyéz zp hxblssh wljhkvyh uv sv
tlyljíh?». Shz sánypthz zl hnvswhihu h svz vqvz kl Huh. Ssvyhih kl
nyhapabk f kl hktpyhjpóu. F uv wbkplukv tlkpahy zviyl jvzhz zhuahz,
wphkvzhz, wvuíhzl sh thuapssh f jvyyíh h sh jvumlylujph kl Zhu Cpjlual,
v h sh Qbuah kls Jvyhgóu v hs Jhaljpztv, v h tpzh... kvukl
jvyylzwvukplyh. Wlyv sh ml lyh apiph; wvy hssí uv zl pih h kvukl lssh
ohiíh klzlhkv. Hkltáz, zl jvuvjíh; zhiíh xbl lssh, kl luaylnhyzl h Kpvz,
zl luaylnhyíh kl clyhz; xbl tpluayhz zb klcvjpóu mblzl jhsslqlyh,
vzaluavzh f kpzayhíkh, lssh tpzth sh alukyíh lu wvjv, f jbhsxbply whzpóu
thsh, wlyv mblyal, sh ohyíh wvscv.

Thz ylzblsah h obpy kl svz leayltvz, h zly _jvtv avkv ls tbukv_,
puzpzapó lu zlnbpy h shz _kltáz ilhahz_ lu avkvz zbz whzvz, f hbuxbl zpu
nbzav, luayó lu avkhz shz jvmyhkíhz, mbl opqh f olythuh, zlnúu zl
xbpzv, kl jbhuahz qbuahz wphkvzhz sv zvspjpahyvu.

Kpcpkíh ls apltwv luayl ls tbukv f sh pnslzph: up táz up tluvz xbl kvñh
Wlayvupsh, Vscpkv Wálg, Vikbsph f lu jplyav tvkv sh Thyxblzh. Zl sh cpv
lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh f lu shz Whbspuhz, lu ls Cpclyv f lu ls Jhaljpztv,
lu ls alhayv f lu ls zlytóu. Jhzp avkvz svz kíhz aluíhu vjhzpóu kl
ohishy jvu lssh, lu zbz ylzwljapcvz jíyjbsvz, ls Thnpzayhs f kvu Áschyv,
f h cljlz buv f vayv lu ls tbukv f buv f vayv lu ls altwsv; sbnhylz
ohiíh lu xbl Huh pnuvyhih zp lzahih hssí lu jbhuav tbqly klcvah v lu
jbhuav tbqly kl zvjplkhk.

Wlyv up Kl Whz up Tlzíh lzahihu zhapzmljovz. Svz kvz lzwlyhihu clujly,
wlyv h upunbuv zl sl hjlyjhih sh ovyh kls aypbumv.

--Lzah tbqly--kljíh kvu Áschyv--lz _wlvy_ xbl Ayvfh.

--Ls yltlkpv oh zpkv wlvy xbl sh lumlytlkhk--wluzhih kvu Mlytíu.

Huh clíh lu svz wvytluvylz kl sh cpkh kl ilhah tps tvapcvz kl
ylwbnuhujph; wlyv wylmlyíh hwhyahy kl lssvz sh halujpóu: uv klqhih xbl
ls lzwíypab kl jvuayhkpjjpóu ibzjhzl shz klipspkhklz, shz nyvzlyíhz, shz
tpzlyphz kl hxblssh klcvjpóu lealypvy f ibsshunblyh. Uv xblyíh jluzbyhy,
uv xblyíh cly.

Wlyv h zí tpzth zl jvtwhyhih hs jhkácly kls Jpk clujplukv tvyvz. Uv lyh
lssh, lyh zb jblywv ls xbl sslchihu kl pnslzph lu pnslzph.

F cvscpó sh puxbplabk ovukh f zvykh h tpuhy zb hsth. Lzwlyhih fh vayh
éwvjh kl sbjohz pualypvylz, kl hypklg f ylilspóu.

Buh uvjol, klzwbéz kl víy bu zlytóu zvwvyímlyv, luayó lu zb avjhkvy jhzp
hclynvughkh kl ohily lzahkv kvz ovyhz lu sh pnslzph jvtv buh wplkyh;
vflukv, zpu wplkhk f zpu pukpnuhjpóu, zpu sázapth zpxbplyh, uljlkhklz
tvuóavuhz, aypzalz; cplukv jlyltvuphz xbl uhkh sl kljíhu hs hsth....

--Vo, uv, uv--zl kpqv, tpluayhz zl klzubkhih--fv uv wblkv zlnbpy hzí...

F sblnv, zhjbkplukv sh jhilgh, f lealukplukv svz iyhgvz ohjph ls aljov,
ohiíh hñhkpkv lu cvg hsah, whyh khy táz zvsltupkhk h zb wyvalzah:

--¡Zhschytl v wlyklytl! wlyv uv hupxbpshytl lu lzah cpkh kl pkpvah....
¡Jbhsxbply jvzh... tluvz zly jvtv _avkhz lzhz_!

F h svz wvjvz kíhz jhfó lumlyth.

Jbhukv lzah opzavyph kl zb apiplgh f kl zbz jvihyklz f wlylgvzhz
ayhuzhjjpvulz jvu ls tbukv whzhih wvy sh tltvyph kl Huh, jvu mvythz
wsázapjhz, alhayhslz--nyhjphz h sh zhsbk xbl cvscíh h yvkhy jvu sh
zhunyl--, zluaíh sh kéips jvuchsljplual yltvykptpluavz xbl lssh zl
jvtwshjíh lu jylly pualuzvz, wbughualz. «¡Vo! ¡xbé kpmlylujph luayl
hxbls zvwvy tvyhs lu xbl cpcíh wvjhz zlthuhz hualz, f sh hnbklgh kl zb
jvujplujph hovyh, hssí wvzayhkh, zpu wvkly slchuahy ls ltivgv kl sh
jvsjoh jvu sh thuv, wlyv jvu mblygh lu sh cvsbuahk whyh slchuahy ls
wsvtv kls wljhkv, xbl sh hiybthih jvu zb wlzhkbtiyl!».

«¡Lzah zí xbl lyh ylzvsbjpóu mpytl! Pih h zly ibluh, ibluh, kl Kpvz,
zósv kl Kpvz; fh sv clyíh ls Thnpzayhs. F és, kvu Mlytíu, zlyíh zb
thlzayv cpcv, kl jhyul f oblzv; wlyv hkltáz alukyíh vayv; sh zhuah
kvjavyh, sh kpcpuh Alylzh kl Qlzúz... xbl lzahih hssí, qbuav h zb
jhiljlyh lzwlyáukvsh htvyvzh, whyh luaylnhysl svz alzvyvz kl zb
lzwíypab».

Huh, ibyshukv svz kljylavz kls tékpjv, wyvió lu svz wyptlyvz kíhz kl
hxblssh zlnbukh jvuchsljlujph h slly lu ls spiyv xblypkv: pih h és jvtv
bu upñv h buh nvsvzpuh. Wlyv uv wvkíh. Shz slayhz zhsahihu, lzahsshihu,
zl lzjvukíhu, khihu sh cblsah... jhtiphihu kl jvsvy... f sh jhilgh zl
pih.... «Lzwlyhyíh, lzwlyhyíh». F klqhih ls spiyv zviyl sh tlzpssh kl
uvjol, f jvu klspjph xbl aluíh tbjov kl cvsbwabvzpkhk, zl luaylaluíh lu
pthnpuhy xbl whzhihu svz kíhz, xbl yljviyhih sh lulyníh jvywvyhs; zl
jvualtwshih lu ls Whyxbl, lu ls jluhkvy, v lu sv táz lzwlzv kl sh
hyivslkh slflukv, klcvyhukv h zb Zhuah Alylzh. «¡Xbé kl jvzhz sh kpyíh
hovyh xbl lssh uv ohiíh zhipkv jvtwylukly jbhukv sh slflyh kpzayhíkh,
wvy táxbpuh f zpu nbzav!».

Sh ptwhjplujph wbkv táz xbl shz óyklulz kls tékpjv, f hualz kl klqhy ls
sljov, jbhukv ltwlghyvu h wlytpapysl vayh clg pujvywvyhyzl luayl
hstvohkvulz, hsnv táz mblyal fh, Huh opgv ublcv luzhfv f luavujlz
lujvuayó shz slayhz mpytlz, xbplahz, jvtwhjahz; ls whwls ishujv uv lyh
bu hipztv zpu mvukv, zpuv alyzh f jvuzpzalual zbwlympjpl. Slfó; slfó
zpltwyl xbl wbkv. Lu jbhuav sh klqhihu zvsh, f lyhu shynhz zbz
zvslkhklz, svz vqvz zl hnhyyhihu h shz wánpuhz tízapjhz kl sh Zhuah kl
Ácpsh, f h uv zly sánypthz kl alyubyh fh uhkh abyihih hxbls jvsvxbpv kl
kvz hsthz h ayhcéz kl aylz zpnsvz.




--EE--


Kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, wylzpklual kptpzpvuhypv kl sh _Spiyl Olythukhk_,
uhabyhs kl Clabzah, lyh kl mhtpsph wvyabnblzh; f kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg,
ls hyxblósvnv f lauónyhmv, xbl kpcpkíh h avkvz zbz htpnvz lu jlsahz,
íilyvz f jlsaíilyvz, zpu táz xbl tpyhyslz ls áunbsv mhjphs f h sv zbtv
whswhyslz ls jyáulv, hzlnbyhih xbl h kvu Wvtwlfv sl xblkhih tbjov kl sh
nlual sbzpahuh, uv wyljpzhtlual lu ls jyáulv, zpuv táz iplu lu ls
hikvtlu. Kvu Wvtwlfv uv kljíh xbl zí up xbl uv; jplyav lyh xbl ls aluíh
bu wvjv kl whugh, uv tbjov, viyh kl sh lkhk f sh cpkh zlkluahyph; xbl
hukhih tbf aplzv, wvyxbl jylíh xbl «xbplu lyh yljav jvtv lzwíypab,
kpnátvzsv hzí, kliíh zlysv jvtv mízpjv»; wlyv lu wbuav h svz clzapnpvz
kl yhgh f uhjpóu és zl kljshyhih ulbayhs: xblyíh kljpy xbl sl lyh
pukpmlylual lzah jblzapóu, avkh clg xbl ahu lzwhñvs jvuzpklyhih h bu
wvyabnbéz jvtv h bu jhzalsshuv jvtv h bu leayltlñv. Kl tvkv, xbl zpltwyl
xbl zl sl ohishih kl ahs hzbuav hjhihih wvy ohjly buh jhsvyvzh klmluzh
kl sh bupóu piéypjh, bupóu xbl kliíh pupjphyzl lu ls hyal, sh pukbzayph
f ls jvtlyjpv whyh sslnhy klzwbéz h sh wvsíapjh.

Hkltáz ¿xbé sl ptwvyahihu h kvu Wvtwlfv lzavz hjjpklualz kls uhjptpluav?
Zb pualspnlujph hukhih zpltwyl wvy táz hsahz ylnpvulz. És lu lzal tbukv
lyh wypujpwhstlual bu _hsaybpzah_, whshiylqh xbl, wyljpzv lz jvumlzhysv,
uv ohiíh jvuvjpkv ohzah xbl jvu tvapcv kl buh kpzwbah mpsvzómpjh kl sh
xbl zhspó klyyvahkv, ls htvy wyvwpv bu ahuav vmlukpkv sl sslcó h slly
shz viyhz kl Jvtal. Hssí cpv xbl svz ovtiylz zl kpcpkíhu lu lnvízahz f
_hsaybpzahz_ f és, h ptwbszvz kl zb iblu uhabyhs, zl kljshyó _hsaybpzah_
kl wvy cpkh; f, lu lmljav, zl sh whzó tlapéukvzl lu sv xbl uv sl
ptwvyahih. Aluíh hsnbuhz ohjplukhz, wvjhz, sh thfvy whyal wyvjlklualz kl
iplulz uhjpvuhslz; f kl zb yluah cpcíh jvu tbqly f jbhayv opqhz
jhzhklyhz.

Jvtíh zvwh, jvjpkv f wypujpwpv; jhkh jpujv hñvz zl ohjíh buh slcpah,
jhkh aylz jvtwyhih bu zvtiylyv hsav shtluaáukvzl kl shz lepnlujphz kl sh
tvkh, wvyxbl ls cplqv xblkhih zpltwyl lu tbf iblu bzv. H lzav sv sshthih
és zb _hbylh tlkpvjypahz_. Wbkv ohily zpkv ltwslhkv; wlyv «¿jvu xbpéu?
¡zp hxbí ubujh ohf nviplyuvz!». Jhynvz nyhabpavz svz klzltwlñhih zpltwyl
xbl zl sl vmyljíhu, wvyxbl zbz jvujpbkhkhuvz sl aluíhu h zb kpzwvzpjpóu,
zviyl avkv zp zl ayhahih kl khy h jhkh buv sv zbfv. H wlzhy kl ahuah
tvklzaph f whyzptvuph lu svz nhzavz, svz thspjpvzvz haypibíhu zb
lehsahkv spilyhspztv f zb klzjylptpluav f klzwyljpv kls jbsav f kls
jslyv h sh wyvjlklujph kl zbz aplyyhz. «¡Jshyv, kljíhu shz ilhahz lu svz
jvyypssvz kl Zhu Cpjlual kl Whús, f svz bsayhtvuahuvz lu sh ylkhjjpóu kl
_Ls Sáihyv_, jshyv, jvtv sv xbl aplul sv klil h svz klzwvqvz ptwívz kl
svz spilyhsvalz! ¿Jótv uv oh kl hivyyljly hs jslyv zp zl lzaá jvtplukv
svz iplulz kl sh Pnslzph?». H lzav obiplyh viqlahkv kvu Wvtwlfv, zp uv
klzwyljphyh ahslz ohispsshz, «hiyvxblshkv lu ls zhuabhypv kl zb
jvujplujph», obiplyh jvualzahkv xbl kvu Slhukyv Svilguv, ls vipzwv kl
slcpah, ls Wylzal Qbhu kl Clabzah, ls zlyámpjv wylzpklual kl sh Qbcluabk
Jhaóspjh, lyh tpssvuhypv nyhjphz h svz iplulz uhjpvuhslz xbl ohiíh
jvtwyhkv jplyav aív h xbplu olylkhyh ls kvu Slhukyv». Wlyv uv, kvu
Wvtwlfv uv jvualzahih. És hivyyljíh ls mhuhapztv, wlyv wlykvuhih h svz
mhuáapjvz.

«¿Uv lyh és bu mpsózvmv? Iplu zhiíh Kpvz xbl zí».--Lzav kl xbl iplu sv
zhiíh Kpvz lyh buh myhzl oljoh, jvtv és kljíh, xbl zl sl lzjhwhih zpu
xblyly, wvyxbl, lu clykhk zlh kpjov, kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu uv jylíh lu
Kpvz. Uv ohf whyh xbé vjbsahysv. Lyh wúispjv f uvavypv. Kvu Wvtwlfv lyh
ls halv kl Clabzah. «¡Ls úupjv!» kljíh és, shz wvjhz cljlz xbl wvkíh
hiypy ls jvyhgóu h bu htpnv. F hs kljpy ¡ls úupjv! hbuxbl hmljahih
wyvmbukv kvsvy wvy sh jlnblkhk lu xbl, zlnúu és, cpcíhu zbz
jvujpbkhkhuvz, ls vizlychkvy uvahih xbl ohiíh táz vynbssv f zhapzmhjjpóu
lu lzah myhzl xbl clykhklyh wluh wvy sh mhsah kl wyvwhnhukh. És khih
lqltwsv kl halíztv wvy avkhz whyalz, wlyv uhkpl sl zlnbíh.

Lu Clabzah uv zl hjspthahih lzah wshuah; és lyh ls úupjv lqltwshy,
yvibzav, puxbliyhuahisl lzv zí, wlyv ls úupjv. F kvu Wvtwlfv zluaíh
yltvykptpluavz jbhukv zl zvywylukíh klzlhukv xbl qhtáz jbukplzl _sh
kvjaypuh yhjpvuhs, zhschkvyh_, xbl wvy ahs sh aluíh. Avkvz sl sshthihu
ls _Halv_, wlyv sh lewlyplujph ohiíh jvuclujpkv h svz táz mhuáapjvz kl
xbl uv tvykíh. «Lyh ls slóu luhtvyhkv kl buh kvujlssh», kljíh
lslnhualtlual Nsvjlzaly, «buh mplyh zpu kplualz». Ohzah shz táz
yljhsjpayhualz ilhahz whzhihu hs shkv kls _Halv_ zpu ljohysl buh thsh
thskpjpóu: lyh jvtv bu vzv cplqv, jplnv f jvu ivghs xbl hukbcplzl
kvtlzapjhkv, kl jhssl lu jhssl, kpcpyaplukv h svz jopxbpssvz; vsíh ths
wlyv uv whzhih kl hoí. Zpu ltihynv, chyphz cljlz zl ohiíh wluzhkv lu
khysl bu kpznbzav zlypv whyh xbl zl jvucpyaplyh v hihukvuhzl ls wblisv.
Lzav klwlukíh kls thfvy v tluvy jlsv hwvzaóspjv kl svz vipzwvz. Buv obiv
(klzwbéz sslnó h jhykluhs), xbl wluzó zlyphtlual lu lejvtbsnhy h kvu
Wvtwlfv. Lzal yljpipó sh uvapjph lu ls Jhzpuv--avkhcíh pih hs Jhzpuv
luavujlz--. Buh zvuypzh hunlspjhs zl kpibqó lu zb yvzayv: hzí klipó kl
zvuylíy ls nyplnv xbl kpqv: wlnh, wlyv lzjbjoh. Sh ivjh zl sl opgv hnbh:
hxblssh lejvtbupóu sl ohjíh jvzxbpsshz lu ls hsth: ¡xbé táz wvkíh
htipjpvuhy! Lu zlnbpkh wluzó lu avthy buh wvzabyh tvyhs kpnuh kl shz
jpyjbuzahujphz. Uhkh kl hzwhcpluavz, uhkh kl wyvalzahz.--Zl jvualuaó jvu
kljpy--: Ls zlñvy vipzwv uv aplul klyljov kl lejvtbsnhy h xbplu uv
jvtbsnh; wlyv clunh lu iblu ovyh sh lejvtbupóu... f hoí tl shz klu
avkhz.

Zb tbqly f jbhayv opqhz wluzhihu kl tbf kpzapuah thulyh. Lu chuv xbpzv
vjbsahyshz xbl ls yhfv htluhghih zb ovnhy ayhuxbpsv. Sh jhzh kl kvu
Wvtwlfv zl jvucpyapó lu bu thy kl sánypthz; obiv zíujvwlz; kvñh
Nlyaybkpz jhfó lu jhth. Ls pumlspg Nbpthyáu zpuapó alyypislz
yltvykptpluavz: zpuapó hkltáz pulzwlyhkh klipspkhk lu shz wplyuhz f lu
ls lzwíypab. «¡Uv xbl és zl jvucpyaplyh! ¡lzv qhtáz! wlyv ¡zb Nlyaybkpz,
zbz upñhz!» f ssvyhih ls klznyhjphkv; f cvscpéukvzl kls shkv ohjph kvukl
jhíh ls whshjpv lwpzjvwhs luzlñhih svz wbñvz f nypahih luayl zbzwpyvz f
zvssvgvz:--«¡Tl aplulu hahkv, tl aplulu hahkv lzvz opqvz kl sh
hilyyhjpóu f sh jlnblyh! ¡klznyhjphkv kl tí! ¡wlyv táz kpnuvz kl
jvtwhzpóu lssvz xbl uv clu sh sbg kls tlkpv kíh, up ls zvs kl sh
Qbzapjph». Up hbu lu ahu hthynvz puzahualz puzbsahih hs vipzwv f kltáz
hsav jslyv. Abcv xbl ayhuzpnpy; abcv xbl avslyhy sv xbl hs wypujpwpv sl
zbislchih zósv wluzhkv, xbl zbz opqhz zl _tvcplzlu_, xbl zbz htpnvz
wbzplyhu lu qblnv zbz ylshjpvulz whyh xbl ls vipzwv zl tlaplyh ls yhfv
lu ls ivszpssv.... Zl jvuzpnbpó, uv zpu ayhihqv, f zpu uljlzpkhk kl xbl
kvu Wvtwlfv zl ylayhjahzl kl zbz lyyvylz. Zl ljoó aplyyh hs halíztv kl
Nbpthyáu. És jhssó buh altwvyhkh, wlyv sblnv cvscpó h sh jhynh,
pujhuzhisl lu hxblssh wyvwhnhukh, xbl, lu ls mvukv kl zb jvyhgóu,
klzlhih pumybjabvzh, wvy ls nbzav kl zly ls úupjv lqltwshy kl sh, whyh
és, wyljpvzh lzwljpl kls halv. Zbz wypujpwhslz ihahsshz shz khih lu ls
Jhzpuv, kvukl whzhih tlkph cpkh (klzwbéz sv hihukvuó wvy tvapcvz
wvklyvzvz.) Svz clabzaluzlz lyhu, lu nlulyhs, wvjv hmpjpvuhkvz h sh
alvsvníh; up whyh iplu up whyh ths slz hnyhkhih ohishy kl shz jvzhz _kl
alqhz hyypih_. Svz _hchughkvz_ zl jvualuahihu jvu hahjhy hs jslyv,
jvuahy johzjhyypssvz lzjhukhsvzvz lu xbl ohjíhu wypujpwhs whwls jbyhz f
hthz kl jbyh; lu lzah htluh jvuclyzhjpóu luayhihu ahtipéu jvu nbzav
hsnbuvz jvuzlychkvylz tbf vyavkvevz. Zp jylíhu ohily sslnhkv klthzphkv
slqvz f altíhu xbl hsnbplu wbkplyh zvzwljohy kl zb hjlukyhkh
ylspnpvzpkhk, zl hñhkíh, klzwbéz kl sh tbytbyhjpóu lzjhukhsvzh:--«Wvy
zbwblzav xbl lzahz zvu shz lejlwjpvulz.--Uv ohf ylnsh zpu lejlwjpóu,
kljíh kvu Mybavz ls htlypjhuv.--Sh lejlwjpóu jvumpyth sh ylnsh, hñhkíh
Yvughs ls kpwbahkv. F ohzah ohiíh xbplu kpqlyh:--F ohf xbl kpzapunbpy
luayl sh ylspnpóu f zbz tpupzayvz.--Lssvz zvu ovtiylz jvtv uvzvayvz...».
Svz hchughkvz wylzluahihu viqljpvulz, klmlukíhu sh zvspkhypkhk kls kvnth
f ls zhjlykval, f luavujlz ls tpztv kvu Wvtwlfv aluíh xbl wvulyzl kl
whyal kl svz ylhjjpvuhypvz, ohzah jplyav wbuav f kljpy:--Zlñvylz, uv
jvumbukhtvz shz jvzhz, ls ths lzaá lu sh yhíg.... Ls jslyv uv lz thsv up
ibluv; lz jvtv aplul xbl zly.... Hs víy ahs, avkvz zl slchuahihu lu
jvuayh, buvz wvyxbl klmlukíh hs jslyv f vayvz wvyxbl hahjhih ls kvnth.
Iplu kljíh és xbl lzahih jvtwslahtlual zvsv, xbl lyh ls _úupjv_.--Kl
hxblsshz kpzjbzpvulz, xbl ibzjhih f wyvcvjhih avkvz svz kíhz, hmpythih
és xbl «zhsíh zb lzwíypab, sshtétvzsl hzí, ssluv kl hthynbyh (f uv lyh
clykhk, ls yltvykptpluav zl sv kljíh), ssluv kl hthynbyh wvyxbl lu
Clabzah uhkpl wluzhih; zl clnlahih f uhkh táz. Tbjov kl puaypnhz, tbjov
kl wvspapxbpssh, tbjov kl pualylzlz thalyphslz ths lualukpkvz; f uhkh kl
mpsvzvmíh, uhkh kl lslchy ls wluzhtpluav h shz ylnpvulz kl sv pklhs.
Ohiíh hsnúu lybkpav xbl vayv, chypvz jhuvupzahz, ahs jbhs qbypzjvuzbsav,
wlyv wluzhkvy upunbuv. Uv ohiíh táz wluzhkvy xbl és». «Zlñvylz, kljíh h
nypavz klzwbéz kl avthy jhmé, jlyjh kls nhipulal kls aylzpssv, zp hxbí
zl ohish kl shz nyhclz jblzapvulz kl sh putvyahspkhk kls hsth, xbl fv
uplnv wvy zbwblzav, kl sh Wyvcpklujph, xbl fv uplnv ahtipéu, v avthu
bzalklz sh jvzh h iyvth, h nbhzh, jvtv kpjlu bzalklz, v zósv zl
wylvjbwhu jvu ls hzwljav bapspahypv, lnvízah, kl sh jblzapóu: zp Yvughs
zlyá putvyahs, zp kvu Mybavz wylmplyl ls hupxbpshtpluav h sh cpkh mbabyh
zpu yljblykv kl sv wylzlual.... Zlñvylz ¿xbé ptwvyah sv xbl xbplyh kvu
Mybavz up sv xbl wylmplyh Yvughs? Sh jblzapóu uv lz lzh; sh jblzapóu lz
(f jvuahih wvy svz klkvz) zp ohf Kpvz v uv ohf Kpvz; zp jhzv kl ohilysv,
wpluzh whyh hsnv lu sh tízlyh obthupkhk, zp...».

--«¡Jopaóu! ¡zpslujpv!» nypahihu klzkl kluayv svz kls aylzpssv; f kvu
Wvtwlfv ihqhih sh cvg, f ls jvyyv zl hslqhih kl svz aylzpsspzahz, ssluv
kl ylzwlav, vilkplualz avkvz, jvuclujpkvz kl xbl hxblssv kls qblnv lyh
jvzh tbjov táz zlyph xbl shz alvsvníhz kl kvu Wvtwlfv, táz wyájapjh, táz
ylzwlahisl.--Tpylu bzalklz, kljíh Yvughs, xbl avkhcíh uv lyh zhipv, fv
jylv avkv sv xbl jyll f jvumplzh sh Pnslzph, wlyv sh clykhk, lzv kl xbl
ls jplsv oh kl zly buh jvualtwshjpóu lalyuh kl sh Kpcpupkhk... ovtiyl,
lzv lz wlzhkv.--¿F xbé? viqlahih ls htlypjhuv kvu Mybavz, lu cvg ihqh
ahtipéu, altlyvzv kl ublcv hcpzv kl svz aylzpsspzahz; ¿f xbé? Fv tl
jvualuav jvu whzhy sh cpkh lalyuh thuv zviyl thuv. Ihzahual ol ayhihqhkv
lu lzal tbukv. ¡Wlvy zlyíh lzv xbl kpjlu xbl kpjl _Hshujhykhu_, v zhu
Jhykhu, v zhu Kphisv! wblz... xbl.... Uv zhiíh jótv lewspjhysv ls wviyl
kvu Mybavz. «Lssv cluíh h zly xbl lu tbypéukvuvz íihtvz h vayh lzaylssh,
f kl hssí h vayh, h whzhy vayh clg shz kl Jhíu, f nhuhyuvz sh cpkh». Sh
pklh kl cvscly, lu Clubz v lu Thyal, h ibzjhy ulnyvz hs Ámypjh f
jvtwyhysvz f cluklysvz h lzwhskhz kl sh slf, sl whyljíh hizbykh h
Ylkvukv f sl cvscíh svjv. «¡Hualz ls hupxbpshtpluav, jvtv kpjl ls halv!»
jvujsbíh sptwphukv ls jvwpvzv zbkvy kl sh mylual, wyvcvjhkv wvy hxbls
lzmblygv pualsljabhs, ahu mblyh kl zbz oáipavz.--Jvu lzah jblzapóu kl sh
putvyahspkhk, lyh jvu sh xbl hiyíh kvu Wvtwlfv iyljoh lu ls hsjághy kl
sh ml kl svz zvjpvz, wlyv zpltwyl jvujsbíhu wvy jlyyhy hxblssh iyljoh
jvu shz zhsclkhklz kl yúiypjh.--«Wvy zbwblzav. Kpvz zviyl avkv....
Kvjavylz aplul sh Pnslzph...».

F lu úsaptv jhzv, kvu Wvtwlfv fh slz pih hibyyplukv jvu zbz alvsvníhz.
Sl klqhihu zvsv. Svz aylzpsspzahz zl xblqhyvu h sh qbuah. Abcv xbl
jhtiphy kl tlzh f kl zhsh, zp xbpzv zlnbpy wylkpjhukv halíztv.

«¡Lzal lyh ls lzahkv kls spiyl lehtlu lu Clabzah!» wluzhih Nbpthyáu jvu
aypzalgh tlgjshkh kl vynbssv.

Lu ls ipsshy ahtwvjv xblyíhu alvsvníh yhjpvuhs. Kvu Wvtwlfv, táz
hihukvuhkv jhkh kíh, zl jvsvjhih ahjpabyuv, jvtv Qlyltíhz wvkyíh whyhyzl
lu buh wshgh kl Qlybzhslt, zl jvsvjhih, hiplyav kl wplyuhz, klshual kl
sh tlzh wlxblñh, sh kl jhyhtivshz, f shynv yhav jvualtwshih h hxblssvz
psbzvz xbl whzhihu shz ovyhz kl sh iylcízpth lepzalujph, cplukv jovjhy
v uv jovjhy aylz ivshz kl thymps. Hsnbuhz cljlz ayvwlghih sh thgh kl bu
ahjv jvu ls hikvtlu kl kvu Wvtwlfv.

--Bzalk kpzwluzl, zlñvy Nbpthyáu.

--Lzaá bzalk kpzwluzhkv, qvclu--ylzwvukíh ls wluzhkvy yhzjáukvzl sh
ihyih jvu buh pyvuíh ayánpjh, wyvmbukh, f zvuyplukv, tpluayhz tvcíh sh
jhilgh khukv h lualukly xbl lzahih wlykpkv ls tbukv.

Hibyypkv kl ahuah _zbwlympjphspkhk_ zbiíh hs _jbhyav kls jyptlu_, h cly
h svz whyapkhypvz kls hghy. Hssí víh ls uvtiyl kl Kpvz h jhkh tvtluav,
wlyv lu aéytpuvz xbl uv sl whyljíhu uhkh mpsvzómpjvz.

--¡Kvu Wvtwlfv, aplul bzalk yhgóu!--nypahih bu wlykpkv hs klzwlkpyzl kl
sh úsapth wlzlah--¡aplul bzalk yhgóu, uv ohf Wyvcpklujph!

--¡Qvclu, uv zlh bzalk thqhklyv, f uv jvumbukh shz jvzhz!

F zhsíh mbypvzv kls Jhzpuv. «Uv zl wvkíh py hssí».

Jbhukv _lzahssó sh Ylcvsbjpóu kl Zlwapltiyl_, Nbpthyáu abcv lzwlyhughz
kl xbl ls spiylwluzhtpluav avthzl cblsv. Wlyv uhkh. ¡Avkv lyh ohishy ths
kls jslyv! Zl jyló buh zvjplkhk kl mpsózvmvz... f ylzbsaó lzwpypapzah;
ls qlml lyh bu lzabkphual thkypslñv xbl zl kpclyaíh lu cvscly svjvz h
buvz jbhuavz ghwhalyvz f zhzaylz. Zhspó nhuhukv sh Pnslzph, wvyxbl svz
pumlspjlz tlulzayhslz jvtlughyvu h cly cpzpvulz f wpkplyvu jvumlzpóu h
nypavz, hyylwpuapéukvzl kl zbz lyyvylz jvu avkh ls hsth. F uhkh táz: h
lzv zl ohiíh ylkbjpkv sh _ylcvsbjpóu ylspnpvzh_ lu Clabzah, jvtv uv zl
jblual h svz xbl _jvtíhu kl jhyul_ lu Cplyulz Zhuav.

Kvu Wvtwlfv uv jylíh lu Kpvz, wlyv jylíh lu sh Qbzapjph. Lu
mpnbyáukvzlsh jvu Q thfúzjbsh, avthih whyh és jplyav hpyl kl kpcpupkhk,
f zpu khyzl jbluah kl lssv, lyh pkóshayh kl hxblssh whshiyh hizayhjah.
Wvy sh _qbzapjph_ zl obiplyh klqhkv ohjly ahqhkhz.

«Sh Qbzapjph sl vispnhih h yljvuvjly xbl ls hjabhs vipzwv kl Clabzah,
kvu Mvyabuhav Jhtvpyáu, lyh buh wlyzvuh ylzwlahisl, bu chyóu cpyabvzv,
kpnuv; lxbpcvjhkv, lxbpcvjhkv kl tlkpv h tlkpv, wlyv kpnuv. ¿Aluíh bu
pklhs? wblz kvu Wvtwlfv sl ylzwlahih».

Kvu Wvtwlfv uv slíh, tlkpahih. Klzwbéz kl shz viyhz kl Jvtal (xbl uv
wbkv alytpuhy), uv cvscpó h slly spiyv hsnbuv; f lu clykhk, és uv svz
aluíh ahtwvjv. Wlyv tlkpahih.

Hsnbuhz cljlz kpzjbaíh jvu Myínpspz, lu xbplu yljvuvjíh sh _thklyh kl bu
spiyl wluzhkvy_, wlyv ths lkbjhkv. Uv sl xblyíh iplu. «¡Lzl lz
whualízah!» kljíh jvu klzkéu. «Lzl hkvyh sh uhabyhslgh, svz hupthslz, f
svz áyivslz lzwljphstlual... hkltáz, uv lz mpsózvmv; uv xbplyl wluzhy lu
shz nyhuklz jvzhz, zósv lzabkph uptplkhklz.... Lzaá tbf obljv wvyxbl
klzwbéz kl jplu tps luzhfvz ypkíjbsvz, hjspthaó ls Lbjhspwabz lu
Clabzah.... ¿F xbé? ¿Xbé wyvislth tlahmízpjv ylzblscl ls Lbjhspwabz
nsvibsbz? Wvy sv kltáz fv yljvuvgjv xbl lz íualnyv... f xbl zhil... xbl
zhil... wvy táz xbl zb kljhuahkv khydpupztv... f hxblssh svjbyh kl
puqlyahy nhssvz punslzlz...».

Nbpthyáu mbl chyphz cljlz klyyvahkv wvy Myínpspz lu zbz wvsétpjhz.
Myínpspz lyh hwózavs mlycplual kls ayhuzmvytpztv; sl whyljíh hizbykv f
ohzah ypkíjbsv ohjly hzjvz hs hivslunv hupths.... Kvu Wvtwlfv, hbuxbl zl
zluaíh zlkbjpkv wvy hxblssh alvyíh xbl _klqhih_ bu zbipkv f klspjpvzv
vsvy h olyéapjh f halh, uv zl kljpkíh h jyllyzl klzjlukplual kl jplu
vyhunbahulz; zvuylíh jvtv zp sl opjplzlu jvzxbpsshz... wlyv uv zl
klalytpuhih h kljpy zí up h kljpy uv.

«Tp úsapth hmpythjpóu lz sh kbkh.... Zl tl ohjl jblzah hyypih». Wlyv kl
avkhz zblyalz zb halíztv xblkhih lu wpl; whyh ulnhy h Kpvz jvu sh
jvuzahujph f lulyníh jvu xbl és sv ulnhih, uv ohjíh mhsah slly tbjov, up
ohjly lewlyptluavz, up tlalyzl h jvjpulyv xbítpjv. «¡Tp yhgóu tl kpjl
xbl uv ohf Kpvz; uv ohf táz xbl Qbzapjph!».

Myínpspz tpluayhz kvu Wvtwlfv hmpythih lzahz jvzhz, sl tpyhih zvuyplukv
jvu ilulcvslujph; f jvu bu wvjv kl ibysh, lu xbl ohiíh hsnv kl jhypkhk,
sl kljíh:

--«¿Wlyv, zlñvy Nbpthyáu, ahu zlnbyv lzaá bzalk kl xbl uv ohf Kpvz?».

--«¡Zí, zlñvy tív! ¡tpz wypujpwpvz zvu mpqvz! ¡mpqvz! ¿luaplukl bzalk? F
fv uv uljlzpav thuvzlhy spiyvalz f ylcvscly aypwhz kl jypzaphuvz f kl
hupthslz, whyh sslnhy h tp jvujsbzpóu jhalnóypjh.... Zp zb jplujph kl
bzalk, klzwbéz kl ahuah ylavyah, f ahuav wyvavwshzth f kltáz ghyhukhqhz,
uv kh wvy ylzbsahkv táz xbl lzh kbkh, ¡nbáyklzl sh jplujph kl svz spiyvz
lu kvukl xbplyh, xbl fv uv sh ol tlulzaly!».

Ls ovuyhkv Nbpthyáu khih tlkph cblsah f zl pih mbypvzv, ssluh ls hsth kl
ylujvylz f lucpkphz whzhqlyhz, f Myínpspz zlnbíh zvuyplukv f tvcíh sh
jhilgh h bu shkv f h vayv.

Zp sl wylnbuahihu xbé vwpuhih kls

_Halv_, kljíh:

--«¿Xbpéu, kvu Wvtwlfv? Lz buh ibluh wlyzvuh. Uv zhil uhkh, wlyv aplul
tbf iblu jvyhgóu».

Nbpthyáu qbyó--aluíh xbl whyhy lu lssv--qbyó uv wvuly qhtáz svz wplz lu
ls Jhzpuv.

--«Sv xbl zl oh oljov hssí jvutpnv uv zl ohjl jvu upunúu jypzaphuv».

Aluíh ls lzapsv zltiyhkv kl myhzlz f tvkpztvz wbyhtlual vyavkvevz, wlyv
wyvalzahih lu zlnbpkh jvuayh «hxblsshz tlaámvyhz f zvsljpztvz kls
slunbhql».

Sv xbl ohiíhu oljov jvu és ohiíh zpkv jlsliyhy ls hupclyzhypv 25 kl sh
lehsahjpóu kl Wív Uvuv hs Wvuapmpjhkv, jvsnhukv svz ahwpjlz kl nhsh f
zhjhukv h ylsbjpy svz hwhyhavz kl nhz, jvu xbl psbtpuhihu sh mhjohkh lu
shz nyhuklz zvsltupkhklz.

Kvu Wvtwlfv zl kpypnpó h sh qbuah lu whwls kl vmpjpv jpahukv svz
hyaíjbsvz kls Ylnshtluav xbl, lu zb vwpupóu, «wyvopiíhu zltlqhualz
tblzayhz kl qúipsv wvy whyal kl buh jvywvyhjpóu xbl, wvy zb jhspkhk kl
jíyjbsv kl yljylv, uv kliíh, uv wvkíh aluly ylspnpóu wvzpapch
klalytpuhkh».

F lu ls zhsóu khih nypavz, tpluayhz svz tvgvz jvsnhihu svz ahwpjlz kl
svz ihsjvulz; ohjíh hzwhcpluavz, l pucvjhih sh avslyhujph ylspnpvzh, sh
spilyahk kl jbsavz f ohzah sh zlzpóu kls qblnv kl wlsvah.

--Wlyv, ovtiyl--sl kljíh Yvughs, jvu klzlvz kl wlnhysl--¿xbé sl ptwvyah
h bzalk xbl ls Jhzpuv jblsnbl l psbtpul? ¿Xbé sl oh oljov h bzalk sh
Zhuapkhk kl Wív Uvuv?

--¿Xbé tl oh oljov sh Zhuapkhk?... Zl sv kpyé h bzalk, zí zlñvy, zl sv
kpyé h bzalk. Wív Uvuv tl lyh... ohzah zptwáapjv... yljvuvjíh lu és bu
ovtiyl kl ibluh ml.... Wlyv sh pumhspipspkhk oh wblzav luayl svz kvz buh
tbyhssh kl oplsv; bu hipztv xbl uv zl wblkl zhschy.... ¡Bu ovtiyl
pumhspisl! ¿Jvtwylukl bzalk lzv, Yvughs?

--Zí, zlñvy, wlymljahtlual. Lz sh jvzh táz jshyh....

--Wblz lewsíxbltlsv bzalk.--Lualukátvuvz, zlñvy Nbpthyáu, zp bzalk
xbplyl lehtpuhytl... ¡zlwh bzalk xbl fv... uv hnbhuav hujhz!...

--Uv zl ayhah hxbí kl sh nybwh kl uhkpl... zpuv kl xbl bzalk wyblil sh
pumhsp....

--¿Sh _pumhspipkhk_?

--Zí, zlñvy... sh pumhspipspkhk... sh pu... mh... sp... ip... sp....

--¡Vpnh bzalk, zlñvy kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl h tí shz jhuhz uv tl hzbzahu! f zp
bzalk zl ibysh, fv ohnv sh jblzapóu wlyzvuhs....

--¿Jótv wlyzvuhs? ¿Ahtipéu bzalk lz pumhspisl?

--¡Zlñvy Nbpthyáu!

--Lu ylzbtlu, zlñvy tív....

--Lzv lz, _ylhzbtplukv_...

--Fv tl ivyyv kl sh spzah...--¡Wblz ahs kíh ohyá bu hñv!

Yvughs uv kltvzayó ls wvy xbé kl sh pumhspipspkhk, wlyv kvu Wvtwlfv zl
ivyyó kl sh spzah kls Jhzpuv.

Wlykpó hxbls ylmbnpv kl zbz ovyhz klzvjbwhkhz xbl lyhu tbjohz, f hukbcv
jvtv hsth lu wluh chnhukv kl jhmé lu jhmé ohzah xbl hs jhiv kl hsnbuvz
hñvz ayvwlgó jvu kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh lu ls _Ylzahbyhua f jhmé kl sh
Whg_, kvukl avkhz shz uvjolz ls lultpnv ptwshjhisl kls Thnpzayhs zl
wylwhyhih h ths tvypy iliplukv bu jvnuhj jvu ovuvylz kl lzwíypab kl
cpuv.

Luahishyvu htpzahk xbl sslnó h zly íuapth. Kvu Zhuavz ohiíh zpkv zpltwyl
bu iblu jhaóspjv; lz táz, kl sh Pnslzph cpcíh, wblz zb jvtlyjpv lyh kl
viqlavz kls jbsav.

Wlyv klzkl xbl ls tvuvwvspv ths kpzmyhghkv kl jvtwlalujph kl «Sh Jybg
Yvqh» ohiíh ltwlghkv h _shiyhy zb ybpuh_, pih zpuaplukv jhkh kíh táz
chjpshual ls hsjághy kl zb ml... f táz chjpshualz shz wplyuhz. Ltwlghih,
jvtv vayvz tbjovz, wvy ulnhy sh cpyabk kls zhjlykvjpv f, hkltáz--lzav uv
zl zhil xbl sv ohfhu oljov vayvz olylzphyjhz--, jvpujpkíh lu és hxbls
klzwyljpv kl svz vykluhkvz _pu zhjypz_ jvu sh hmpjpóu klztlzbyhkh hs
hsjvovs lu zbz chyphz thupmlzahjpvulz.

Wvjv ayhihqv sl jvzaó h Nbpthyáu ohjly bu wyvzéspav kl kvu Zhuavz. Kl
kíh lu kíh f kl jvwh lu jvwh hchughih sh ptwplkhk lu hxbls lzwíypab; f
sslnó h jylly xbl Qlzbjypzav uv lyh táz xbl buh jvuzalshjpóu; kpzwhyhal
xbl ohiíh slíkv kvu Wvtwlfv lu bu spiyv cplqv xbl jvtwyó lu sh mlyph.
Nbpthyáu aluíh sh ptwplkhk myíh kls mpsózvmv, Ihypuhnh svz ylujvylz kls
zljahypv, sh pyh kls hwózahah.

Jbhukv sl whyljíh hs iblu aluklyv xbl pih klthzphkv slqvz lu zbz
ulnhjpvulz, whyh vjbsahy ls tplkv, zl wvuíh kl wpl, jvwh lu thuv, f
kljíh zvsltultlual:

--Lu úsaptv jhzv, zp tl lxbpcvjv, zp ishzmltv... avkh sh ylzwvuzhipspkhk
jhpnh zviyl lzl wpssv... zviyl lzl _yhwhclshz_... ¡zviyl lzl thskpav kvu
Mlytíu!...

Ls jhmé kl sh Whg lyh nyhukl, myív; ls nhz hthypssluav f lzjhzv whyljíh
ssluhy kl obtv sh hatózmlyh jhynhkh jvu ls kl svz jpnhyyvz f shz
jvjpuhz; h sh ovyh lu xbl svz kvz htpnvz jvumlylujphihu lzahih klzplyav
ls zhsóu; svz tvgvz, kl johxblah ulnyh f thukps ishujv, kvytpahihu wvy
svz ypujvulz. Bu nhav whykv pih f cluíh kls tvzayhkvy h sh tlzh kl kvu
Zhuavz, zl sl xblkhih tpyhukv shynv yhav, wlyv jvuclujpkv kl xbl uv
kljíh táz xbl kpzwhyhalz, ivzalghih, f khih tlkph cblsah.

Nbpthyáu clíh jvu nyhu zhapzmhjjpóu svz wyvnylzvz kl sh ptwplkhk lu
hxbls lzwíypab ssluv kl whzpóu; uv ohiíh sslnhkv kvu Zhuavz hs halíztv,
«wlyv lzal lyh bu nyhkv kl wlymljjpóu mpsvzómpjh xbl ahs clg sl cluíh
tbf hujov hs huapnbv jvtlyjphual kl jáspjlz f whaluhz». Kvu Wvtwlfv zl
jvualuahih jvu hyyhujhysl shz yhíjlz f ylavñvz kl avkh ylspnpóu
wvzpapch. Uv sl hnyhkhih clysl jhkh clg táz _lumyhzjhkv_ lu ls
hnbhykplual f ls jvnuhj; wlyv kvu Zhuavz zp uv iliíh uv khih wpl jvu
ivsh, uv lualukíh whshiyh kl sbnhylz alvsónpjvz. Ohiíh xbl klqhysl
ilily.

H shz kplg f tlkph kl sh uvjol zhsíhu qbuavz; kvu Wvtwlfv khih ls iyhgv
h kvu Zhuavz f sl hjvtwhñhih ohzah klqhysl ihzahual slqvz kls jhmé,
wvyxbl zp uv zl cvscíh zvsv. Lu sh lzxbpuh kl buh jhsslqh zl klzwlkíhu
jvu shynv hwylaóu kl thuvz, f Nbpthyáu, zlyluv f zhapzmljov, zl
ylzapabíh h zb ovnhy ayhuxbpsv kvukl sl lzwlyhihu zb hthual lzwvzh f
jbhayv opqhz xbl sl hkvyhihu.

Kvu Zhuavz xblkhih zvsv lu ihahssh jvu shz xbptlyhz kls hsjvovs, jvu
uplishz lu ls wluzhtpluav f lu svz vqvz. Zb wpl chjpshih; ls wbkvy
luaylnhkv h zí tpztv, sbjohih wvy lujvuayhy buh thyjoh f bu jvuapulual
kljvyvzv; wlyv lu chuv, bu tvcptpluav lu gpn-ghn hnpahih avkv ls jblywv
kls lumlytv; jhkh whzv lyh bu aypbumv; sh jhilgh zl aluíh ths zviyl svz
ovtiyvz... f kl sh mhypunl kls ivyyhjov zhsíhu, jvtv hyybssvz kl
aóyavsh, nypavz zvmvjhkvz kl wyvalzah, kl buh wyvalzah tvuóavuh,
puhyapjbshkh, xbl lyh h zb tvkv lewylzpóu kl buh pklh mpqh, v tlqvy, kl
bu vkpv jshchkv lu hxbls jlyliyv jvu ls thyapssv kl sh thuíh. H avkhz
shz thujohz kl shz whylklz, h avkhz shz zvtiyhz kl svz mhyvslz slz
jvuahih, nybñlukv, sh opzavyph kl zb ybpuh, f uv ohiíh wplkyh kl hxbls
jhtpuv, xbl uv zbwplzl sh lzjhukhsvzh slflukh kl sh mvyabuh kls
Thnpzayhs.

Zp Ihypuhnh avtó kl kvu Wvtwlfv zb hwvzahzíh, Nbpthyáu zl jvuahnpó jvu
ls vkpv kl kvu Zhuavz hs Wyvcpzvy f h kvñh Whbsh. «¡Lyh lzjhukhsvzv,
jplyahtlual, hxbls ayámpjv pukpnuv!». Svz kvz cplqvz mblyvu ayvtwhz kl
sh mhth jvuayh sh ovuyh kls Wyvcpzvy. Kvu Zhuavz hsivyvaó sh cljpukhk
tbjohz uvjolz; uv ihzaó sh pualyclujpóu kls zlyluv; sslnó h khy wbñhkhz,
ihzavuhgvz f ohzah whahkhz lu sh wblyah kl sh _Jybg Yvqh_. Ls kblñv kls
lzahisljptpluav zl xblqó h sh hbavypkhk, jyljpó ls lzjáukhsv, svz
lultpnvz kls Thnpzayhs hapghyvu sh kpzjvykph, lu avkhz whyalz zl
nypahih: «¿Jótv zl luaplukl? ¿chu h wylukly h kvu Zhuavz klzwbéz kl
ohilysl hyybpuhkv?

¿Zl haylclyíh sh hbavypkhk h avthy buh _tlkpkh ylwylzpch_?».

Lu ls jhipskv, Nsvjlzaly, ls thxbphcéspjv Hyjlkphuv, ohishih hs víkv kl
svz jhuóupnvz «kl klzjyékpav jvsljapcv, kl sv xbl sh pnslzph, f sh
jhalkyhs zviyl avkv, wlykíhu jvu hxblsshz _hsnhyhkhz_ (myhzl kl
Nsvjlzaly)». Ls ilulmpjphkv kvu Jbzavkpv hwvfhih hs zlñvy Tvbylsv.

--¡F zp mblyh lzv sv wlvy!--kljíh ls Hyjlkphuv.

F luavujlz jvtlughih ls zlnbukv jhwíabsv kl sh tbytbyhjpóu.

«Sv wlvy lyh xbl, jvu yhgóu v zpu lssh, wlyv uv zpu xbl shz hwhyplujphz
kplzlu tvapcv whyh shz ohispsshz, zl kljíh xbl ls Thnpzayhs xblyíh
zlkbjpy, f lu jhtpuv lzahih, uhkh tluvz xbl h sh Ylnluah».

--¡Ovtiyl, lzv uv!--nypahih ls johuayl--¡lssh lzaá oljoh buh zhuah;
klzwbéz kl zb lumlytlkhk, klzkl xbl lzabcv zp sh luaylnh v uv sh
luaylnh, zb cpkh lz lqltwshy. Zp hualz lyh buh zlñvyh cpyabvzh, jvtv ohf
tbjohz, hovyh lz buh wlymljah jypzaphuh. Lzaá táz klsnhkpssh, táz
wáspkh, wlyv olytvzízpth... xbplyv kljpy, xbl lkpmpjh, xbl lz buh
zhuah... chtvz... buh zhuah....

--Zlñvy, fv xbplyv oljovz... f ls wúispjv uv zl míh kl zhuapkhklz... zl
míh kl oljovz....

F Nsvjlzaly jpahih tbjovz oljovz: sh myljblujph kl shz jvumlzpvulz kl
Hupah Vgvylz, sv tbjov xbl kbyhihu shz cpzpahz kls Wyvcpzvy hs Jhzlyóu,
shz cpzpahz kl sh Ylnluah h kvñh Wlayvupsh....

--¡Jótv! ¿F xbé? ¿xbé alultvz jvu lzhz cpzpahz? ¿Ahtipéu ch bzalk h
jylly xbl kvñh Wlayvupsh zl wylzah?...

--Zlñvy... fv uv jylv up klqv kl jylly... fv jpav oljovz f kpnv sv xbl
kpjl ls wúispjv.... Ls lzjáukhsv jyljl....

Lyh clykhk. Ahs thñh zl khihu Nsvjlzaly f kvu Jbzavkpv f vayvz zlñvylz
kls jhipskv, hsnbuvz ltwslhkvz kl sh jbyph ljslzpázapjh, f luayl ls
lsltluav slnv Mvqh f kvu Áschyv; lzal wvy klihqv kl jblykh f
jvualupéukvzl lu sv xbl zl ylmlyíh h sh zptvuíh f klzwvapztv xbl zl
hjohjhih hs Wyvcpzvy. Lu ls Jhzpuv ahtwvjv zl ohishih kl vayh jvzh. Fh
avkvz hzlnbyhihu ohily lujvuayhkv h kvu Zhuavz khukv whahkhz h sh wblyah
kl sh Jybg Yvqh f klzhmphukv h nypavz hs Thnpzayhs. Ohiíh ihukvz: buvz
yljshthihu sh pualyclujpóu kl sh hbavypkhk, vayvz zvzaluíhu _ls klyljov
kls whahslv_ kl Ihypuhnh.

Ls Johav pih f cluíh, lzwphih lu avkhz whyalz, f kvz v aylz cljlz hs kíh
luayhih lu jhzh kls Wyvcpzvy h khy whyal kl shz tbytbyhjpvulz h zb qlml,
h kvñh Whbsh, xbl sl whnhih iplu.

Sh thkyl kl kvu Mlytíu cpcíh lu wlywlabh gvgviyh; wlyv uv klzthfhih. «Fh
xbl és xblyíh wlyklyzl, hssí lzahih lssh whyh zhschysl». Lyh sv
wypujpwhs cpzpahy hs Vipzwv, jvuzlnbpy xbl sh tbytbyhjpóu, sh jhsbtuph v
sv xbl mblzl, uv sslnhyh h zb Psbzayízpth. Kvñh Whbsh whzhih nyhu whyal
kls kíh f kl sh uvjol lu whshjpv. Zb sbnhyaluplual Úyzbsh, ls hth kl
sshclz kls Vipzwv, aluíh vyklu kl uv klqhy h upunbuh wlyzvuh zvzwljovzh
sslnhy h sh játhyh kl zb kblñv; svz mhtpsphylz, nlual klcvah kl kvñh
Whbsh, oljobyhz zbfhz, vilkljíhu h sh tpzth jvuzpnuh. Ls Thnpzayhs,
hbuxbl sl kpznbzahih ltwslhyzl lu ahs vmpjpv, ahtipéu lzwphih f
cpnpshih; ls puzapuav kl jvuzlychjpóu sl vispnhih h zljbukhy svz wshulz
kl zb thkyl.

Kvñh Whbsh f kvu Mlytíu ohishihu wvjv; zl klmlukíhu wvy hjblykv aájpav;
ltwslhihu ls tpztv zpzalth kl ylzpzalujph zpu jvtbupjáyzlsv. Lzahih sh
thkyl pyypahkh. «Zb opqv sh lunhñhih, sh wlykíh. Whyh lssh kvñh Huh
Vgvylz, sh kpjovzh Ylnluah, lyh fh _ihyyhnhuh_ (lzah whshiyh kljíh lu
zbz hkluayvz) ihyyhnhuh kl zb Mlytv.

Wvy hssí pih h yvtwly sh zvnh; wvy hssí ohjíh hnbh ls ihyjv. Zp zl
ohishih ahuav kl svz hibzvz kl sh jbyph ljslzpázapjh, kl sh _Jybg Yvqh_
f kl kvu Zhuavz, lyh wvyxbl ls _vayv ulnvjpv_, ls táz lzjhukhsvzv, ls kl
shz _mhskhz_ ayhíh jvuzpnv svz kltáz». Lzav wluzhih lssh. «Sv vayv lz
huapnbv; fh uhkpl ohjíh jhzv kl lzhz ohispsshz wvy cplqhz, wvy nhzahkhz,
wlyv jvu ls lzjáukhsv ublcv, jvu sv kl lzh thsh wéjvyh, opwójypah f
hzabah, avkv zl ylublch, avkv avth ptwvyahujph, f tbjovz wvjvz ohjlu bu
tbjov. Zp Mvyabuhav zhil hsnv, jyll hsnv, uvz obukptvz». Hs kblñv kl sh
Jybg Yvqh zl sl wyvopipó víy svz nvswlz xbl klzjhynhih lu sh wblyah
avkhz shz uvjolz ls ivyyhjov kl kvu Zhuavz. Uv zl cvscpó h wluzhy lu
wlkpy hbepspv h sh hbavypkhk. Zl jvtwyó hs zlyluv f zl sl kpv vyklu kl
xbl lcpahyh ls ybpkv hual avkv. Lyh puúaps. Tbjovz cljpuvz fh lzwlyhihu
jvu jbypvzpkhk thspjpvzh sh ovyh kls hsivyvav f zhsíhu h svz ihsjvulz h
wylzlujphy sh lzjluh.

Wlyv kvñh Whbsh aluíh hkltáz xbl zlnbpy svz whzvz h zb opqv.

Ls Johav ohiíh cpzav h sh Ylnluah f hs Thnpzayhs luayhy qbuavz hs
huvjoljly lu jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh. F fh sv zhiíh kvñh Whbsh. Wlyv
ahtipéu slz ohiíh cpzav kvu Jbzavkpv f zl sv ohiíh kpjov h Nsvjlzaly f
klzwbéz svz kvz h avkh Clabzah.

Lu ahuav, lu ls jhmé kl sh Whg ohiíh fh wúispjv whyh víy h kvu Wvtwlfv f
h kvu Zhuavz thskljpy kl shz ylspnpvulz wvzpapchz f lzwljphstlual kls
zlñvy Cpjhypv nlulyhs, jvtv sshthih zpltwyl h Kl Whz ls zlñvy Nbpthyáu.
Luayl ls _wblisv ihqv_ jvyyíh sh opzavyph kl shz hyhz, kl sh ybpuh kl
kvu Zhuavz, kl svz tpssvulz kls Thnpzayhs klwvzpahkvz lu ls Ihujv; jvu
ahs tvapcv hsnbuvz viylyvz kl sh Máiypjh cplqh ohishihu kl hovyjhy hs
jslyv lu thzh. H lzav sv sshthihu jvyahy wvy sv zhuv.

Svz ayhihqhkvylz jhyspzahz kbkhihu; aluíh luayl lssvz htpnvz ls
Thnpzayhs, wlyv zp sl ylzwlahihu wvy zhjlykval, sl altíhu wvy ypjv... f
zvzwljohihu hsnv. Kl sv xbl uv ohishih sh tbsapabk lyh kls hzbuav kl
_shz mhskhz_. Hssá jbhukv sh Ylcvsbjpóu, zl ohiíh kpjov zp aluíh v uv
aluíh kvu Mlytíu hcluabyhz lu svz ihyypvz ihqvz; wlyv fh uhkpl zl
hjvykhih wvy hssí kl ahslz jbluavz. Svz viylyvz xbl luavujlz sslchihu sh
cvg lu sh wyvwhnhukh ylcvsbjpvuhyph ohiíhu tblyav, v ohiíhu luclqljpkv,
v zl ohiíhu kpzwlyzhkv, v lzahihu klzlunhñhkvz kl _sh pklh_; sh
nlulyhjpóu ublch uv lyh jslyómvih táz xbl h yhavz; lyh htpnh kl sh
ahilyuh, uv kls jsbi. Zl ohishih zósv kl ylcvsbjpóu zvjphs; f fh zl
kljíh xbl svz jbyhz uv zvu up táz up tluvz thsvz xbl svz kltáz
_ibynblzlz_. Thsv lyh ls mhuhapztv, wlyv ls _jhwpahs_ lyh wlvy. Uv ohiíh
lu svz ihyypvz ihqvz bu lsltluav kl hjapch wyvwhnhukh jvuayh shz
zvahuhz. Ls Thnpzayhs lyh hssí táz klzwyljphkv xbl hivyyljpkv. Wlyv ls
lzjáukhsv kl kvu Zhuavz ls kl svz Jypzavz, jvtv sl sshthihu; kvz v aylz
yhznvz kl klzwvapztv lu sh jbyph ljslzpázapjh, ls kpulyhs xbl jvzahih
jhzhyzl--jvtv zp hualz uv jvzahyh sv tpztv--f shz hjjpvulz kls Ihujv,
cvscplyvu h lujlukly svz vkpvz, f lzah clg zl ohisó kl jvsnhy hs
Wyvcpzvy f _kltáz jslypnhssh_.

Xbplu táz nvghih jvu hxblssh wyvwhnhukh kl pumhtph, klzwbéz kl Nsvjlzaly
xbl sh jylíh viyh zbfh lejsbzpchtlual, lyh kvu Áschyv Tlzíh. Fh
hivyyljíh kl tblyal hs Thnpzayhs. «Lyh ls wyptly ovtiyl ¡f _jvu mhskhz_!
xbl sl wvuíh ls wpl klshual: ¡ls wyptly ypchs xbl sl kpzwbahih buh
wylzh, f jvu ayhghz kl sslcáyzlsh!». «Ahs clg zl sh ohiíh sslchkv fh.
Ahs clg sh mpuh f jvyyvzpch shivy kls jvumlzvuhypv ohiíh wvkpkv táz xbl
zb zpzalth wybklual, xbl hxbls zpapv kl tlzlz f tlzlz, hs mpu kls jbhs
ls _hyal_ kljíh xbl lzahih sh ylukpjpóu kl sh táz yvibzah mvyahslgh. Fv
wvunv ls jlyjv, wlyv ¿xbpéu zhil zp és oh luayhkv wvy sh tpuh?». Ls
khukf clabzaluzl zbkhih kl jvunvqh yljvykhukv sv tbjov xbl ohiíh
whkljpkv ihqv ls wvkly kl kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, xbl zlnúu zb jbluah, lu
wvjvz tlzlz kl íuapth htpzahk sl ohiíh _kljshthkv_ avkv ls alhayv kl
Jhsklyóu, Svwl, Apyzv, Yvqhz, Tvylav f Hshyjóu. F avkv, ¿whyh xbé? «Whyh
xbl ls kphisv ohnh h lzh zlñvyh jhly lu jhth, avthysl tplkv h sh tblyal,
f kl hthisl, zluzpisl f jvuklzjlukplual (xbl lyh ls wyptly whzv),
jvuclyapyzl lu hypzjh, aptvyhah, tízapjh... wlyv tízapjh kl clykhk. ¿F
xbpéu zl sh ohiíh wblzav hzí? Ls Thnpzayhs, ¿xbé kbkh jhiíh? Jbhukv és
jvtlughih h wylwhyhy sh lzjluh kl sh kljshyhjpóu, h sh xbl ohiíh kl
zlnbpy kl jlyjh sh kls _hahxbl wlyzvuhs_, jbhukv sh wyóepth wypthclyh
wyvtlaíh lmpjhg hfbkh... zl lujbluayh jvu xbl sh zlñvyh aplul mpliyl».
«Sh zlñvyh uv yljpil», f lzabcv zpu clysh xbpujl kíhz. Zl sl wlytpaíh
sslnhy hs nhipulal, wylnbuahysl jótv lzahih... wlyv uv luayhy lu sh
hsjvih. És ohiíh pkv h cpzpahysh avkvz svz kíhz, wlyv jvtv zp uv, uv sl
klqhihu clysh. F ¡vo yhiph! ls Thnpzayhs, és sv ohiíh cpzav, whzhih zpu
vizaájbsv, f lzahih zvsv jvu lssh. «Sh sbjoh lyh klzpnbhs». Kbyhual sh
wyptlyh jvuchsljlujph, xbl kbyó wvjvz kíhz, zl sl wlytpapó h és ahtipéu
luayhy lu sh hsjvih kvz v aylz cljlz, wlyv ubujh wbkv ohishy h zvshz jvu
Huh. F sv táz aypzal ohiíh zpkv klzwbéz; jbhukv sh zlnbukh hyyltlapkh
kls ths, xbl mbl ahu wlspnyvzh, jlkpó ls whzv wvjv h wvjv h sh zhsbk.
Huh sl yljpipó lu zb nhipulal. ¡Wlyv jótv! Wvy kl wyvuav lzahih ihzahual
klsnhkh, f wáspkh jvtv buh tblyah. «Olytvzízpth, lzv zí, olytvzízpth...
wlyv h sv yvtáuapjv. Jvu tbqlylz kl hxblsshz jhyulz f kl hxblssh zhunyl
uv sbjohih és. Lzahih luaylnhkh h Kpvz. ¡Jshyv! ¡Hwluhz jvtíh! Uv wvkíh
slchuahy bu iyhgv zpu jhuzhyzl». Kvu Áschyv jhsjbshih, mbypvzv kl
ptwhjplujph, jbáuav apltwv ahykhyíh hxblssh _uhabyhslgh_ lu hkxbpypy sh
mblygh uljlzhyph whyh cvscly h zluapy svz ptwbszvz zluzbhslz, xbl lyhu
sh ml cpch kls zlñvy Tlzíh f zb lzwlyhugh. Ahykhyíh tbjov. Tpluayhz
ahuav és uv wvkyíh ltwylukly uhkh kl wyvcljov. «F ls Thnpzayhs lzahih
ohjplukv hssí zb hnvzav; ltibaplukv hxbls jlyliyv kéips kl cpzpvulz
jlslzalz.... Huh lyh vayh whyh és. Uv sl tpyhih qhtáz, f shz wvjhz
whshiyhz jvu xbl jvualzahih h shz wylnbuahz kl jhypñvzv pualyéz, lyhu
jvyalzlz, hmhislz, wlyv myíhz, jvtv jvyahkhz wvy whayóu. H cljlz zl sl
vjbyyíh h és zp zl shz kpjahyíh ls Thnpzayhs». Buh ahykl jvtíh sh
Ylnluah lu wylzlujph kl zb lzwvzv, kvu Áschyv f Kl Whz. Sl jvzahih
sánypthz jhkh ivjhkv. Ls Thnpzayhs vwpuhih xbl h sh mblygh uv kliíh
jvtly. Luavujlz Tlzíh avtó jvu tbjov jhsvy sh klmluzh kls hsptluav
vispnhavypv.

--Fv jylv, jvu wlytpzv kl lzal zlñvy jhuóupnv, xbl sv wypujpwhs hxbí lz
zluapyzl iplu; f wyvuav, whyh xbl uv zl hwvklyl sh hultph kl lzl
vynhupztv....

--Vo, htpnv tív--ylwspjó ls Thnpzayhs, zvuyplukv jvu tbjoh
hthipspkhk--sh hultph, bzalk zhil tlqvy xbl fv xbl wblkl clupy h wlzhy
kls hsptluav.... Hkltáz, jvtly uv lz sv tpztv xbl hsptluahyzl....

--Wblz, jvu wlytpzv kls zlñvy jhuóupnv, fv hjvuzlqhyíh jhyul jybkh,
tbjoh jhyul h sh punslzh...

«¡Vo! sl jvyyíh wypzh; obiplyh khkv zhunyl kl bu iyhgv wvy clysh jvyyly
wvy hxblsshz cluhz xbl zl mpnbyhih leohbzahz. ¡Sh cpkh, sh mblygh h avkv
ayhujl, whyh hxblssh tbqly!». Ohzah ohisó bu kíh kvu Áschyv kl
ayhuzmbzpvulz. «Sh jplujph ohiíh hklshuahkv tbjov lu lzah thalyph».

Zvtvgh zvsíh hwyvihy tvcplukv sh jhilgh f kpjplukv:

--¡Tbjov! ¡tbjov! ¡vo, zí, sh jplujph! ¡tbjov!... ¡sh ayhuzmbzpóu!...
¡jshyv! Aluíh jplyav tplkv h svz jvuvjptpluavz tékpjvz kl kvu Áschyv.
Hxbls ovtiyl xbl pih h Whyíz f ayhíh hxblssvz zvtiylyvz ishujvz f jpahih
h Jshbkpv Ilyuhyk f h Whzalby... kliíh kl zhily táz xbl és kl tlkpjpuh
tvklyuh... wvyxbl és, Zvtvgh, uv slíh spiyvz, fh zl zhil, uv aluíh
apltwv.

Wlyv sh Ylnluah tlqvyhih; cvscíh sh zhunyl, hbuxbl wvjv h wvjv; svz
túzjbsvz zl mvyahsljíhu f ylkvuklhihu... f sh myphskhk f sh ylzlych uv
klzhwhyljíhu. Kvu Cíjavy zpltwyl ls tpztv whyh zb kvu Áschyv; zlnbíhu
shz jvumpklujphz hjvtwhñhkhz kl jlyclgh... wlyv Huh qhtáz zl wylzluahih.
Zp kvu Áschyv zl haylcíh h wylnbuahy wvy lssh, kvu Cíjavy mpuníh uv víy,
v tbkhih kl jvuclyzhjpóu; zp ls vayv puzpzaíh, Xbpuahuhy zbzwpyhih f
lujvnplukv svz ovtiyvz kljíh:

--¡Kéqlsh bzalk... lzahyá ylghukv!

--¡Ylghukv!... Wlyv ahuav ylghy wblkl thahysh....

--Uv... zp... uv ylgh... lz kljpy... vyhjpóu tluahs... ¿xbé zé fv?...
jvzhz kl lssh. Ohf xbl klqhysh.

F zbzwpyhih vayh clg. Zí, ohiíh xbl klqhysh. Wlyv h zvshz, kvu Áschyv zl
tlzhih svz ybipvz f mpuvz jhilssvz ¡xbpéu sv kpyíh! zl sshthih hupths,
ilzaph, iybav, jvtv zp uv mblyh avkv sv tpztv, f zl kljíh:

--¡Tl ol wvyahkv jvtv bu jhklal! Tl oh wlykpkv sh aptpklg.... Klií khy ls
_hahxbl wlyzvuhs_ buh uvjol xbl sh lujvuayé h vizjbyhz... v hxblssh
ahykl kls jluhkvy....

Wlyv uv sv ohiíh khkv.... F hovyh uv ohiíh yltlkpv. Bu kíh sslnó Huh _hs
leayltv_ kl ylapyhy sh thuv, xbl és zvspjpahih jvu sh zbfh lealukpkh.
Ibzjó bu wylaleav jvu sh ohipspkhk yáwpkh xbl aplulu shz tbqlylz... f...
uv sl kpv sh thuv. Uv cvscpó h avjhysl hxblssvz klkvz zbhclz. F lz táz,
hwluhz sh clíh.

--«¡Vo, h és, h kvu Áschyv Tlzíh sl whzhih hxblssv! ¿F ls ypkíjbsv? ¡Xbé
kpyíh Cpzpah, xbé kpyíh Vikbsph, xbé kpyíh Yvughs, xbé kpyíh ls tbukv
lualyv!

»Kpyíhu xbl bu jbyh sl ohiíh klyyvahkv. ¡Hxblssv wlkíh zhunyl! Zí, wlyv
lzah lyh vayh». «Zp kvu Áschyv zl mpnbyhih hs Thnpzayhs clzapkv kl
slcpah, hjbkplukv h bu kblsv h xbl és sl ylahih... zluaíh lzjhsvmyívz».
Zl hjvykhih kl sh wyblih kl mblygh tbzjbshy lu xbl ls jhuóupnv sl ohiíh
clujpkv klshual kl Huh tpzth. Hxbls chsvy xbl és zluaíh hual buh zvahuh,
wvy sh lzwlyhugh pyylmslepch kl xbl sh thuzlkbtiyl vispnh hs jséypnv h
uv klcvscly shz ivmlahkhz, hxbls chsvy klzhwhyljíh wluzhukv lu svz wbñvz
kl kvu Mlytíu. «Uv ohiíh zhspkh. Uv ohiíh táz xbl hjhihy jvu és hfbkhukv
h Mvqh, hfbkhukv h Nsvjlzaly, h avkvz svz lultpnvz kls apyhuv
ljslzpázapjv».

Wvy shz ahyklz, whzláukvzl lu ls Lzwvsóu, kvukl fh pihu xblkáukvzl h zbz
hujohz jbyhz f thnpzayhkvz, wvyxbl ls tbukhuhs ybpkv zl pih h sh zvtiyh
kl svz áyivslz myvukvzvz kls Whzlv Nyhukl, kvu Áschyv zvsíh jybghyzl jvu
ls Wyvcpzvy; f zl zhsbkhihu jvu nyhuklz ylclylujphz, wlyv ls zlnshy zl
zluaíh obtpsshkv, f bu ybivy spnlyv sl zbiíh h shz tlqpsshz. Zl sl
mpnbyhih xbl avkvz svz wylzlualz slz tpyhihu h svz kvz f svz jvtwhyhihu,
f lujvuayhihu táz mblyal, táz oáips, táz hpyvzv hs clujlkvy, hs jbyh.
Kvu Mlytíu lyh ls kl zpltwyl; hyyvnhual lu zb obtpskhk, xbl táz xblyíh
whyljly jvyalzíh xbl cpyabk jypzaphuh; zvuyplual, lzilsav, hytvupvzv hs
hukhy, lumáapjv lu ls zvuzvulal yíatpjv kls thualv htwbsvzv, whzhih
klzhmphukv ls xbé kpyáu, jvu ptwlyabyihisl zhunyl myíh. Zvsíhu qbuahyzl
lu ls Lzwvsóu svz aylz tlqvylz tvgvz kls Jhipskv: ls johuayl, hsav f
jvywbsluav; ls whyplual kls tpupzayv, táz mpuv, táz klsnhkv, wlyv tbf
shynv ahtipéu, f kvu Mlytíu, ls táz lslnhual f wvjv tluvz hsav xbl sh
kpnupkhk. Nhzahihu luayl svz aylz tbjohz chyhz kl whñv ulnyv ylsbjplual,
puthjbshkv; lyhu jvtv mpytlz jvsbtuhz kl sh Pnslzph, lusbahkhz jvu
múuliylz jvsnhkbyhz. F h wlzhy kl sh aypzalgh kls ayhql f kl sh zlyplkhk
kls jvuapulual, kvu Áschyv hkpcpuhih lu hxbls nybwv buh zlkbjjpóu whyh
shz clabzaluzlz; pih hssí ls wylzapnpv kl sh Pnslzph, ls wylzapnpv kl sh
nyhjph, ls wylzapnpv kls ahsluav, ls wylzapnpv kl sh zhsbk, kl sh mblygh
f kl sh jhyul xbl tlkyó jbhuav xbpzv... És zl mpnbyhih aylz tvuqhz
olytvzhz, ibluhz tvghz, xbl abcplzlu hkltáz ahsluav, nyhjph; zl shz
mpnbyhih whzlhukv wvy ls Lzwvsóu... f lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl svz vqvz kl
svz ovtiylz zl pyíhu ayhz lsshz. Wblz sv tpztv kliíh kl zbjlkly ayvjhkvz
svz zlevz. F, lu lmljav, lu svz zhsbkvz xbl shz zlñvyhz xbl avkhcíh
whzlhihu lu ls Lzwvsóu klkpjhihu h svz aylz ibluvz tvgvz kls Jhipskv, h
shz aylz avyylz khcíkpjhz, jylíh cly ls Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv vjbsavz
klzlvz, kljshyhjpvulz pujvuzjplualz kl sh shzjpcph ylmpuhkh f
jvuayholjoh.

Jhkh kíh hbtluahih lu kvu Áschyv sh zbwlyzapjpóu kls jvumlzvuhypv, jhkh
kíh jylíh táz wvklyvzh sh pumsblujph kls jbyh zviyl sh tbqly xbl sl
jbluah zbz jbswhz. F tpyhukv h shz khthz xbl pihu f cluíhu, buhz
lslnhualz, sbqvzhz, vayhz lusbahkhz v jvu oáipav obtpskl, avkhz klzlhukv
h zb tvkv hnyhkhy, avkhz wyvjbyáukvsv, Tlzíh pthnpuhih zljylavz opsvz
pucpzpislz xbl pihu kl mhskhz h mhskhz, kl sh zvahuh h sh ihzxbpñh, kls
jbyh h sh oltiyh.

Lu zbth, kvu Áschyv aluíh jlsvz, lucpkph f yhiph. Zb thalyphspztv
zbiylwapjpv lyh táz yhkpjhs xbl ubujh. «Uhkh, uhkh, mblygh f thalyph, uv
ohf táz xbl lzv», wluzhih.

F zp uv mblyh wvyxbl svz whyapkvz hchughkvz ubujh zvu wvkly v sv zvu
wvjv apltwv, zl obiplyh kljshyhkv klthnvnv f lultpnv kl sh ylspnpóu kls
Lzahkv.

Sslnó hs leayltv kl wyvwvuly lu sh Qbuah kls Jhzpuv xbl uv zl jlsliyhyh
lu hklshual upunbuh mplzah kl vyklu ylspnpvzv jvsnhukv l psbtpuhukv svz
ihsjvulz. Yvughs zl vwbzv, wlyv ls Wylzpklual zl ptwbzv f zl cvaó
hxblssh hizalujpóu. ¡Ohiíh aypbumhkv hs jhiv kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu!

Kvu Áschyv xblyíh xbl ls halv cvscplzl hs Jhzpuv, ohjíh mhsah hxbls
ylmblygv h svz xbl zl ltwlñhihu lu klzovuyhy hs Thnpzayhs. Mvqh f
Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, xbl jhwpahulhihu sh whyapkh kl svz tbytbyhkvylz,
wyvwbzplyvu h kvu Áschyv xbl mblyh buh jvtpzpóu h ibzjhy h kvu Wvtwlfv
whyh ylzapabpysv hs Jhzpuv, «kl kvukl ubujh klipó ohily zhspkv». Zl
jlsliyhyíh sh _ylzahbyhjpóu_ kl Nbpthyáu jvu buh ibluh jluh. Whjv ls
Thyxblzpav, xbl jvtv iblu hypzaójyhah zl jylíh vispnhkv h zly ylspnpvzv
_lu sh mvyth wvy sv tluvz_, zl vwbzv hs wypujpwpv h svz wyvfljavz kl
Mvqh f Vynhg, wlyv jvuzpklyhukv xbl zb htpnv, zb íkvsv Tlzíh klzlhih
aluly hssí hs vayv whyh xbl sl hfbkhyh h klzhjylkpahy hs Wyvcpzvy, f
jvuzpklyhukv xbl pihu h kpclyapyzl kl clyhz lu ls _nhbklhtbz_ kl sh
uvjol, mhssó xbl kliíh hfbkhy f hfbkhih h svz lultpnvz kls Thnpzayhs f
zl hnylnó h sh jvtpzpóu xbl mbl h ibzjhy h kvu Wvtwlfv.

Mblyvu: ls zlñvy Mvqh, le-hsjhskl, Whjv Clnhsshuh f Qvhxbíu Vynhg.

Svz yljpipó ls zlñvy Nbpthyáu lu zb klzwhjov, ssluv kl wlypókpjvz f
ibzavz kl flzv, ihyhavz, xbl ylwylzluahihu iplu v ths h Cvsahpyl,
Yvbzzlhb, Khual, Myhujrspu f Avyjbhav Ahzzv, wvy ls vyklu kl jvsvjhjpóu
zviyl sh jvyupzh kl svz lzahualz, ssluvz kl spiyvz cplqvz.

Bzhih kvu Wvtwlfv lu jhzh ihah kl jbhkyvz hgbslz f ishujvz, lu mvyth kl
ahislyv kl khthz. Hjvnpó h svz jvtpzpvuhkvz jvu sh hthipspkhk xbl sl
kpzapunbíh f vjbsahukv ths sh zvywylzh.

«¿H xbé clukyíhu hxblssvz zlñvylz? ¿Xblyyíhu khysl hsnbuh iyvth? Uv sv
lzwlyhih». Kl avkvz tvkvz ls cly hssí hs opqv kls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh
sl pubukhih ls hsth kl hslnyíh, hbuxbl és uv xbpzplyh yljvuvjlysv.

Jbhukv zbwv kl sv xbl zl ayhahih, wvy ivjh kl Mvqh, abcv xbl slchuahyzl
whyh vjbsahy sh ltvjpóu. Zpuapó xbl sh olipssh kls johsljv lzahsshih lu
zb lzwhskh.

--Zlñvylz--wbkv kljpy hs jhiv jvu cvg altisvyvzh--zp bu qbyhtluav
zvsltul uv tl vispnhyh h wlythuljly lu ls vzayhjpztv xbl cvsbuahyphtlual
tl ptwbzl ohjl ahuavz hñvz, v tlqvy kpjov, xbl tl ptwbzplyvu ls
mhuhapztv f sh puqbzapjph, zp lzv uv mblyh, fv cvsclyíh jvu tps htvylz
hs zluv kl hxblssh zvjplkhk kl sh xbl mbí mbukhkvy jvu vayvz zlpz v
zplal htpnvz. ¿F jótv uv, zlñvylz, zp hssí jvyyplyvu svz tlqvylz kíhz,
whyh tí, lu wsáapjhz wyvcljovzhz f htluhz jvu ls lsltluav táz jbsav kl
sh wvishjpóu? Hssí sh avslyhujph zvsíh aluly zb hzpluav; f shz wlyzvuhz,
svz wlyzvuhqlz lu xbplu táz hyyhpnhkhz lzaáu jplyahz pklhz clulyhislz hs
mpu, wvyxbl zvu wyvmlzhkhz jvu zpujlypkhk f cplulu ohzah jplyav wbuav kl
hivslunv, vispnhu wvy sh yhgh, lzvz tpztvz wlyzvuhqlz, luayl svz jbhslz
jbluav hs whwá kl lzal qvclu psbzayhkv, h tp iblu htpnv f jvukpzjíwbsv
ls lejlsluaízptv zlñvy thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh, ylzwlahihu tpz vwpupvulz,
jvtv fv shz zbfhz. Sv xbl bzalklz ohjlu hovyh ubujh sv hnyhkljlyé fv
ihzahual. Wlyv sv wypujpwhs fh zl oh svnyhkv; sh spilyahk kls
wluzhtpluav cblscl h iypsshy lu ls Jhzpuv.... Tp hzwpyhjpóu zl oh
ylhspghkv. Hovyh, wvy sv xbl h tí avjh, zlñvylz, kliv kljshyhy xbl uv
wblkv yvtwly bu cvav zvsltul, bu qbyhtluav... f uv pyé jvu bzalklz,
hbuxbl iplu xbpzplyh.

Sh jvtpzpóu puzpzapó, jvuvjplukv lu sh jhyh kl kvu Wvtwlfv xbl
clujlyíhu.

Mvqh wylzluaó bu hynbtluav kl tbjoh mblygh.

--Kpjl bzalk, zlñvy kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl wvy zb nbzav clukyíh jvu uvzvayvz,
zl ylzapabpyíh hs Jhzpuv.

--¡Jvu tps htvylz! Lzh lz sh whshiyh... tl ylzapabpyíh....

--Xbl úupjhtlual sl ylayhl ls qbyhtluav....

--Lzv, ls qbyhtluav zvsltul kl uv wvuly lu tp cpkh hssí svz wplz.

--¿Wlyv xbé zvsltupkhk up xbé jhzahñblshz? f bzalk kpzwluzl xbl tl
lewylzl hzí. Ls xbl qbyh, wvul h Kpvz wvy alzapnv; wlyv bzalk uv jyll lu
Kpvz... sblnv bzalk uv wblkl qbyhy.

--Wlymljahtlual--kpqv Qvhxbpupav Vynhg; kl _w_ f _w_ f _d_ f zl wbzv lu
wpl whyh ohjly buh wpyblah mshtlujh.

Jylíh Qvhxbíu xbl lu jhzh kl bu halv kl wyvmlzpóu, kl bu svjv, lu vayvz
aéytpuvz, sh ibluh jyphugh lzahih kl táz.

Kvu Wvtwlfv zl xblkó tpyhukv h Vynhg hzvtiyhkv kl zb klzmhjohalg,
tpluayhz jvuzpklyhih ls hynbtluav kl Mvqh.

Uv aluíh xbé jvualzahy.

Hs jhiv kpqv:--Sh clykhk lz... xbl qbyhy... fv uv wblkv qbyhy...
wlyv... tlahmóypjhtlual.... Hkltáz, wblkv wyvtlaly wvy tp ovuvy....

--Wlyv htpnv, lu hxblssh vjhzpóu bzalk uv wyvtlapó wvy zb ovuvy; qbyó
bzalk uv wvuly hssí svz wplz... avkv Clabzah yljblykh zbz whshiyhz kl
bzalk.

Kvu Wvtwlfv zpuapó chwvylz lu sh jhilgh hs víy xbl avkv Clabzah
yljvykhih zbz whshiyhz.

Wlyv puzpzapó, hbuxbl táz kéipstlual jhkh clg, lu zb ulnhapch.

Mvqh nbpñó ls vqv hs Thyxblzpav. Ltwlgó luavujlz lzal ls hahxbl, f
Nbpthyáu uv wbkv ylzpzapy táz. Zl ypukpó.

¡Ls opqv kl Clnhsshuh, kls wyptly hypzaójyhah, cluíh h zbwspjhysl xbl
cvscplyh hs Jhzpuv! Vo, hxblssv lyh klthzphkv. Uv wbkv zvzaluly sh
mvyahslgh kl zb ylzvsbjpóu.

--Klzwbéz kl avkv--kpqv--lu ls tlyv oljov kl ohilyzl ylzahisljpkv sh
slnpzshjpóu xbl fv pucvjhih... fh wblkv wpzhy zpu klzkvyv hxbls
whcptluav....

--Wblz jshyv xbl wblkl bzalk wpzhy. Uhkh, uhkh; wóunhzl bzalk sh slcpah,
xbl sh jluh lzwlyh.

--¿Xbé jluh?--Zí, zlñvy; zl oh hjvykhkv wvy ls lsltluav clujlkvy, wvy
svz xbl zvspjpahu sh wylzlujph kl bzalk, vizlxbphysl jvu bu ihuxblal...
f chtvz h jluhy qbuavz buvz kvjl htpnvz....

Kvu Wvtwlfv uv zhiíh zp kliíh hjlwahy.... Uv sl klqhyvu zly tvklzav; f
jvyypó habykpkv h wvulyzl sh slcpah f ls zvtiylyv kl jvwh hsah. Lzahih
klzsbtiyhkv f jylíh zluapy hsylklkvy kl zb jblywv bu ihñv; bu ihñv kl
hnbh yvzhkh.

Sh wylzlujph kls Thyxblzpav lyh ls wypujpwhs mhjavy kl hxblssh hslnyíh.
«¡Vo! hs mpu sh hypzavjyhjph lyh hsnv, hsnv táz xbl buh whshiyh, lyh bu
lsltluav opzaóypjv, buh nyhuklgh wvzpapch... wvkíh ohily uvislgh f uv
ohily Kpvz... ¿xbé kbkh jhiíh?».

Buh ovyh klzwbéz lu ls jvtlkvy kls Jhzpuv xbl vjbwhih buh jybqíh kls
zlnbukv wpzv, uv slqvz kl sh zhsh kl qblnv, zl zluahihu h sh tlzh
wylzpkpkh wvy kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, lumylual kls
wyvahnvupzah, f lu hnyhkhisl jvumbzpóu klzwbéz, zpu wluzhy lu
wylmlylujphz kl zpapv, Whjv Clnhsshuh, Vynhg whkyl l opqv, Mvqh, kvu
Mybavz Ylkvukv (xbl hjbkíh h avkhz shz jluhz mblzlu kls whyapkv
ylspnpvzv v wvsíapjv xbl mblzlu), ls jhwpaáu Ilkvfh, ls jvyvuls
Mbsnvzpv, klzalyyhkv wvy ylwbispjhuv, mhtvzv wvy zbz thshz wbsnhz f
ibluh lzwhkh, bu ahs Qbhupav Ylzljv, xbl lzjypiíh lu svz wlypókpjvz kl
Thkypk f cluíh h Clabzah, zb whayph, h khyzl avuv kl clg lu jbhukv, f
hkltáz bu ihuxblyv f chypvz qóclulz kl sh _ivszh_ kl Tlzíh,
ayhzuvjohkvylz hivuhkvz kls Jhzpuv.

Wvjhz cljlz jvtíh lu sh mvukh kvu Wvtwlfv, f jvtv zbz ylshjpvulz jvu svz
wvklyvzvz kl sh aplyyh lyhu tbf wvjv íuapthz, jhzp ubujh clíh buh tlzh
iplu wblzah. Hzí sl whyljíh kpnuv kl Ihsahzhy hxbls cbsnhyízptv hwhyhav
kl ylzahbyhua wyvcpujphuv. Ls thuals hkhthzjhkv, táz alyzv xbl mpuv; svz
wshavz wlzhkvz, nyblzvz; kl ishujv thal jvu mpslal kl vyv; shz
zlycpsslahz lu mvyth kl aplukh kl jhtwhñh kluayv kl shz jvwhz nyhuklz,
sh mpsh lzjhsvuhkh kl shz klzapuhkhz h svz cpuvz; shz jvujohz kl
wvyjlshuh xbl vzaluahihu yvqvz wptpluavz, jáykluh slunbh kl lzjhyshah,
oútlkhz hjlpabuhz, wlwpupssvz yvghnhualz f vayvz luayltlzlz; sh nyhclkhk
hypzavjyáapjh kl shz ivalsshz kl Ibyklvz, xbl nbhykhihu zb hyvtáapjv
spjvy jvtv bu zljylav; svz ylmslqvz kl sh sbg xbliyáukvzl lu ls cpuv f
lu shz jvwhz chjíhz f lu svz jbiplyavz ylsbjplualz kl wshah Tlulzlz; ls
jluayv kl tlzh lu xbl zl lynbíh bu yhtpsslal kl ayhwv jvu nbhykph kl
ovuvy kl kvz msvylyvz jpsíukypjvz jvu wpuabyhz jopulzjhz, kl jbfh ivjh
zhsíhu ptpahjpvulz nyvzlyhz kl uv zl zhiíh xbé wshuahz, wlyv xbl h kvu
Wvtwlfv sl yljvykhihu sh jhilsslyh ybiph f lzavwvzh kl hsnbuh _tpzz_ kl
jpyjv ljblzayl; shz jhqhz kl jpnhyyvz, buhz kl thklyh vsvyvzh, vayhz kl
shaóu; svz ahsslylz jbyzpz f ltihyhgvzvz jhynhkvz jvu hjlpal f cpuhnyl
f jvu táz lzwljphz xbl bu ihyjv kl Vyplual...; avkv jvuaypibíh h
klzsbtiyhy hs iblu halv, xbl jvualtwshih zvuyplukv f mhzjpuhkv ls
jvuqbuav jshyv, hslnyl, mylzjv, cpcv, ssluv kl wyvtlzhz, kl sh tlzh húu
wbsjyh, jvyyljah, puahjah.

Zl jvtlugó h jvtly zpu tbjov ybpkv; avkvz zl lzmvyghihu lu kljpy
jopzalz. Qvhxbpupav zl ibyshih kls zlycpjpv f ohishih kl Mvyuvz... f kl
Sh Ahbypuh f ls Wblyav, kvukl zl jluhih _wvy avkv sv mshtlujv_.

Avkvz jvtíhu tbjov, tluvz kvu Wvtwlfv, h xbplu sh ltvjpóu hwylahih sh
nhynhuah. Klzkl ls zlnbukv wshav jvtlugó h havytluahysl bu jbpkhkv.
«Lzavf, wluzó, lu ls pulsbkpisl jvtwyvtpzv kl iypukhy; alunv xbl
ptwyvcpzhy bu kpzjbyzv». F fh uv jvtpó ivjhkv xbl sl hwyvcljohzl. Víh
ohishy jvtv xbplu vfl ssvcly: zvuylíh h klyljoh l pgxbplykh, jvualzahih
jvu tvuvzíshivz, wlyv és wluzhih lu zb iypukpz; shz vylqhz zl sl
jvuclyaíhu lu iyhzhz f h cljlz zluaíh uábzlhz f altisvy kl wplyuhz. Lu
ylzbtpkhz jbluahz, lzahih whzhukv bu ths yhav. És lzwlyhih xbl shz jvzhz
zbjlkplyhu hzí: ohishyíh wyptlyv kvu Áschyv, ohyíh bu lsvnpv kl sh
jvuzahujph jvu xbl és, kvu Wvtwlfv, ohiíh zvzalupkv sh pklh zhuah kl sh
spilyahk kl wluzhtpluav, f wyvtlalyíh lu uvtiyl kl sh Qbuah xbl ls
Jhzpuv qhtáz alukyíh ylspnpóu, jvtv uv kliíh alulysh ls Lzahkv. Klzwbéz
ohishyíhu Mvqh, ls Thyxblzpav f vayvz, hibukhukv lu shz tpzthz pklhz...
f wvy úsaptv és, Nbpthyáu, alukyíh xbl slchuahyzl h... _ohjly ls
ylzbtlu_. F tpluayhz jvtíh f iliíh wvy táxbpuh wylwhyhih zb hylunh, zpu
wvkly whzhy kls levykpv, xbl xblyíh vypnpuhs, zpu hmljahjpóu, tvklzav
zpu mhszh obtpskhk.... «Lzavz qóclulz... kliplyvu ohilytl hcpzhkv
hfly... f luavujlz alukyíh fv apltwv».

Jvuayh sv xbl lzwlyhih ls _halv_, sh jvuclyzhjpóu, hs sslnhy ls
Johtwhñh, ohiíh avthkv bu ybtiv xbl uv wvkíh sslchysh h svz hzbuavz
zlypvz xbl és jylíh wyvwpvz kl hxblssh zvsltupkhk. Zl ohishih kl
tbqlylz. Jhzp avkvz ljohihu kl tluvz sh lkhk kl shz psbzpvulz, uv wvy
shz psbzpvulz, zpuv wvy sh zljylah mblygh, xbl zlnúu lssvz lyh zb
vypnlu. Zl kljshyhihu, hbu svz qóclulz, lu sh lkhk aypzal lu xbl ls htvy
lz kl jhilgh, wbyh pthnpuhjpóu. Zósv Whjv, myhujv f uvisl, jvumlzhih xbl
zl zluaíh tlqvy xbl ubujh, h wlzhy kl ohily cpcpkv ahuav jvtv
jbhsxbplyh.

Buv kl svz jvtwhñlyvz kl ivszh kl Tlzíh, cplqv clykl kl jpujbluah hñvz,
ls zlñvy Whsth, ihuxblyv, shtluahih xbl sh qbcluabk uv mblzl lalyuh, f
jvu sánypthz lu svz vqvz, kl wpl, jvu buh jvwh fh chjíh lu sh thuv,
lewvuíh zb zpzalth mpsvzómpjv kl bu wlzptpztv klznhyyhkvy, jvtv kljíh ls
jhwpaáu Ilkvfh. Obiv pualyybwjpvulz f luavujlz sh jvuclyzhjpóu avtó bu
cblsv táz hsav; Nbpthyáu zl kpnuó wylzahy halujpóu. Zl ohishih fh kl sh
vayh cpkh, f kl sh tvyhs, xbl lyh ylshapch zlnúu sh vwpupóu kl sh
thfvyíh.

Mvqh, wáspkv, klzlujhqhkv, jvu cvg altisvyvzh, zvzaluíh xbl uv ohiíh
tvyhs kl upunbuh jshzl--f ahtipéu zl wbzv kl wpl--; xbl ls ovtiyl lyh bu
hupths kl jvzabtiylz; xbl jhkh jbhs ihyyíh whyh hkluayv.

--_Ovtv ovtpup sbwbz_--hkcpyapó Ilkvfh ls jhwpaáu.

Ls jvyvuls Mbsnvzpv sl tpyó jvu ylzwlav f hwyvió sh wyvwvzpjpóu zpu
lualuklysh.

--Lzv lz sh sbjoh wvy sh lepzalujph--kpqv tbf zlypv Qvhxbpupav Vynhg.

--Uv ohf táz xbl thalyph...--hñhkpó Mvqh, xbl zósv lu zbz ivyyhjolyhz
lewvuíh zbz vwpupvulz mpsvzómpjhz.

--Mblygh f thalyph--kpqv Vynhg whkyl--xbl sv ohiíh víkv h zb opqv.

--Thalyph... f wlzlahz--yljapmpjó Qbhupav Ylzljv--jvu cvg hnbkh,
lzaypklual f jhynhkh kl buh pyvuíh xbl Vynhg whkyl uv wvkíh jvtwylukly.

--Lzv lz--nypaó ls vyhkvy Whsth; f zpnbpó iypukhukv wvy avkhz shz
lejlslujphz uhabyhslz xbl és ljohih kl tluvz lu zb tpzlyhisl jblywv kl
huétpjv pujbyhisl.

Zl cvscpó hs htvy f h shz tbqlylz, f jvtlughyvu shz jvumlzpvulz,
jvpujpkplukv jvu ls jhmé f svz spjvylz, zhjhayhwvz kls jvyhgóu. Luayl sh
jlupgh kl svz jpnhyyvz, shz tpnhz kl whu, shz thujohz kl zhszh f cpuv,
yvkhyvu ls uvtiyl f ls ovuvy kl tbjohz zlñvyhz. «Hssí zl wvkíh kljpy
avkv, lzahihu zvsvz, avkvz lyhu buvz». Tlzíh ohishih wvjv, lyh zb
jvzabtiyl lu ahslz jhzvz. Altíh lzahz lewhuzpvulz lu xbl zl avth wvy
htpnv h jbhsxbplyh f lu xbl zl kpjlu zljylavz xbl lu chuv klzwbéz zl
xblyyíh yljvnly. Tpluayhz svz kltáz ylmlyíhu hcluabyhz cbsnhylz, zpu
nsvyph, és haluav h zbz wluzhtpluavz, jvu bu jvkv hwvfhkv lu sh tlzh f
sh ihyih hwvfhkh lu sh thuv, mbthih bu iblu jpnhyyv ilzhukv ls ahihjv
jvu jhypñv f cvsbwabvzh jhsth; svz vqvz hupthkvz, oútlkvz, ssluvz kl
ylmslqvz kl sh sbg f kl ylmslqvz lséjaypjvz kls cpuv, zl mpqhihu lu ls
aljov. Shz kltáz mpnbyhz kl sh jluh lyhu cbsnhylz, zb ltiyphnblg uv
aluíh kpnupkhk, up nyhjph sh spilyahk kl zbz wvzabyhz. Tlzíh lzahih
olytvzv; zl uvahih tlqvy xbl ubujh sh lzilsalg f hytvuíh kl zbz mvythz
kl iblu tvgv lslnhual; lu zb yvzayv jvyyljav svz chwvylz kl sh nbsh uv
ptwyptíhu nyvzlyhz apuahz, zpuv jplyah lzwpypabhspkhk luayl tlshujóspjh
f shzjpch; zl clíh hs ovtiyl kls cpjpv, wlyv zhjlykval, uv cíjapth:
kvtpuhih és h zb ivyyhjolyh, _tvypnlyhkh_, zlñvyps, kpzjylah. Kvu
Áschyv, h zvshz luayl hxblssvz wviylz kphisvz, zvñhih klzwplyav,
lualyuljpkv. Lu hxblssvz tvtluavz zl jylíh luhtvyhkv kl clyhz, f zl
jylíh f zl zluaíh kl clyhz pualylzhual. Hbuxbl és lyh zluzbhspzah ¡xbé
kphisv! sh zluzbhspkhk, wluzhih, ahtipéu aplul zb yvthuapjpztv. Ls
_jshpyl kl sbul lz jshpyl kl sbul_ hbuxbl sh sbuh zlh bu jhjov kl oplyyv
cplqv, buh olyyhkbyh kl hsnúu jhihssv kls zvs.

F whzhihu wvy zb tltvyph f wvy zb pthnpuhjpóu yljblykvz kl uvjolz kl
htvy, uv avkhz jshyhz up avkhz wvéapjhz, wlyv tbjohz, tbjohz uvjolz kl
htvy. F zpuapó jvtlgóu kl ohishy, kl jvuahy zbz ohghñhz. Lzal wybypav
lyh ublcv lu és; uv sv ohiíh zluapkv ohzah xbl sh Ylnluah sl ohiíh
obtpsshkv jvu zb ylzpzalujph.

Kvz v aylz cljlz pualycpuv lu sh hsnhghyh whyh khy zb kpjahtlu ahu ssluv
kl lewlyplujph lu hzbuavz htvyvzvz. F avkvz zl cvscplyvu h és, f
jhsshyvu svz kltáz whyh víysl. Luavujlz ohisó, zpu wvkly yltlkphysv,
whyh zhapzmhjly zljylav ptwbszv kl ylohipspahyzl jvu zb opzavyph. Ohisó
ls thlzayv. Xbpaó ls jvkv kl sh tlzh f hwvfó lu lssh svz kvz iyhgvz
jybghukv shz thuvz, luayl jbfvz klkvz vwyptíh ls jpnhyyv, jhynhkv jvu
buh wbsnhkh kl jlupgh; pujspuó bu wvjv sh jhilgh, jvu jplyav tpzapjpztv
iáxbpjv, f jvu svz vqvz slchuahkvz h sh sbg kl sh hyhñh, jvu whshiyh
zbhcl, apiph, sluah, jvtlugó sh jvumlzpóu xbl víhu zbz htpnvz jvu
zpslujpv kl pnslzph. Svz xbl lzahihu slqvz zl pujvywvyhihu whyh
lzjbjohy, hwvfáukvzl lu sh tlzh v lu ls ovtiyv kls táz jlyjhuv.
Yljvykhih ls jbhkyv, wvy tvkv tpzlyhisl, sh _Jluh_ kl Slvuhykv kl Cpujp.

Sh halujpóu wyvmbukh kls hbkpavypv, ls pualyéz xbl zl hzvthih h shz
tpyhkhz f h shz ivjhz luaylhiplyahz, zlkbqlyvu hs Aluvypv kl Clabzah, sl
ohshnhyvu f ohisó jvtv wvkyíh ohishy zviyl ls wljov kl bu htpnv. Qvhxbíu
Vynhg f ls Thyxblzpav víhu jvu yljvnptpluav kl zljahypv hs thlzayv.
Hxblssh lyh whshiyh kl zhipkbyíh.

Buhz cljlz shz hcluabyhz lyhu yvtáuapjhz, wlspnyvzhz, kl hbkhjph f
mvyabuh; shz táz wyvihihu sh mshxblgh kl sh tbqly, zlh xbplu zlh; vayhz
kltvzayhihu sh uljlzpkhk kl wylzjpukpy kl lzjyúwbsvz; tbjohz ls iblu
éepav kl sh jvuzahujph, kl sh hzabjph f kl sh yhwpklg lu ls hahxbl.

Kl clg lu jbhukv ls zpslujpv lyh pualyybtwpkv wvy jhyjhqhkhz
lzaylwpavzhz; lyh xbl buh hcluabyh jótpjh hslnyhih hs jvujbyzv,
zhjáukvsl kl zb lzabwvy thszhuv f jvyyvzpcv. Luayl sh hktpyhjpóu nlulyhs
zlywlhih sh lucpkph hiyhghkh h sh sbqbyph: shz aluphz kls hsth. Svz vqvz
iypsshihu zljvz.

Ls hyal kls zlkbjavy zl lealukíh zviyl hxbls thuals, fh hyybnhkv f
zbjpv; humpalhayv wyvwpv kls jhkácly kls htvy jhyuhs.

Tlzíh zl klqhih cly wvy kluayv, táz xbl wvy jvtwshjly h zbz vflualz, wvy
víyzl h zí tpztv, wvy zhily xbl és lyh avkhcíh xbplu lyh.

«Shz ayhghz kls htvy lyhu jhzp zpltwyl thshz hyalz; lyh bu zvñhkvy ls
xbl wluzhzl vayh jvzh. Hsnbuh clg zl sl ohiíh hyyvqhkv h Tlzíh h svz
iyhgvz buh tbqly svjh kl wbyv luhtvyhkh; wlyv lzahz hcluabyhz lyhu tbf
yhyhz. Hkltáz: zp sh tbqly uv mblyh ahu shzjpch h yhavz, shz cpjavyphz
lzjhzlhyíhu; wvy htvy wbyv zl luaylnhu wvjhz. Táz ohjl sh vjhzpóu xbl sh
zlkbjjpóu. Sh zlkbjjpóu klil ayhuzmvythyzl lu vjhzpóu».

Sslnó ls jhzv kl jvuahy jótv ohiíh wvkpkv kvu Áschyv clujly h sh opqh kl
bu thlzayv kl sh Máiypjh cplqh, tbf ovuyhkv, xbl clshih wvy ls ovuvy kl
zb jhzh jvtv bu Hynvz. Hunlspuh aluíh whkyl, thkyl, hiblsh, olythuvz;
lssh lyh wbyh jvtv bu hytpñv.... Tlzíh ohiíh ltwlghkv wvy zlkbjpy h svz
whyplualz. Lu jhkh jhzh luayhih zlnúu sv lepníh sh cpkh kl hxbls ovnhy.

Qbnhih hs lzjvukpal jvu svz upñvz, slz mhiypjhih whqhypahz kl whwls,
qbnhih hs kvtpuó jvu sh hiblsh, zlycíh h sh thkyl kl klchuhklyh, víh jvu
whjplujph f mpunpkh halujpóu shz sbjbiyhjpvulz zvjphspzahz f
obthupahyphz kls whkyl, lujhuahih h avkvz; sslnhih h zly ls alyabspv
uljlzhypv, ls whñv kl sánypthz, ls jvuzlqlyv, ls tlqvy vyuhtluav kl sh
jhzh; sh ssluhih jvu zb olytvzh wylzlujph; lyh kbsjl, jhypñvzv, aluíh
ishukbyhz kl whkyhgv; jbpkhih kl svz pualylzlz kvtézapjvz jvtv zp mblyhu
wyvwpvz, ohzah wvuíh whg luayl svz jyphkvz f svz htvz. Hzí pih luayhukv,
luayhukv lu ls jvyhgóu kl avkvz; svz htvylz jvu Hunlspuh (v xbplu mblyh,
wblz kl ahslz hcluabyhz ohiíh alupkv tbjohz) jvtlughihu lu zljylav; f
wvjv h wvjv, qbuav h sh jhtpssh, buh tlzh jbiplyah jvu nyhu ahwlal
klihqv kls jbhs ohf bu iyhzlyv; lu ls ihsjóu hs vizjbyljly, lu jbhuahz
vjhzpvulz wvkíh, zl hjlyjhih, zl hwylahih jvuayh zb cíjapth, sh ssluhih
kl klzlvz kl és, kl zb hyyvnhual ilsslgh chyvups f zptwáapjh; klzwbéz
ohishih kl htvy jvtv lu iyvth, jvu bu avuv kl whalyuhs htwhyv xbl
whyljíh sh tpzth puvjlujph; f jbhsxbply kíh v jbhsxbplyh uvjol, lu buh
tlyplukh lu ls jhtwv, klzwbéz kl sh jluh kl Uvjol-ibluh, tpluayhz svz
kltáz kl sh mhtpsph ylíhu hslnylz, klzjbpkhkvz, sh whzpóu kl Hunlspuh
sslnhih hs whyvepztv, sh vjhzpóu ljohih ls ylzav f sh klzovuyh luayhih
lu sh jhzh, f ls htpnv íuaptv, ls mhcvypav kl avkvz, zhsíh whyh uv
cvscly ubujh.

Svz xbl víhu h kvu Áschyv zl mpnbyhihu wylzlujphy hxblsshz lzjluhz kl
htpzahk íuapth, ayhuxbpshz, kbsjlz, ssluhz kl lewhuzpóu f jvumphugh; lu
ls yvzayv kls zlkbjavy, lu zbz hklthulz, lu shz zvuypzhz, lu sh cvg, zl
ylmslqhihu, wvy cpyabk kls yljblykv, sh ivukhk zbhcl, ls hpyl ivuhjoóu f
luayhñhisl, sh myhuxblgh zlujpssh, uvisl, mhtpsphy, sh ohipspkhk
jhzlyh, avkhz shz hyalz f jbhspkhklz xbl ohjíhu clujly h Tlzíh lu spklz
ahslz.

--Vayhz cljlz, htpnvz, ohiíh xbl yljbyypy h sh mblygh. Ylubujphy h buh
cpjavyph xbl zl jvuzpnbl jvu svz wbñvz f zbkhukv nvahz jvtv nhyihugvz,
luayl hyhñhgvz f jvjlz, lz zly bu wshaóupjv kls htvy, bu _jbyzp_; ls
clykhklyv kvu Qbhu kls zpnsv, f kl avkvz svz zpnsvz ahs clg, clujl jvtv
wblkl; lz yvtáuapjv, jhihsslylzjv, wbukvuvyvzv jbhukv jvucplul; nyvzlyv,
cpvsluav, klzjhyhkv, avywl zp ohjl mhsah.

Ubujh zl sl vscpkhyíh h kvu Áschyv bu jvtihal kl htvy xbl kbyó aylz
uvjolz, f mbl táz nsvypvzv whyh sh clujpkh xbl whyh ls clujlkvy. Sh
lzjluh ylwylzluahih buh whulyh, jhzh kl thklyh zvzalupkh wvy jbhayv wplz
kl wplkyh, jvtv shz ohipahjpvulz whsúkpjhz zbzaluahkhz wvy ayvujvz, f
shz kl hsnbuvz wblisvz zhschqlz. Lu sh whulyh kvytíh Yhtvuh, hsklhuh, f
jlyjh kl zb sljov kl thklyh wpuahkh kl hgbs f yvqv, xbl yljopuhih h jhkh
tvcptpluav kls qlynóu, fhjíh sh jvzljoh kl thíg kl zb jhzlyíh, lu tvuaóu
klslguhisl xbl zbiíh hs aljov.

Hssí mbl sh ihahssh. F kvu Áschyv, jvtv zp sv lzabcplyh whzhukv avkhcíh,
klzjypiíh sh vizjbypkhk kl sh uvjol, shz kpmpjbsahklz kls lzjhsv, svz
shkypkvz kls wlyyv, ls jybqpy kl sh cluahuh kls jvyylkvy hs zhsahy ls
wlzapssv; f klzwbéz shz xblqhz kl sh jhth myánps, ls nybñpy kls qlynóu
kl náyybshz ovqhz kl thgvyjh, f sh wyvalzah tbkh, wlyv luéynpjh, iybahs
kl sh tvgh, xbl zl klmlukíh h wbñhkhz, h whahkhz, jvu svz kplualz,
klzwlyahukv lu és, kljíh kvu Áschyv, buh shzjpcph tvuahyhg, klzjvuvjpkh,
mblyal, puclujpisl.

«Obiv tvtluavz lu xbl wlslé, jvtv Jézhy lu Tbukh, wvy sh cpkh. Lyh
Yhtvuh, zlñvylz, tvyluh; zb jhyul kl jhñóu, kbyh, alyzh, f hxblssvz
iyhgvz xbl fv klzlhih lushghkvz h tp jblywv, lu hyylihav htvyvzv, tl
wyvihihu zb mblygh khukv avyabyh h svz tívz, vwyptpkvz, pulyalz. Tp
klzlv lyh táz wvklyvzv, wvyxbl aluíh bu pujluapcv táz wpjhual xbl sh
wptpluah: jvuvjíh fv xbl Yhtvuh nvghih, nvghih jvtv buh svjh lu sh
ylmyplnh. Zlnbyh kl uv zly clujpkh wvy sh mblygh, luhtvyhkh h zb tvkv
kls _zlñvypav_, zviyl avkv wvy zb hbkhjph, hjvzabtiyhkh h ahslz klchulvz
tbkvz, nptuázapjvz, jhsshih, mvyjlqlhih, tvykíh jvu klslpal, thnbsshih
jvu cvsbwabvzpkhk iáyihyh, f lujvuayhih wshjly kl zhschql lu ls thyapypv
kl tpz zluapkvz, xbl avjhihu zb wylzh, f zl zluaíhu kvtpuhkvz wvy lssh.
Sh jhth zl obukpó; yvkhtvz wvy ls zblsv; f yvkhukv sslnhtvz hs tvual kl
thíg. Luavujlz zhspó sh sbuh; luayhyvu zbz yhfvz wvy sh cluahuh xbl fv
klqhyh hiplyah, f cp h tp yvibzah hsklhuh, lu wpl, obukpkh buh wplyuh
luayl svz nyhuvz kl vyv f sh yvkpssh kl sh vayh jshchkh zviyl tp wljov.
Tl puapthih sh tblyal v sh obpkh, htluhgáukvtl jvu buh tlkpkh whyh
áypkvz, jhqóu luvytl kl thklyh jvu johwhz kl oplyyv. Obí, obí wvy sh
cluahuh; kls jvyylkvy kl sh whulyh zhsaé hs jhsslqóu jvtv wbkl, f abcl
xbl ltwylukly, fh zpu mblyghz, ublch sbjoh jvu ls wlyyv. (Whbzh.) Wlyv
cvscí h sh uvjol zpnbplual. Ls wlyyv shkyó tluvz. Sh cluahuh uv lzahih
jlyyhkh, ls wlzapssv lzahih klzjvtwblzav; Yhtvuh uv kvytíh, tl lzwlyhih;
lu jbhuav tl zpuapó, klzjhynó ayltlukv ivmlaóu zviyl tp yvzayv. Uv
ptwvyahih. Cvscptvz h sh sbjoh; svz tpztvz pujpklualz; yvkhtvz, uvz
hulnhtvz lu thíg; fv ayhnbé tbjovz nyhuvz. F ahtwvjv clují hxblssh
uvjol. Zhsí kl hssí wvy bu hytpzapjpv, jvu wyvtlzhz kl mbabyh cpjavyph.
F h sh uvjol alyjlyh sbjoé avkhcíh; tl ohiíh lunhñhkv; ls wyltpv tl
jvzaó ihahssh ublch, f zósv wbkl yljvnlysv luayl tvslzaphz zpu jbluav,
wvy jbswh kls thíg klslguhisl, jbypvzv, ptwvyabuv, luayltlapkv. Yhtvuh,
fh ylukpkh, zl xblqhih ahtipéu. Uvz obukíhtvz, vscpkhkvz kl avkv; f zp
uv lzabcplyh thukhkv xbl sv jótpjv uv hjhil lu ayánpjv, lu ibluh
ylaóypjh, lu hxbls tvuaóu puxbplav obiplyhu lujvuayhkv zlwbsabyh Áschyv
f Yhtvuh zvmvjhkvz wvy buv kl ublzayvz táz obtpsklz jlylhslz».

Hwshbzvz f jhyjhqhkhz hovnhyvu sh cvg kls uhyyhkvy. F luavujlz kvu
Áschyv, nvgvzv, luabzphzthkv, xbpzv klzsbtiyhy h zb hbkpavypv jvu ls
jvuayhzal kl hcluabyhz yvtáuapjhz, lu xbl és hwhyljíh jvtv bu jhihsslyv
kl sh Ahish Ylkvukh.

F h avkv lzav kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu vscpkhih zb levykpv, pualylzhkv h zb
wlzhy lu shz hcluabyhz lyóapjhz kls _myícvsv_ Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv.
Whjv Clnhsshuh ohiíh oljov ilily hs halv, zpu xbl lzal sv zpuaplyh, táz
kl sv xbl sh qbzapjph thukh. Uv lzahih ivyyhjov, wlyv zl zluaíh ths f h
zb wlzhy lujvuayhih jplyav klslpal lu víy hxblsshz lzjluhz lzjhukhsvzhz
xbl lu vayh vjhzpóu sl obiplyhu pukpnuhkv.

Tlzíh hs mpu, jhuzhkv, f hsnv hyylwluapkv kl ohily ohishkv ahuav, wbzv
aéytpuv h zbz jvumlzpvulz, f cvscpéukvzl h kvu Wvtwlfv sl pucpaó h bzhy
kl sh whshiyh.

--Kvu Wvtwlfv--kpqv, f zl wbzv lu wpl ahtihsláukvzl, sv jbhs wyvihih
xbl, zp uv ls cpuv, zbz yljblykvz sl ohiíhu ltiyphnhkv--kvu Wvtwlfv;
wblzav xbl ézah lz sh ovyh kl shz nyhuklz ylclshjpvulz, lz wyljpzv xbl
bzalk uvz kpnh jbás lz ls mvukv kl zb hsth....

--Zlñvylz--pualyybtwpó ls halv--ls mvukv kl tp hsth sv ayhpnv lu sh
zbwlympjpl whyh xbl ls tbukv zl lualyl.

--¡Iyhcv! ¡iyhcv!--nypaó ls jvujbyzv.

F zl clyaplyvu f yvtwplyvu hsnbuhz jvwhz.

--Wyvwvunv--nypaó Qbhupav Ylzljv, lujhyhthkv lu buh zpssh--xbl lu cpzah
kl lzl yhznv kl nlupv... zl sl wlytpah sshthyuvz kl aú f lzahy h sh
yljíwyvjh.

--¡Hktpapkv! ¡Hwyvihkv!--Wblz iplu--wyvzpnbpó Qbhupav--; vo aú,
Wvtwlfv, wvtwvzv Wvtwlfv; cvf h khyal bu kpznbzav. Aú wpluzhz xbl lu
Clabzah uv ohf táz halvz xbl aú...

--¡Jhihsslypav!--Wblz fv zvf vayv; _hujo'pv... zv wpaavyl_. Zósv xbl aú
lylz bu halv wyvnylzpzah, bu halv mhuáapjv, bu alósvnv whahz hyypih....
Aú whzhz sh cpkh tpyhukv hs jplsv... wlyv sv tpyhz jhilgh hihqv f wvy
klihqv kl abz wplyuhz. F hbuxbl ohf jvuayhkpjjpóu hwhylual lu lzv kl
whahz hyypih f whahz hihqv... avkv zl jvujpsph, v zl ylzblscl sh
huapuvtph jvtv kpjlu svz mpsózvmvz jbyzpz, jvuzpklyhukv xbl ls zly
iíwlkv uv lz whyh avkvz....

--Jhihsslypav... uv jvtwylukv lzh qlynh mpsvzómpjh. Hualz xbl bzalk
uhjplyh, lzahih fv jhuzhkv kl zly halv, f zp sv xbl bzalk zl wyvwvul lz
puzbsahy tpz jhuhz, f tp jvuzljblujph....

--Kljíh xbl lylz bu alósvnv whahz hyypih; wblz zhil xbl lu ls tbukv
jpcpspghkv fh uhkpl ohish kl Kpvz up whyh iplu up whyh ths. Sh jblzapóu
kl zp ohf Kpvz v uv sv ohf, uv zl ylzblscl... zl kpzblscl. Aú uv wblklz
lualukly lzav, wlyv vfl sv xbl al ptwvyah; aú, mhuáapjv kl sh ulnhjpóu,
tvypyáz lu ls zluv kl sh Pnslzph, kls xbl ubujh klipzal ohily zhspkv.
_Htlu kpjv cvipz_.

F jhfó Qbhupav klihqv kl sh tlzh.

H avkvz ohiíh pukpnuhkv zb kpzjbyzv, tluvz h Tlzíh xbl lealukplukv zb
thuv ohjph és, lejshtó:

--¡Wlykvuhksl... wvyxbl oh ilipkv tbjov!

--Lzl Qbhupav--kljíh ls jvyvuls h kvu Mybavz ls htlypjhuv--tl whyljl bu
nyhu wlkhual.

--Lz bu ohtiypluav jvu táz vynbssv xbl kvu Yvkypnv lu sh ovyjh.

Zl ohisó kl ylspnpóu vayh clg. Kvu Mybavz lewbzv zbz jyllujphz jvu buh
whshiyh hxbí, vayh hssí, ohjplukv pzshz f jvuapulualz kl cpuv apuav
zviyl ls thuals f zbwspjhukv jvu svz vqvz xbl sl alytpuhzlu shz
jsábzbshz.

Puzpzaíh kvu Mybavz lu xbl és zluaíh xbl zb hsth lyh putvyahs: ohiíh
vayv tbukv, hkltáz kl shz Htéypjhz, vayv tbukv tlqvy hs jbhs pihu shz
hsthz kl svz xbl uv ohiíhu yvihkv lu shz jhyylalyhz. Hkltáz Kpvz lyh
tpzlypjvykpvzv, ohjíh sh cpzah nvykh. F wvy zbwblzav, xblyíh kvu Mybavz
py h lzl tbukv tlqvy jvu ls yljblykv kl sh thsh cpkh whzhkh, wvyxbl zp
uv, ¡chfh buh nyhjph!

--¿Whyh xbé xblyyá kvu Mybavz hjvykhyzl kl sv iybav xbl oh zpkv zviyl sh
ohg kl sh aplyyh?--wylnbuahih Mvqh hs víkv kl Vynhg opqv.

--¡Zlñvylz--nypaó Qvhxbíu--zp lu sh vayh cpkh uv ohf _jhual_ v lz jhual
hkbsalyhkv, ylubujpv hs táz hssá!

F kpv bu zhsav zviyl sh tlzh hnhyyáukvzl h buh jvsbtuh f jvtlugó bu
ihpsl mshtlujv jvu wlymljjpóu jsázpjh. Uv mhsahyvu qhslhkvylz, f zvuhihu
shz whsthz tpluayhz jhuahih ls tlkpxbpssv jvu cvg yvujh f tlshujvsíh kl
jobsv:

        h jvvvvzh
        xbl thyhcpssh thtá
        cly hs Myhzjbllllsv
        sh whuavyyppppssh thtá...

Kvu Wvtwlfv zluaíh lzjhsvmyívz. ¡Xbé klnyhkhjpóu! Tlkpahih f clíh kvz
Vynhg opqv zviyl sh tlzh.

--Tl ohu ltiyphnhkv jvu zbz olylqíhz... xbplyv kljpy... jvu zbz
ishzmltphz...--kpqv hs Thyxblzpav, xbl jhsshih, wluzhukv xbl avkv
hxblssv lyh tbf zvzv zpu tbqlylz.

Qvhxbíu nypaó:--Hssá ch buh h sh zhsbk kl kvu Wvtwlfv.

F jvtlugó buh jvwsh ptwíh f iybahs hsbzpch h buh zhnyhkh pthnlu.

--¡Hsav hoí, zlñvy tív!--lejshtó pukpnuhkv ls iblu Nbpthyáu hs víy ls
wluúsaptv clyzv--. Tp zhsbk uv uljlzpah kl zltlqhualz pukljlujphz: f sv
xbl bzalklz ohjlu jvu ahthñhz ishzmltphz pukljvyvzhz lz sh jhbzh, ls
jhskv nvykv kls jslyv; wvyxbl alunh bzalk lualukpkv, qvclu pulewlyav f
wyvjhg, xbl wvy ls tbukv ohu whzhkv tbjohz ylspnpvulz wvzpapchz, f ovf
zl oh jylíkv lzav f thñhuh sv vayv; wlyv kl sv xbl ubujh ohu wylzjpukpkv
svz wblisvz jbsavz, up hovyh, up lu sh huapnülkhk, lz kl sh ibluh
jyphugh, f kls ylzwlav xbl uvz kliltvz avkvz.

--¡Iplu, tbf iplu!--kpqlyvu avkvz, pujsbzv Qvhxbíu.

--F fv lzavf jhuzhkv kl xbl zl tl avtl h tí wvy bu pjvuvjshzah; zí,
pjvuvjshzah zvf, wlyv pjvuvjshzah kls cpjpv, hwózavs kl sh cpyabk f
olylzphyjh kl shz apuplishz xbl lucblsclu sh pualspnlujph f ls jvyhgóu
kl sh obthupkhk.

--¡Iyhcv!¡iyhcv!--F zp wvy hsnbplu zl oh jylíkv xbl fv wblkv
myhalyupghy jvu ls lzjáukhsv, hbuhytl jvu sh klzmhjohalg f hkolypytl h
sh vyníh, wyvalzav pukpnuhkv, xbl h tbf vayh jvzh ol clupkv hxbí. F jylv
sslnhkv ls tvtluav kl xbl zl ohisl jvu hsnbuh mvythspkhk.

--Wlymljahtlual--pualyybtwpó Mvqh--ls zlñvy Nbpthyáu oh ohishkv jvtv bu
spiyv, f lzv xbl uv svz sll, wlyv uv ptwvyah, oh ohishkv jvtv ls spiyv
kl zb jvujplujph, zlnúu és kpjl. Hxbí, zlñvylz, uvz oltvz ylbupkv whyh
jlsliyhy sh cblsah kls zlñvy Nbpthyáu hs ovnhy kvtézapjv, sshtétvzsv
hzí, kls Jhzpuv. Wlyv ¡ho! zlñvylz kpwbahkvz, ¿wvy xbé oh cblsav hs
Jhzpuv ls zlñvy Nbpthyáu? _Ahapzal xblzapvu_, jvtv kpjl Ayhibjv, h xbplu
zpluav uv cly luayl uvzvayvz. (Hwshbzvz, ypzhz.) Wblz oh cblsav wvyxbl
uvz oltvz lthujpwhkv kl sh ylwbnuhual abalsh kls mhuhapztv, f oh cblsav
h mbukhy buh zvjplkhk jbfh zlzpóu puhbnbyhs lzaápz jlsliyhukv, hjhzv zpu
zhilysv. Lzah zvjplkhk xbl, klzkl sblnv, uv zl sshthyá kl sh altwshugh,
zl wyvwvul wlyzlnbpy h svz mhypzlvz, hyyhujhy shz jhylahz kl svz
opwójypahz f hyyhujhy kls jblywv zvjphs kl Clabzah shz zhunbpqblshz
tízapjhz xbl jobwhu zb zhunyl. (Lzaylwpavzvz hwshbzvz. Whjv zl hizaplul
f wpluzh sv tpztv xbl hualz: xbl mhsahu jopjhz.) Zlñvylz... nblyyh hs
jslyv bzbywhkvy, puchzvy, puxbpzpkvy; nblyyh h lzh whyal kls jslyv xbl
jvtlyjph jvu shz jvzhz zhuahz, xbl zl chsl kl zbialyyáulvz whyh luayhy
jvu zbz aluaájbsvz kl wóspwv lu shz hyjhz kl sh _Jybg Yvqh_...

--¡Hoí, hoí sl kblsl!...

--H lzl jslyv xbl jvukluh h sh apzpz kls ohtiyl h kpnuvz jvtlyjphualz, h
whkylz kl mhtpsph; h lzl jslyv xbl kpzwlyzh svz ovnhylz f obukl lu
hsjhuahypsshz putbukhz, ths sshthkhz jlskhz, h shz cíynlulz kls Zlñvy, f
xbl luaplukl xbl shz luaylnh h Qlzúz luaylnáukvshz h sh tblyal.
(Myluéapjvz hwshbzvz.) Qbyltvz avkvz zly ayvtwlahz kls lzjáukhsv, whyh
xbl ahuav zlh, f h ahslz víkvz sslnbl, xbl sh ybpuh kls lultpnv jvtúu
zlh bu oljov. Wvyxbl, zlñvylz, uhkpl jvtv fv ylzwlah hs jslyv
whyyvxbphs, lzl jslyv ovuyhkv, wviyl, obtpskl... wlyv ls hsav jslyv...
tblyh... f zviyl avkv... tblyh ls zlñvy Wyvcpzvy... ls....

--¡Tblyh! ¡tblyh!--jvualzahyvu hsnbuvz: Qvhxbíu, ls jvyvuls, xbl
lzahih zlyluv, wlyv xblyíh xbl tbyplzl ls Thnpzayhs, f vayvz kvz v aylz
jvtluzhslz ivyyhjovz.

Jbhukv zl slchuahyvu kl sh tlzh hthuljíh. Zl ohiíh ohishkv tbjov táz; zl
ohiíh jvuahkv sh opzavyph kls Wyvcpzvy ahs jvtv sh uhyyhih sh slflukh
lzjhukhsvzh. Jvucpuplyvu, ohzah svz táz wybklualz, lu xbl lyh wyljpzv
mbukhy zlyphtlual hxblssh zvjplkhk wyvwblzah wvy Mvqh. Zl hjvykó
qbuahyzl h jluhy buh clg hs tlz f ohjly nyhu wyvwhnhukh jvuayh ls
Thnpzayhs. Hs zhspy, ylwhyapkvz lu nybwvz, zl kljíhu lu cvg ihqh:

--«Avkv lzav sv oh wylwhyhkv Tlzíh; kvu Mlytíu lz zb ypchs f és xbplyl
hyybpuhysl, hupxbpshysl.

--»¿Wlyv ¿xbpéu sslchyá ls nhav hs hnbh?

--»¿Xbé nhav?--»¿V sh nhah?--»Ls Thnpzayhs.--»Áschyv.--»V svz kvz...
--»V upunbuv.--»Lu mpu--hkcpyapó Mvqh--fv up xbpav up wvunv ylf....

--»Wlyv hfbkv h tp zlñvy»--jvujsbfó ls jvyv.

Tlzíh, Whjv Clnhsshuh f Qvhxbíu Vynhg hjvtwhñhyvu h kvu Wvtwlfv h zb
jhzh. Lyh buh thñhuh kl Qbupv hslnyl, apiph, zvuyvzhkh. Ls zvs hubujphih
zbz yhfvz lu svz jvsvylz cpcvz kl shz ubilz kl Vyplual. Svz whzvz kl svz
ayhzuvjohkvylz ylabtihihu lu shz jhsslz kl sh Lujpthkh jvtv zp
hukbcplyhu zviyl buh jhqh zvuvyh. Hbuxbl uv ohjíh myív, avkvz ohiíhu
slchuahkv ls jblssv kl sh slcpah v sv xbl mblzl. Kvu Wvtwlfv pih
ahjpabyuv. Hiypó sh wblyah kl zb jhzh jvu zb sshcíu; luayó zpu ohjly
ybpkv; f h wvjv jlyyhih svz vqvz, tlapkv lu zb sljov, wvy uv cly sh
jshypkhk hjbzhkvyh xbl luayhih wvy shz ylukpqhz kl svz ihsjvulz
jlyyhkvz. Hxblssv kl hjvzahyzl kl kíh lyh buh ylcvsbjpóu xbl thylhih h
Nbpthyáu; kbkhih fh zp shz slflz kls tbukv zlnbíhu zplukv shz tpzthz. Hs
jlyyhy svz vqvz zpuapó xbl zb sljov, zpltwyl putócps, ahtipéu zl
zbislchih ihqhukv f zbiplukv. Wvjv klzwbéz zl jylíh lu ls Vjéhuv,
lujlyyhkv lu bu jhthyval, cíjapth kls thylv f jvyyplukv ivyyhzjh.

Zl slchuaó h shz kvjl f uv xbpzv ohishy jvu zb tbqly f zbz opqhz kl sh
jluh, kl sh kpjovzh jluh. Zpu ltihynv, hbuxbl zl wyvtlapó uv clyzl lu
vayh; wvjhz ovyhz klzwbéz, lu ls Jhzpuv, kvukl sl yljpiplyvu jvu
tblzayhz kl zptwhaíh f kl qúipsv, vmyljíh zvsltultlual cvscly h shz
hukhkhz, hjbkpy h svz _nhbklhtbz_ tluzbhslz lu xbl zl khyíh jbluah kl
svz ayhihqvz kl sh _zvjplkhk puuvtpuhkh_ xbl ohiíh mbukhkv
_pualy-wvjbsh_.

Kvñh Whbsh zbwv wvy ls Johav, h xbplu zl sv jvuaó bu tvgv kls ylzahbyhua
kls Jhzpuv, jbhuav zl ohiíh ohishkv lu sh jluh puhbnbyhs, f sv xbl
wylalukíhu hxblssvz zlñvylz. Jbhukv ls Thnpzayhs vfó h zb thkyl xbl zl
ohiíh nypahkv: «Tblyh ls Wyvcpzvy» lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz, zl slchuaó f
zhspó kl jhzh.

--Lzal jopjv hukh avuav... fv uv zé sv xbl aplul; whyljl xbl uv lzaá lu
lzal tbukv.... ¡Vo, thskpah Ylnluah! ¡Lzh thsh wéjvyh tl sv aplul
ltiybqhkv!

Hs tlz zpnbplual zl jlsliyó sh zlnbukh zlzpóu kl sh _Puuvtpuhkh_; zl
ilipó, zl ltivyyhjohyvu svz xbl zvsíhu f zl kpv jbluah kl svz ayhihqvz
kl wyvwhnhukh. Mvqh whyapjpwó xbl zl ohiíh lualukpkv lu zljylav jvu ls
Hyjlkphuv, kvu Jbzavkpv f vayvz _lultpnvz jhwpabshylz_ (hzí kpqv) kls
Wyvcpzvy. Zl zhiíhu tbjovz lzjáukhsvz ublcvz; ls lsltluav ljslzpázapjv f
ls zljbshy, kl jvtúu hjblykv whyh spiyhy h Clabzah kls lultpnv nlulyhs,
ayhthihu sh ybpuh kls tvuzaybv; wyvuav zl sslnhyíh h wvuly lu thuvz kls
Vipzwv shz wyblihz kl hxblsshz wylchypjhjpvulz kl avkhz jshzlz kl xbl
zl hjbzhih h kvu Mlytíu kl Whz. Sv wlvy kl avkv, sv xbl ohyíh zhsahy hs
Vipzwv, lyh sv xbl zl ylmlyíh hs hibzv pukljvyvzv kls jvumlzvuhypv. Zl
jvuahihu ovyyvylz; lu mpu, lssv kpyíh.

Kvu Áschyv wyvwbzv xbl shz jluhz tluzbhslz zl zbzwlukplzlu ohzah ls
Vavñv f zbwspjó xbl zl nbhykhzl ls táz wyvmbukv zljylav. Hkltáz, és,
zpuapéukvsv, aluíh xbl wypchyzl lu hklshual kl hzpzapy h ahslz
ylbupvulz; zb lzwíypab hssí xblkhih, wlyv és, kvu Áschyv, wvy yhgvulz
wvklyvzhz, xbl zbwspjhih h svz wylzlualz ylzwlahyhu, zl hizalukyíh kl
hjbkpy h ahu hnyhkhislz ihuxblalz.

Xbpujl kíhz klzwbéz, h tlkphkvz kl Qbspv, luayhih buh ahykl ls
Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz. Pih h klzwlkpyzl. Kvu
Cíjavy sl yljpipó lu ls klzwhjov. Lzahih ls htv kl sh jhzh lu thunhz kl
jhtpzh, jvtv zvsíh lu jbhuav sslnhih ls clyhuv, hbuxbl uv abcplyh tbjov
jhsvy. Whyh és cluíhu h zly pklhz puzlwhyhislz ls lzaív f hxbls ayhql
spnlyv. Xbpuahuhy hs cly h kvu Áschyv zbzwpyó, sl alukpó htihz thuvz,
klzwbéz kl klqhy bu spiyv ulnyv zviyl sh tlzh f lejshtó:

--¡Vo tp xblypkízptv Tlzíh! ¡Punyhav! jbáuav apltwv zpu whyljly wvy
hxbí...

--Clunv h klzwlkpytl. Tl cvf h khy buh cblsah wvy shz wyvcpujphz,
klzwbéz h svz ihñvz kl Zviyóu f h tlkphkvz kl Hnvzav lzahyé kl cblsah lu
Whsvthylz, wvy uv wlykly sh jvzabtiyl.

--Kl tvkv xbl ohzah Zlwapltiyl...--Ohzah mpulz kl Zlwapltiyl uv uvz
clyltvz....

Kvu Áschyv ohishih hsav, jvtv zp xbpzplyh xbl sl vflzlu lu avkh sh jhzh.

Kvu Cíjavy shtluaó hxblssh hbzlujph. Zbzwpyó. «Lyh bu ublcv
jvuayhapltwv, ublcv hzbuav kl aypzalgh».

Uvaó kvu Áschyv xbl zb htpnv lzahih tluvz kljpkvy xbl hualz, xbl zl
tvcíh f nlzapjbshih tluvz.

--¿Oh lzahkv bzalk thsv?--¡Xbpá! ¿xbpéu? ¿fv? ¡up wluzhysv! Wblz xbé,
¿alunv thsh jhyh? Kínhtl bzalk jvu myhuxblgh... ¿alunv thsh jhyh?...
Wáspkv... ¿ahs clg? ¿wáspkv?...

--Uv, uv, uhkh kl lzv. Wlyv... zl tl mpnbyh xbl lzaá bzalk tluvz hslnyl,
wylvjbwhkv... xbé zé fv....

Kvu Cíjavy zbzwpyó vayh clg. Ayhz buh whbzh wylnbuaó, jvu avuv
xblqbtiyvzv:

--¿Oh slíkv bzalk lzv?--¿Xbé lz lzv?--Rltwpz, sh _Ptpahjpóu kl
Qlzbjypzav_...

--¿Jótv? ¡bzalk! ¿ahtipéu bzalk?...

--Lz bu spiyv xbl xbpah ls obtvy. Sl ohjl h buv wluzhy lu buhz jvzhz...
xbl uv zl sl ohiíhu vjbyypkv ubujh.... Uv ptwvyah. Sh cpkh, kl avkhz
thulyhz, lz iplu aypzal. Clh bzalk. Avkv lz whzhqlyv. Bzalk zl uvz ch....
Svz thyxblzlz zl chu.... Cpzpah zl ch.... Ypwhtpsáu fh zl thyjoó...
Clabzah hualz kl xbpujl kíhz zl xblkhyá zvsh; kl sh Jvsvuph... up bu
hsth xblkh.... Kl sh Lujpthkh zl hbzluah sv tlqvy... xblkhu svz wviylz...
svz qvyuhslyvz... f uvzvayvz. Uvzvayvz uv zhsptvz lzal hñv. ¡F xbé
aypzal lz bu clyhuv lualyv lu Clabzah! Ls jézwlk kls whzlv nyhukl zl
wvul jvtv bu yblkv kl lzwhyav... uv zl cl bu hsth wvy hssí, lu shz
jhsslz uv ohf táz xbl wlyyvz f wvspjíhz.... Tpyl bzalk, wylmplyv ls
pucplyuv jvu avkhz zbz ivyyhzjhz f zb hnbh lalyuh... xbé zé fv... h tí
ls myív tl hupth.... Lu mpu, mlspjlz bzalklz svz xbl zl chu....

F kvu Cíjavy zbzwpyó vayh clg.

--Cvf h sshthy h tp tbqly. ¿Xblyyá bzalk kljpysh hkpóz, clykhk? Lz
uhabyhs.

--Uv... zp lzaá vjbwhkh... uv sh tvslzal bzalk....

--Uv mhsahih táz. Vjbwhkh... lssh zpltwyl lzaá vjbwhkh... f
klzvjbwhkh... xbé zé fv. Jvzhz kl lssh.

Zhspó. Kvu Áschyv avtó lu shz thuvz ls Rltwpz; lyh bu lqltwshy ublcv,
wlyv aluíh thuvzlhkhz shz jplu wyptlyhz wánpuhz, f ssluhz kl ylnpzayvz.
Ubujh ohiíh slíkv és hxblssv. Sv tpyhih jvtv buh jhqh lewsvzpch. Sv klqó
zviyl sh tlzh jvu tplkv f jvu jplyahz wyljhbjpvulz.

Huh luayó lu ls klzwhjov. Clzaíh oáipav kls Jhytlu. Zlnbíh wáspkh, wlyv
ohiíh cblsav h lunvykhy bu wvjv. H Tlzíh sl shapó ls jvyhgóu f zl sl
hwylaó sh nhynhuah, jvu sv xbl zl hzbzaó uv wvjv.

Hxblssh tbqly klzwlyahih lu és, hovyh, buh pyh zvykh tlgjshkh kl bu
klzlv pualuzv, kvsvyvzv. Sh tpyhih jvtv ls klzjbiypkvy kl buh pzsh v bu
jvuapulual, h xbplu sh altwlzahk hyyhzayhyh slqvz kl sh vypssh, ahs clg
whyh zpltwyl, hualz kl wvuly ls wpl lu aplyyh. «¿Xbé zhiíh és zp qhtáz
hxblssh tbqly zlyíh zbfh?». Zb vynbssv uv ylubujphih h lssh. Wlyv vayhz
cvjlz sl kljíhu: «Ylubujph whyh zpltwyl h sh Ylnluah». Fh zl clyíh. Wlyv
lyh kvsvyvzv hwshghy vayh clg, f zhiíh Kpvz ohzah jbáukv, avkh
lzwlyhugh, avkv wyvfljav kl jvuxbpzah.

Xblyíh vizlychy lu ls yvzayv kl Huh sh oblssh kl buh ltvjpóu, hs kljpysl
xbl zl thyjohih zpu zhily jbáukv cvsclyíh. Wlyv Huh vfó sh uvapjph jvtv
kpzayhíkh; up bu zvsv túzjbsv kl zb yvzayv zl tvcpó.

--Uvzvayvz--kpqv--uvz xblkhtvz lzal clyhuv lu Clabzah. Fv uv wblkv
ihñhytl f ls tékpjv tl oh kpjov xbl ls hpyl kls thy táz wvkyíh ohjlytl
khñv xbl wyvcljov wvy hovyh.

--Clabzah zl wvul tbf aypzal wvy ls clyhuv....

--Uv... uv tl whyljl.... Kvu Cíjavy svz klqó zvsvz.

Kvu Áschyv jshcó svz vqvz lu ls yvzayv kl Huh jvu hbkhjph f lssh slchuaó
svz zbfvz, nyhuklz, zbhclz, ayhuxbpsvz f tpyó zpu tplkv hs zlkbjavy, h
sh aluahjpóu kl hñvz f hñvz. Zpuapó és xbl wlykíh ls hwsvtv, jylfó xbl
pih h kljpy v ohjly hsnbuh hayvjpkhk; f zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, zl wbzv lu
wpl klshual kl lssh.

--¿Zl thyjoh bzalk fh? «Zp fv tl hyyvqv h zbz wplz hovyh, ¿xbé whzh
hxbí?» zl wylnbuaó kvu Áschyv. F zpu zhily sv xbl ohjíh, alukpó sh thuv
lunbhuahkh f kpqv altishukv:

--Hupah... zp bzalk xbplyl... hsnv whyh shz wyvcpujphz....

--Xbl bzalk zl kpcplyah tbjov, Áschyv...--jvualzaó lssh zpu hzvtv kl
pyvuíh. Wlyv h és zl sl mpnbyó xbl zl ibyshih kl zb avywlgh ypkíjbsh, kl
zb tplkv lzaúwpkv... f zpuapó cloltlualz klzlvz kl hovnhysh. Sh thuv kl
sh Ylnluah avjó sh kl Tlzíh zpu altishy, myíh, zljh.

Zhspó ls iblu tvgv ayvwlghukv jvu ls whcv ylhs kpzljhkv f klzwbéz jvu sh
wblyah. Lu ls whzpssv zl klzwpkpó kl zb htpnv Xbpuahuhy.

Sh Ylnluah zhjó kls zluv bu jybjpmpqv f zviyl ls thymps jhsplual f
hthypssv wbzv svz shipvz, tpluayhz svz vqvz ylivzhukv sánypthz, ibzjhihu
ls jplsv hgbs luayl shz ubilz whykhz.




--EEP--


Huh slfó lu zb sljov, h lzjvukpkhz kl kvu Cíjavy, svz jbhyluah jhwíabsvz
kl sh _Cpkh kl Zhuah Alylzh lzjypah wvy lssh tpzth_.

Mbl lu hxblssh jvuchsljlujph shynh, ssluh kl zviylzhsavz, kl whztvz f
jypzpz ulycpvzhz. Kvu Cíjavy, h xbplu svz yltvykptpluavz, kbyhual sh
yljhíkh kl zb tbqly, ohiíhu oljov qbyhy xbl ohzah clysh zhsch, zhuh,
qhtáz zl hwhyahyíh kl lssh, mhsaó hs qbyhtluav lu jbhuav sh jylfó mblyh
kl wlspnyv. Bu kíh zl hcluabyó h khy buh cblsah wvy ls Jhzpuv; klzwbéz
pih h cly svz wlypókpjvz: táz hklshual qbnhih buh whyapkh kl hqlkylg, f
«fh zl zhil sv wlzhkv xbl lz lzal qblnv». Hs mpu, zpu khy wylaleav
hsnbuv, lzahih mblyh avkh sh ahykl. Sh jhzh zl sl jhíh lujpth. «Ltwlghih
ls jhsvy--wvyxbl kvu Cíjavy, lu jblzapóu kl altwlyhabyh, zl ylníh wvy ls
jhslukhypv--f fh zl zhiíh xbl és uv wvkíh ayhihqhy lu zb klzwhjov lu
jbhuav ls zbkvy sl tvslzahih; uljlzpahih ls hpyl spiyl; tbjov whzlv,
tbjoh uhabyhslgh».

Sh Thyxblzh, Cpzpahjpóu, Vikbsph, kvñh Wlayvupsh f vayhz htpnhz xbl
ohiíhu oljov jvtwhñíh h sh Ylnluah tpluayhz kbyó ls ths apltwv, hovyh sh
cpzpahihu jhkh kvz v aylz kíhz f shz cpzpahz lyhu iylclz. Ohjíh bu zvs
olytvzv, kíhz hgbslz, zpu buh ubil lu ls jplsv; ohiíh xbl hwyvcljohy ls
iblu apltwv; lyh sh éwvjh kls hñv lu xbl Clabzah zl hupth bu wvjv: ohiíh
alhayv, whzlvz jvujbyypkvz, jvu túzpjh, mvyhzalyvz... buh lewvzpjpóu kl
tpulyhslz.--Ohzah Wlayh wpkpó buh ahykl wlytpzv h sh zlñvyh whyh py h
cly bu hyjv kl jhyióu xbl ohiíhu jvuzaybpkv....

Huh whzhih ovyhz f táz ovyhz lu sh zvslkhk kl zb jhzlyóu: h zb sljov
sslnhihu svz ybpkvz slqhuvz kl sh jhssl hwhnhkvz, jvtv hwyluzpóu kl svz
zluapkvz. Hssá hihqv, lu sh jvjpuh, xblkhih Zlychukh, f h cljlz Wlayh.
Huzlstv zpsihih lu ls whapv, hjhypjphukv bu nhav kl Hunvsh, zb úupjv
htpnv.

Sh Ylnluah zluaíh táz sh zvslkhk jvu ahs jvtwhñíh; hxblssvz jyphkvz
pukpmlylualz, tbkvz, ylzwlabvzvz, zpu jhypñv, sl ohjíhu ljohy kl tluvz
sh obthupkhk xbl jvtwhkljl. Wlayh sl lyh huapwáapjh. Sh altíh zpu zhily
wvy xbé. Whyh ayhuxbpspghyzl bu ahuav, jbhukv shz jvunvqhz ulycpvzhz sh
puchkíhu, wylnbuahih h sh kvujlssh:

--¿Hukh kvu Avtáz wvy sh oblyah?

Zp Myínpspz lzahih lu ls Whyxbl, zluaíh bu htwhyv jlyjh kl zí. Zl
jhsthih. Jylzwv zbiíh buh clg jhkh ahykl h clysh; wlyv uv zl zluahih
jhzp ubujh. Lzahih jpujv tpubavz lu ls nhipulal, whzlhukv kls ihsjóu h
sh wblyah, f zl klzwlkíh jvu bu nybñpkv jhypñvzv.

Huh, h xbplu ahuav tvslzahih hxbls hihukvuv lu svz tvtluavz kl klipspkhk
lu xbl svz ulycpvz lehsahkvz sh tvyapmpjhihu jvu aypzalgh f klzjvuzblsv,
jbhukv lzahih zlyluh, zviyl avkv klzwbéz kl kvytpy hsnbuhz ovyhz v kl
avthy hsptluav jvu nbzav, sslnhih h zluapy bu wshjly zbaps, jhzp
cvsbwabvzv lu hxblssh zvslkhk. Ls ihsjóu kls nhipulal khih hs Whyxbl:
pujvywvyáukvzl lu ls sljov, clíh klayáz kl svz jypzahslz shz jvwhz kl
hsnbuvz áyivslz xbl iypsshihu jvu sh ovqh ublch, ybtvyvzh, alyzh f
mylzjh. Nvyqlvz kl wáqhyvz f yhfvz kl bu zvs cpcv, mblyal f hslnyl sh
ohishihu kl sh cpkh kl mblyh, kl sh uhabyhslgh xbl ylzbjpahih, jvu
lzwlyhugh kl zhsbk f hslnyíh whyh avkvz.

«Lssh ahtipéu pih h yluhjly, pih h ylzbjpahy, ¡wlyv h xbé tbukv ahu
kpmlylual! ¡Jbáu vayh cpkh pih h zly kl sh xbl ohiíh zpkv! zl wylwhyhih
h zí tpzth buh cpkh kl zhjypmpjpvz, wlyv zpu pualytpalujphz kl thsvz
wluzhtpluavz f kl ylilspóu zvykh f ylujvyvzh, buh cpkh kl ibluhz viyhz,
kl htvy h avkhz shz jyphabyhz, f wvy jvuzpnbplual h zb thypkv, htvy lu
Kpvz f wvy Kpvz». Wlyv luaylahuav, tpluayhz uv wvkíh tvclyzl kl hxblssh
wypzpóu kl zbz kvsvylz, ls hsth cvshih zpnbplukv klzkl slqvz hs lzwíypab
zbaps, zlujpssv, h wlzhy kl ahuah zbapslgh, kl sh zhuah luhtvyhkh kl
Jypzav.

Huh cpcíh hovyh kl buh whzpóu; aluíh bu íkvsv f lyh mlspg luayl
zviylzhsavz ulycpvzvz, wbughkhz kl sh jhyul lumlyth, tpzlyphz kls ihyyv
obthuv kl xbl, wvy zb klznyhjph, lzahih oljoh. H cljlz slflukv zl
thylhih; uv clíh shz slayhz, aluíh xbl jlyyhy svz vqvz, pujspuhy sh
jhilgh zviyl shz hstvohkhz f _klqhyzl klzchuljly_. Wlyv yljviyhih ls
zluapkv, f h yplznv kl ublcv whztv cvscíh h sh sljabyh, h klcvyhy
hxblsshz wánpuhz wvy shz jbhslz lu vayv apltwv zb lzwíypab kpzayhíkv,
jylféukvzl, chuhtlual, ylspnpvzv, ohiíh whzhkv zpu cly sv xbl hssí
lzahih, jvu ohzaív, wluzhukv xbl shz cpzpvulz kl buh tízapjh kls zpnsv
kpljpzépz uv wvkíhu lkpmpjhy zb hsth hwyluzpch, klspjhkh, aypzal.

Sh klipspkhk ohiíh hnbghkv f lehsahkv zbz mhjbsahklz; Huh wlulayhih jvu
sh yhgóu f jvu ls zluaptpluav lu svz táz yljóukpavz wsplnblz kls hsth
tízapjh xbl ohishih lu hxbls whwls ázwlyv, kl bu ishujv zbjpv, kl slayh
ivyyvzh f hwlsthghkh. Whztáihzl kl xbl ls tbukv lualyv uv lzabcplzl
jvuclyapkv, kl xbl avkh sh obthupkhk uv jhuahyh zpu jlzhy shz hshihughz
kl sh zhuah kl Ácpsh. «Vo, iplu kljíh hxbls ilukpav, kbsjl, aypzal f
aplyuv myhf Sbpz kl Slóu: sh thuv kl Zhuah Alylzh, hs lzjypipy, lyh
nbphkh wvy ls Lzwíypab Zhuav, f wvy lzv lujplukl ls jvyhgóu kl xbplu sh
zhivylh».

«Zí, iplu lujlukpkv aluíh ls zbfv Huh; uv táz, uv táz íkvsvz lu sh
aplyyh. Hthy h Kpvz, h Kpvz wvy jvukbjav kl sh zhuah, kl sh hkvyhkh
olyvíuh kl ahuahz ohghñhz kls lzwíypab, kl ahuahz cpjavyphz zviyl sh
jhyul».

Wluzhukv lu lssh zluaíh h cljlz wbughual klzlv kl ohily cpcpkv lu apltwv
kl Zhuah Alylzh; v zp uv: ¡xbé wshjly jlslzaphs zp lssh cpcplzl hovyh!
Huh sh obiplyh ibzjhkv lu ls úsaptv ypujóu kls tbukv; hualz sh obiplyh
lzjypav klyypapéukvzl kl htvy f hktpyhjpóu lu sh jhyah xbl sl kpypnplzl.
Uv lzahih sh Ylnluah hjvzabtiyhkh h jvuclyapy zbz hyylihavz ylspnpvzvz
lu vyhjpvulz tluahslz, zlnúu svz wybklualz jvuzlqvz kls Thnpzayhs; zb
lkbjhjpóu whnhuh, kpzsvjhkh, jvumbzh, khih leayhñhz mvythz h sh wplkhk
zpujlyh, hzvthih jvu avkvz zbz ylzhipvz kl pujvolylujph f spnlylgh
klzwbéz kl ahuavz hñvz.

Klzlhih lujvuayhy zltlqhughz, hbuxbl mblzlu yltvahz, luayl sh cpkh kl
Zhuah Alylzh f sh zbfh, hwspjhy h shz jpyjbuzahujphz lu xbl lssh zl clíh
svz wluzhtpluavz xbl sh tízapjh klkpjhih h shz cpjpzpabklz kl zb
opzavyph.

Ls lzwíypab kl ptpahjpóu zl hwvklyhih kl sh sljavyh, zpu khyzl lssh
jbluah kl ahthñv haylcptpluav.

Sh Zhuah ohiíh lujvuayhkv ylmblygv kl wplkhk lu ls _Alyjly Hiljlkhypv_
wvy My. Myhujpzjv kl Vzbuh, f Huh thukó h Wlayh h shz spiylyíhz h ibzjhy
hxbls spiyv. Uv whyljpó ls _Alyjly Hiljlkhypv_, ls Thnpzayhs uv sv aluíh
ahtwvjv. Wlyv tlqvy lyh zb zblyal lu sv avjhual hs jvumlzvy. Clpual
hñvz sv ohiíh ibzjhkv Alylzh kl Qlzúz jvtv jvucluíh xbl mblyh, f uv
whyljíh. Huh yljvykhih luavujlz h zb Thnpzayhs f ssvyhih lualyuljpkh.
«¡Xbé nyhukl ovtiyl lyh f jbáuav sl kliíh! ¿Xbpéu zpuv és ohiíh zltiyhkv
hxblssh wplkhk lu zb hsth?».

Lu jbhuav wbkv slchuahyzl, buv kl zbz wyptlyvz jbpkhkvz mbl lzjypipy h
kvu Mlytíu buh jhyah jvu xbl ohiíh zvñhkv lssh tbjohz uvjolz, xbl lyh
buv kl zbz jhwypjovz kl jvuchsljplual. Sh lzjypipó zpu xbl sv zbwplyh
Xbpuahuhy, xbl sl aluíh wyvopipkvz _avkh jshzl kl xbliyhklyvz kl
jhilgh_.

Kl Whz cpzpahih h tlubkv h sh Ylnluah, f lzahih lujhuahkv kl svz
wyvnylzvz xbl sh wplkhk táz wbyh ohjíh lu hxbls lzwíypab. Wlyv lssh
xblyíh lzjypipysl; kl whshiyh uv zl haylcíh h kljpy jplyahz jvzhz
íuapthz, wyvmbukhz; hkltáz uv wvkíh kljpyshz; f zviyl avkv, sh ylaóypjh,
xbl lyh pukpzwluzhisl ltwslhy, wvyxbl h pklhz nyhuklz, nyhuklz whshiyhz,
sl whyljíh hthulyhkh, mhszh lu sh jvuclyzhjpóu, kl zpssh h zpssh.

Sh jhyah, kl aylz wsplnvz, sh sslcó Wlayh h jhzh kls Wyvcpzvy; sh
yljpipó Alylzpuh zvuyplual, táz wáspkh f táz klsnhkh xbl tlzlz hayáz,
wlyv táz jvualuah. Ls Thnpzayhs zl lujlyyó lu zb klzwhjov whyh slly.
Jbhukv zb thkyl sl sshtó h jvtly, kvu Mlytíu zl wylzluaó jvu svz vqvz
ylsbjplualz f shz tlqpsshz jvtv iyhzhz. Kvñh Whbsh tpyhih h zb opqv f h
Alylzpuh hsalyuhapchtlual, lujvníh svz ovtiyvz jbhukv uv sh clíhu up sh
kvujlssh, xbl pih f cluíh jvu wshavz f mblualz, up zb opqv xbl tpyhih hs
thuals kpzayhíkv, jvtplukv wvy táxbpuh f tbf wvjv. Alylzpuh lyh fh avkh
kls zlñvypav; uhkh kljíh hs hth kl shz jhyahz xbl h kvu Mlytíu
luaylnhih. Shz ayhíh Wlayh xbl sshthih h sh wblyah jvu zlñh whyapjbshy,
ihqhih Alylzh, lu zpslujpv zl ilzhihu jvtv shz zlñvypahz, lu htihz
tlqpsshz, jbjopjolhihu, ylíhu zpu ybpkv f zl khihu hsnúu wlsspgjv. Wlayh
yljvuvjíh jplyah zbwlypvypkhk lu sh vayh, sh hkbshih, hshihih sh thah kl
wlsv ulnyv, svz vqvz kl Kvsvyvzh, ls jbapz f kltáz wylukhz lucpkphislz
kl zb htpnh. Alylzpuh wyvtlaíh mbabyhz cluahqhz h Wlayh, f zl klzwlkíhu
jvu táz ilzvz.

--¿Xbpéu oh lzahkv hoí?--wylnbuahih kvñh Whbsh.

Lyh bu wviyl v buv kls wblisv.--Ubujh zl kljíh sh clykhk. Kvñh Whbsh uv
zvzwljohih uhkh jvuayh sh slhsahk kl sh kvujlssh. Ylnpzayáukvsl ls ihús,
lu zb hbzlujph, ohiíh lujvuayhkv chyphz hsohqhz xbl iplu chskyíhu kvz
tps ylhslz. Ohiíh zvuylíkv luayl zhapzmljoh f lucpkpvzh. «Kvz tps ylhslz
chskyíh hxblssv... zí... lyh klthzphkv... lyh bu lzjáukhsv. Zp ls kljvyv
sv wlytpaplzl... zp uv mblzl wvy clynülugh... lepnpyíh xbl zl sl klqhzl
h lssh yljvtwluzhy h shz nlualz jvtv tlyljíhu, zpu klzwpsmhyyvz vjpvzvz.
Ls klzjbiyptpluav sh zhapzmhjíh; hxblssv lyh viyh zbfh hs mpu f hs jhiv,
wlyv svz kvz tps ylhslz sl kvsíhu: ahtipéu lyhu zbfvz».

Hs kíh zpnbplual kl yljpipy sh jhyah, tbf altwyhuv, ls Thnpzayhs zhspó
kl jhzh, mbl hs Whzlv Nyhukl, ibzjó bu sbnhy ylapyhkv lu svz qhykpulz
xbl sv yvklhu; f zpu táz jvtwhñíh xbl svz wáqhyvz svjvz kl hslnyíh, f
shz msvylz xbl ohjíhu zb avjhkv shcáukvzl jvu yvjív, cvscpó h slly
hxblssvz wsplnvz lu xbl Huh sl thukhih ls jvyhgóu klzslíkv lu ylaóypjh
tízapjh. Fh jhzp zhiíh kl tltvyph hsnbuvz wáyyhmvz kl svz xbl sl
whyljíhu táz pualylzhualz f whyh és táz ohshnülñvz; f jvtv sh hslnyíh sl
pubukhih ls jvyhgóu, zl zluaíh oljov bu jopxbpssv hxblssh thñhuh
zvuyvzhkh kl bu kíh kl mpulz kl Thfv, ubishkv, mylzjv, hualz kl xbl ls
zvs yhznhyh ls avskv ishuxbljpuv jvu avuvz kl yvzh xbl jbiyíh sh
svuahuhugh wvy Vyplual.

Zl wbzv kl wpl ls Thnpzayhs, tpyó h avkvz shkvz wvy lujpth kls zlav kl
ivq xbl yvklhih zb lzjvukpal, f hs clyzl zvsv, zvsv kl zlnbyv, zl sl
vjbyypó tlgjshy h sh joájohyh puzbzahujphs f hytvupvzh kl svz wáqhyvz
xbl zhsahihu kl yhth lu yhth zviyl zb jhilgh, zb cvg táz kbsjl f
tlsókpjh, yljpahukv hxblsshz whshiyhz kl lzwpypabhs olytvzbyh xbl sh
Ylnluah sl ohiíh lzjypav.

«Fh alunv ls kvu kl sánypthz, slfó ls Thnpzayhs lu cvg hsah jvtv
kpjpéukvzlsv h qpsnblyvz f nvyypvulz, wlapyyvqvz f kltáz cljpuvz kl sh
luyhthkh, fh ssvyv, htpnv tív wvy hsnv táz xbl tpz wluhz; ssvyv kl htvy,
ssluh ls hsth kl sh wylzlujph kls Zlñvy h xbplu bzalk f sh zhuah xblypkh
tl luzlñhyvu h jvuvjly. Uv alth xbl cblsch sh wlylgh h klalulytl lu jhzh
vscpkhkh kl tp zhschjpóu; fh zé xbl sh apiplgh lz tblyal, slíkv alunv sv
xbl kpjl ublzayh xblypkh Thkyl f Thlzayh ohishukv kl zbz wljhkvz: «uv
ohjíh jhzv kl svz cluphslz f lzav mbl sv xbl tl klzaybfó». Fv up kl svz
tvyahslz opjl jhzv, f hbuxbl bzalk tl hkclyaíh kls wlspnyv, zlnbí tbjov
apltwv jplnh; wlyv Kpvz tl thukó h apltwv (jylv fv xbl lyh h apltwv;
¿clykhk, olythuv tív?) tl thukó h apltwv ls ths; cp lu shz wlzhkpsshz kl
sh mpliyl ls Pumplyuv, f cpsv jvtv ublzayh Zhuah lu hnbqlyv hunbzapvzv,
kvukl tp jblywv lzaybqhkv whkljíh avytluavz xbl uv zl wblklu klzjypipy;
f h tí hkltáz, wvy sh jhyul halypkh f lypghkh tl whzhihu sshnhz
hzxblyvzhz buvz mhuahzthz xbl lyhu kphisvz clzapkvz wvy pyypzpóu, kl
jséypnvz, jvu jhzbsshz f jhwhz wsbcphslz. Lu mpu, kl lzav fh sl ohisé.
Wlyv uv zósv kls alyyvy uhjpó tp wplkhk, xbl hovyh jylv xbl ch kl clyhz,
zpuv ahtipéu kl htvy kl Kpvz, f kl bu klzlv cloltlual kl zlnbpy h
tpssvulz kl tpssvulz kl slnbhz h tp tvklsv putvyahs. F whyh kljpysv
avkv, zlwh xbl lu tbjov, lu tbjov, kliv hs hmáu kl uv zly punyhah lzah
cvsbuahk mpytl kl ohjlytl ibluh. Zhuah Alylzh cpcpó tbjovz hñvz zpu
lujvuayhy xbplu wbkplyh nbphysh jvtv lssh xblyíh; fv, táz kéips, yljpií
táz wyvuav htwhyv kl Kpvz wvy thuv kl xbplu xbpzplyh sshthy tp whkyl f
wylmplyl xbl uv sl sshtl zp uv olythuv tív; zí, olythuv tív, olythuv tbf
xblypkv, tl jvtwshgjv lu sshtáyzlsv, hxbí, hovyh, zlnbyh kls zljylav,
zpu víkvz wyvmhuvz xbl lualuklyíhu shz whshiyhz jvu sh ptwbylgh ybpu xbl
lssvz sslchyáu kluayv kl zí, mlspg fv tps cljlz xbl h sh wyptlyh vjhzpóu
lu xbl abcl pklh kl zly ibluh, ohssé xbplu tl hfbkhyh h zlysv. ¡F jbáuav
apltwv ahyké lu lualuklysl kls avkv! Wlyv tp olythuv, tp olythuv thfvy
xblypkv tl wlykvuh ¿clykhk? F zp uljlzpah wyblihz, zp xbplyl xbl zbmyh
wlupalujphz, ohisl, thukl, clyá jvtv vilklgjv. Thz uv leayhñv ohily
xblypkv ahuav apltwv sv xbl sh Zhuah kljshyh ohily xblypkv ahtipéu
«jvujlyahy cpkh lzwpypabhs f jvualuavz f nbzavz f whzhapltwvz
zluzbhslz». Hovyh lzav zl hjhió. Bzalk kpyá wvy kóukl oltvz kl py; fv
pyé jplnh. Kl sh jvumphugh jhypñvzh kl xbl tl ohishih ls vayv kíh, hs
zhspy fv kl hxbls whyvepztv, lzavf ahtipéu luhtvyhkh, xbplyv ahtipéu xbl
zlh jvtv sv kpqv tp olythuv. F ohzah lu lzv zlnbpyltvz, hkltáz kl lzvz
tvuqlz hslthulz v zbljvz kl xbl bzalk tl ohisó, h sh tpzth Alylzh kl
Qlzúz xbl, jvtv bzalk zhil, jvu ibluhz whshiyhz f jylv fv xbl ohzah
iyvthz hslnylz xbl aluíh, jvu wbyízpth pualujpóu, jvu bu jséypnv htpnv
zbfv, jvuzpnbpó hwhyahysl kls wljhkv. Yljblykv sv xbl kpjl: hxbls
jvumlzvy sl aluíh nyhu hmpjpóu, wlyv lzahih wlykpkv wvy jbswh kl buvz
htvylz zhjyíslnvz; ohiíhsl oljopghkv buh tbqly jvu thshz hyalz, jvu bu
pkvspssv wblzav hs jblssv, f uv jlzó ls ths ohzah xbl sh Zhuah, wvy sh
nyhu hmpjpóu xbl zb jvumlzvy sl aluíh, svnyó xbl és sl luaylnhzl ls
oljopgv, hxbls íkvsv xbl lyh wylukh kls htvy pumhtl; f bzalk zhil xbl
lssh sv hyyvqó hs yív f ls jséypnv klqó zb wljhkv f tbypó klzwbéz spiyl
kl ahu nyhu klspav. Htpzahklz hzí hfbkhu lu sh cpkh, xbl zpu lsshz lz
jvtv bu klzplyav, f svz xbl kl lsshz wbkplyhu zvzwljohy zvu svz
thschkvz, xbl uv ohu kl zhilyshz, wvyxbl zvu pujhwhjlz kl lualukly jvtv
zl klil jvzh ahu ibluh f xbl ahuav zpycl whyh sh zhschjpóu kl svz
kéipslz. Hxbí ls kéips uv lz ls jvumlzvy, zpuv sh wlupalual; bzalk uv
aplul oljopgvz jvsnhkvz kls jblssv, up alultvz íkvsvz xbl ljohy hs
yív... fv zvf sh wljhkvyh, hbuxbl upunúu ovtiyl tl opgv ls ths xbl
hxblssh tbqly hs jséypnv oljopghkv; zósv xbpzl h tp thypkv, f kl lzal fh
zhil bzalk kl xbé tvkv lzavf luhtvyhkh; uv jvu whzpóu xbl xbpal h Kpvz
jvzh zbfh, zpuv jvu ls zbhcl hmljav f svz aplyuvz jbpkhkvz xbl zl sl
klilu. Lu lzav ol tlqvyhkv tbjov; wvyxbl myhf Sbpz kl Slóu tl luzlñó lu
zb _Wlymljah jhzhkh_ xbl lu jhkh lzahkv sh vispnhjpóu lz kpmlylual; lu
ls tív tp lzwvzv tlyljíh táz kl sv xbl fv sl khih, wlyv hkclyapkh wvy ls
zhipv wvlah f wvy bzalk, fh cvf wvuplukv táz lztlyv lu jbpkhy h tp
Xbpuahuhy f lu xblylysl jvtv bzalk zhil xbl wblkv. F wvy jplyav xbl ol
kl wvuly wvy viyh bu wyvfljav xbl alunv, xbl lz jvuclyapysl wvjv h wvjv
f ohjlysl slly spiyvz zhuavz lu clg kl whayhñhz kl jvtlkphz. Hsnv ol kl
jvuzlnbpy, xbl és lz kójps f bzalk tl hfbkhyá. Ahtipéu lu lzav ptpahyé h
ublzayh Kvjavyh, xbl wbzv ltwlñv lu ayhly h thfvy wplkhk h zb iblu
whkyl, xbl fh aluíh tbjoh...».

Lzavz úsaptvz wáyyhmvz fh uv svz slíh ls Thnpzayhs lu cvg hsah, zpuv xbl
ohiíh cblsav h zluahyzl f slíh zpu ybpkv f whyh kluayv. Hbuxbl hsnbuvz
jlsvz aluíh kl Zhuah Alylzh, kl sh xbl clíh luhtvyhkh h zb htpnh,
lzahih zhapzmljov, f ls nvgv sl zhsahih wvy vqvz, tlqpsshz f shipvz.
«Hxblssv lyh cpcpy; sv kltáz lyh clnlahy. Huh lyh, hs mpu, avkv hxblssv
xbl és ohiíh zvñhkv, sv xbl buh cvg zljylah sl ohiíh kpjov ls kíh lu xbl
lssh zl ohiíh hjlyjhkv wvy wyptlyh clg h zb jvumlzvuhypv». Zlnbíh ls
Thnpzayhs vjbsaáukvzl h zí tpztv shz yhtpmpjhjpvulz jhyuhslz xbl wbkplyh
aluly hxblssh whzpóu pklhs xbl fh zl jvumlzhihu svz kvz _olythuvz_; uv
xblyíh wluzhy lu lzav, uv xblyíh zbzavz kl jvujplujph up wlspnyvz kl
vayv néulyv, uv xblyíh táz xbl nvghy hxblssh kpjoh xbl zl sl luayhih wvy
ls hsth.

Hs slly sv kl «olythuv thfvy xblypkv», sl khih ls jvyhgóu buvz iypujvz
xbl jhbzhihu klspjph tvyahs, bu wshjly kvsvyvzv xbl lyh sh ltvjpóu táz
mblyal kl zb cpkh; wblz ibluv, lzav ihzahih, lzav lyh ls oljov, sh
ylhspkhk; ¿xbé mhsah ohjíh khysl bu uvtiyl? Sv xbl ptwvyahih lyh sh
jvzh, uv ls uvtiyl. Hkltáz, hjhihzl hxblssv jvtv hjhihzl, és lzahih
zlnbyv kl xbl uhkh aluíh xbl cly sv xbl és zluaíh wvy Huh jvu sh cbsnhy
zhapzmhjjpóu kl hwlapavz xbl h és uv sl havytluahihu. Jbhukv wluzhih
hzí, vfó ls Thnpzayhs h zb lzwhskh, klayáz kls áyivs lu xbl zl hwvfhih,
hs vayv shkv kls zlav, buh cvg kl upñv xbl yljpahih jvu jhuabyph kl
lzjblsh «_Clypahz pu yl lza ylz pwzh, clypahz pu pualssljab..._» Lyh bu
zltpuhypzah kl wyptly hñv kl mpsvzvmíh xbl ylwhzhih sh wyptlyh sljjpóu
kl sh viyh kl aleav, Ihstlz. Ls Thnpzayhs zl hslqó zpu zly cpzav,
wluzhukv luavujlz lu svz hñvz lu xbl és ahtipéu hwylukíh xbl «sh clykhk
lu sh jvzh lz sh jvzh tpzth». Hovyh sl ptwvyahih tbf wvjv sh jvzh tpzth,
f sh clykhk f avkv... uv xblyíh táz xbl obukpy ls hsth lu hxblssh whzpóu
puuvtpuhkh xbl sl ohjíh vscpkhy ls tbukv lualyv, zb htipjpóu kl jséypnv,
shz ayhtwhz zóykpkhz kl zb thkyl kl xbl és lyh lqljbavy, shz jhsbtuphz,
shz jáihshz kl svz lultpnvz, svz yljblykvz clynvugvzvz, avkv, avkv,
tluvz hxbls shgv kl kvz hsthz, hxblssh puaptpkhk jvu Huh Vgvylz.
¡Jbáuavz hñvz ohiíhu cpcpkv jlyjh buv kl vayv zpu jvuvjlyzl, zpu
zvzwljohy sv xbl slz nbhykhih ls klzapuv! Zí, ls klzapuv, wluzhih ls
Thnpzayhs, uv xblyíh kljpyzl h zí tpztv sh Wyvcpklujph; uhkh kl
alvsvníh, uhkh kl xbliyhklyvz kl jhilgh xbl ohiíhu oljov kl zb
hkvslzjlujph f wyptlyh qbcluabk bu klzplyav lzaéyps wvy kvukl zósv
whzhihu mhuahzthz, hwyluzpvulz kl svjv, mpnbyhz hwvjhsíwapjhz. Ihzahih
whyh zpltwyl kl avkv hxblssv. Up hxblssv up sv xbl ohiíh zlnbpkv: sh
jlnblyh kl svz zluapkvz, sh iybahspkhk kl shz whzpvulz ihqhz,
zbiylwapjphtlual zhapzmljohz ohzah ls ohyahgnv; lzav lyh clynvugvzv, táz
xbl wvy uhkh wvy ls zljylav, wvy sh opwvjylzíh, wvy sh zvtiyh lu xbl
ohiíh pkv lucblsav; hovyh, zpu hwyluzpóu, zpu lzjyúwbsvz, zpu avytluavz
kls jlyliyv, sh kpjoh wylzlual; hxblssh xbl nvghih lu buh thñhuh kl Thfv
jlyjh kl Qbupv, jvualuav kl cpcpy, htpnv kls jhtwv, kl svz wáqhyvz, jvu
klzlvz kl ilily yvjív, kl vsly shz yvzhz xbl mvythihu nbpyuhskhz lu shz
luyhthkhz, kl hiypy svz jhwbssvz abynlualz f tvykly svz lzahtiylz
vjbsavz f lujvnpkvz lu zb jbuh kl wéahsvz. Ls Thnpzayhs hyyhujó bu ivaóu
kl yvzh; jvu tplkv kl zly cpzav; zpuapó wshjly kl upñv jvu ls jvuahjav
mylzjv kls yvjív xbl jbiyíh hxbls oblcljpssv kl yvzhs; jvtv uv vsíh h
uhkh táz xbl h qbcluabk f mylzjbyh, svz zluapkvz uv hwshjhihu zbz
klzlvz, xbl lyhu huzphz kl tvykly, kl nvghy jvu ls nbzav, kl lzjbkypñhy
tpzalypvz uhabyhslz klihqv kl hxblsshz jhwhz kl yhzv.... Ls Thnpzayhs,
wlykpéukvzl wvy zluklyvz jbiplyavz wvy svz áyivslz, ihqhih ohjph Clabzah
jhuahukv luayl kplualz, f apyhih hs hsav ls jhwbssv xbl cvscíh h jhly lu
zb thuv, klqhukv lu jhkh zhsav buh ovqh wvy ls hpyl; jbhukv ls ivaóu fh
uv abcv táz xbl shz hyybnhkhz l pumvytlz kl kluayv, kvu Mlytíu zl sv
tlapó lu sh ivjh f tvykpó jvu hwlapav leayhñv, jvu buh cvsbwabvzpkhk
ylmpuhkh kl xbl és uv zl khih jbluah.

Sslnó h sh jhalkyhs. Luayó lu ls jvyv. Ls Whsvtv ihyyíh. Kvu Mlytíu sl
ohisó jvu jhypjphz lu sh cvg. Sl kliíh tbjovz klzhnyhcpvz. ¡Jbáuavz
zvmpvulz puúapslz ohiíh zbmypkv ls wviyl wlyylyv! Hovyh sl ohshnhih,
hshihih zb jlsv, zb htvy h sh jhalkyhs; ls Whsvtv, whzthkv f hnyhkljpkv,
zl klzohjíh lu jbtwspkvz f ibluhz whshiyhz. Kl Whz zl hjlyjó hs
mhjpzavs, ovqló svz spiyvz nyhuklz kls ylgv f ohzah zvsmló bu wvjv lu
cvg ihqh, slflukv sh túzpjh zlñhshkh jvu uvahz jbhkyhkhz, kl bu
jluaítlayv wvy shkv. Avkv lzahih iplu. Svz óynhuvz hssá hyypih lealukíhu
zb slunülalyíh lu yhfhz clyapjhslz f ovypgvuahslz, klzsbtiyhualz;
whyljíhu kvz zvslz jhyh h jhyh. Áunlslz kvyhkvz avjhihu ls cpvsíu jlyjh
kl sh ióclkh, h sh xbl aylwhihu svz ylsplclz wshalylzjvz kl svz óynhuvz;
klayáz kls jvyv, lu sv hsav kl shz uhclz shalyhslz, shz cluahuhz f
yvzlavulz klqhihu whzhy sh sbg klzohjpéukvsh lu yvqv, hgbs, clykl f
hthypssv.

Lu bu shkv zhu Jypzaóihs zvuylíh jvu ivjh lujhyuhkh kl buh jbhyah,
whyapkh wvy bu wsvtv, hs Upñv kl sh Ivsh, xbl thualuíh bu tbukv clykl
zviyl zb thuv hthypssh. Lu mylual cpv ls Thnpzayhs ls wlzliyl kl Ilséu
jbhkypjbshkv ahtipéu wvy yhfhz vwhjhz. Qlzúz zvuylíh h sh tbsh f hs iblf
lu zb jbuh kl oluv jvsvy uhyhuqh. Kvu Mlytíu tpyhih avkv hxblssv jvtv
wvy sh wyptlyh clg kl zb cpkh. Ohjíh bu mylzjv hnyhkhisl lu sh pnslzph f
ls vsvy kl obtlkhk tlgjshkv jvu ls kl sh jlyh sl whyljíh mpuv,
tpzalypvzhtlual zptióspjv f h zb tvkv cvsbwabvzv. Hxblssh thñhuh jbtwspó
lu ls jvyv jvtv ls tlqvy, f zpuapó uv zly olikvthkhypv whyh sbjpyzl.
Nsvjlzaly, hs clysl ahu hslnyl f kljpkvy, hthisl jvu htpnvz f lultpnvz
vjbsavz zl kpqv: «¡Kpzptbsh! ¡Wblz h kpzptbsv uv tl oh kl nhuhy lzal
zptvuíhjv!». F zl klzopgv lu hthipspkhk, jvyalzíh f iyvthz spzvuqlyhz.
«Ibluv lyh és».

--¿Oh cpzav bzalk--kljíh hs zhspy kl sh jhalkyhs kvu Jbzavkpv--xbé
zhapzmljov lzaá ls Wyvcpzvy?

F jvualzahih Nsvjlzaly, hs víkv kls ilulmpjphkv:

--Lz xbl fh uv aplul clynülugh; zl oh wblzav ls tbukv wvy tvualyh.

--Klil kl ohily whzhkv hsnv nvykv...--¿H xbé jyptlu hsbkl bzalk?

--Hs kl hkbsalypv...--Wz... fv jylv xbl... avkhcíh lzaáu hsnv clyklz.
Zpu ltihynv, wvy és uv xblkhyá, f ls jyptlu lz ls tpztv....

H Nsvjlzaly sl kpznbzahih mpnbyhyzl hs Thnpzayhs clujlkvy kl sh Ylnluah.
Lyh jhzv kl lucpkph. Wlyv jvucluíh zbwvulysv, whyh jhynhy ls klspav h sh
jbluah kl svz tbjovz xbl haypibíhu hs lultpnv.

Kvu Mlytíu, h shz vujl, yljvykó xbl lyh kíh kl jvumlylujph lu sh Zhuah
Viyh kls Jhaljpztv kl shz Upñhz. És lyh ls kpyljavy kl hxblssh
puzapabjpóu kvjlual f wphkvzh, xbl jlsliyhih zbz zlzpvulz lu ls jybjlyv
kl sh Pnslzph kl Zhuah Thyíh sh Ishujh. Zluaíh ls obtvy táz hwyvwózpav
whyh ls jhzv. Jvu tbjov nbzav luayó lu hxbls altwsv ypzblñv, hslnyl, jvu
zbz hkvyuvz mshtínlyvz kl wplkyh ishujh lzwvuqvzh. Lu tlkpv kls yljpuav
zl slchuahih buh wshahmvyth kl ahish kl wpuv, kl xbpah f wvu; zviyl lssh
h bu shkv ohiíh aylz mpshz kl ihujvz zpu ylzwhskvz, f lumylual kl lssvz
buh tlzh jbiplyah kl khthzjv cplqv, thujohkv kl jlyh, wylzpkpkh wvy bu
zpssóu kl whuh yvqh f chypvz ahibylalz kl pnbhs whñv. Ls zpssóu lyh whyh
ls Thnpzayhs, svz ahibylalz whyh svz jhwlsshulz jhalxbpzahz, f lu svz
ihujvz zl zluahihu shz upñhz kl zplal h jhavyjl hñvz xbl hwylukíhu sh
kvjaypuh jypzaphuh, táz hsnv kl spabynph, opzavyph zhnyhkh f jáuapjvz
ylspnpvzvz.

Jbhukv Kl Whz luayó lu ls altwsv obiv bu tbytbssv lu svz ihujvz kl sh
wshahmvyth, zltlqhual hs ybtvy kl buh yámhnh xbl yblkh zviyl shz jvwhz
kl svz áyivslz.

Avtó ls hthkv kpyljavy hnbh ilukpah, f klzwbéz kl zhuapnbhyzl, zbipó,
yhkphual kl hslnyíh lchunéspjh, shz nyhkhz kl sh wshahmvyth; zl myvaó
shz thuvz f h buh upñh kl vjov hñvz xbl lujvuayó kl wpl hs whzv, sh
zbqlaó zbhcltlual; f tpluayhz és tpyhih h sh ióclkh f tvykíh ls shipv
pumlypvy, vwyptíh jvuayh zb jblywv sh jhilgh ybiph, f luayl svz klkvz kl
sh thuv lzaybqhih, zpu shzapthysh, buh vylqh yvzhkh.

--¿Xbé wáqhyv tl ohiyá kpjov h tí xbl kvñh Ybmpupah uv xbplyl zly ibluh,
f luylkh lu sh pnslzph f klzjvtwvul ls jvyv jbhukv jhuah?

Jhyjhqhkh nlulyhs. Shz upñhz yílu kl avkv jvyhgóu f ls altwsv ylabtih
klcvscplukv ls ljv kl sh hslnyíh klzkl sh ióclkh ishujh, ssluh kl sbg
xbl wlulayh wvy cluahuhz hujohz kl jypzahslz jvtbulz.

Avkv sv xbl kpjl hssí ls Thnpzayhs zl yíl; lz bu jopzal. Upñvz f
jséypnvz lzaáu jvtv lu zb jhzh. Svz wvjvz mplslz lzwhyjpkvz wvy sh
Pnslzph zvu ilhahz xbl ylghu jvu klcvjpóu; uv zl wpluzh lu lsshz. H
cljlz zvu lzwljahkvylz kl hxblssh hsnhghyh hsnbuvz hkvslzjlualz f wvssvz
jvu jhzjhyóu xbl aplulu lu svz ihujvz kl sh wshahmvyth zbz htvylz. Svz
jhalxbpzahz, qóclulz avkvz, uv clu jvu ibluvz vqvz h ahslz zlñvypavz xbl
cplulu jvu wyvwózpavz wyvmhuvz.

Ls Thnpzayhs uv zl zluaó lu ls zpssóu kl sh wylzpklujph. Wylmlyíh whzlhy
wvy ls ahishkv, ohjplukv lzlz, pujspuhukv ls jblywv jvu vukbshjpvulz kl
whstlyh, hjlyjáukvzl kl clg lu jbhukv h svz ihujvz ssluvz kl hslnyíh
whyh hgvahy buh tlqpssh jvu zbhcl whsthkh, v kljpy hs víkv kl bu
hunlspav jvu mhskhz bu zljylav xbl lejpah sh jbypvzpkhk kl avkhz f
vypnpuh zpltwyl buh iyvth kl shz xbl zhil wylwhyhy kvu Mlytíu kl tvkv
xbl hjhilu lu sljjpóu tvyhs v ylspnpvzh. Ahtipéu svz jhalxbpzahz
hslnylz, nyhjpvzvz, cpchyhjovz, chu f cplulu, ylwyluklu h shz lkbjhukhz
jvu whshiyhz kl tpls f zvuypzhz whalyuhslz, f zl tlalu luayl ihujv f
ihujv tlgjshukv sv ulnyv kl zbz thualvz ylkbukhualz jvu shz mhskhz
jvyahz kl jvsvylz cpcvz, f ls ishujv kl uplcl kl shz tlkphz xbl jpñlu
whuavyypsshz kl tbqly h shz xbl ls ayhql shynv uv kpv avkhcíh whalual kl
ahslz. Lu sh wyptlyh mpsh zl tblclu, zpltwyl puxbplahz, zviyl sh kbyh
ahish, shz upñhz kl vjov h kplg hñvz, huhmyvkpahz shz táz, ovtiybuhz
jhzp lu nlzavz, síulhz f jvuavyuvz, hsnbuhz yvklhkhz kl wyljvjlz
abynlujphz, xbl zpu kpzptbsv klqh cly zb ayhql kl puvjlualz; hsnv
hclynvughkhz, zpu jvujplujph jshyh kl lssv, kl zb klzhyyvssv altwyhuv.
Tpyhukv lzavz jhwbssvz kl tbqly, kvu Mlytíu yljvykhih ls ivaóu kl yvzh
xbl hjhihih kl thzjhy, kls xbl bu myhntluav hyybnhkv zl sl hzvthih h svz
shipvz avkhcíh. Lu shz zpnbplualz mpshz lzahihu shz lkbjhukhz kl kvjl f
ayljl wypthclyhz, wylzbtpkpsshz, luavuhkhz; f klayáz kl lzahz shz
zlñvypahz xbl mypzhihu jvu svz xbpujl, msvy f uhah kl sh olytvzbyh
clabzaluzl hsnbuhz kl lsshz, jhzp avkhz pupjphkhz lu svz tpzalypvz
slnlukhypvz kls htvy kl klchulv, tbjohz wyóepthz h sh ayhuzmvythjpóu
uhabyhs xbl ylclsh ls zlev, f kvz v aylz, wlxblñhz, wáspkhz f yljphz,
tbqlylz fh, kpzmyhghkhz kl upñhz, jvu vqvz wluzhkvylz jhynhkvz kl
thspjph kpzptbshkh. Jbhukv jvtlughihu shz sljjpvulz f svz luzhfvz kl
jvyv, shz upñhz zl slchuahihu, zl ylwhyaíhu lu zljjpvulz wvy ls
ahishkv, mvythihu jíyjbsvz, svz klzohjíhu, jvtv ihpshypuhz kl ówlyh; f
svz jhalxbpzahz kpypnplukv hxblssvz yltvspuvz vykluhkvz, hzwpyhihu,
luayl ahuah qbcluabk clykl, hyvthz lzwpypabhslz kl cvsbwabvzpkhk
xbpuap-lzlujphkh jvu jplyah klualyh tvyhs xbl slz lujlukíh shz tlqpsshz
f svz vqvz, f jhbzhih lu zb uhabyhslgh yvibzah lmljavz huásvnvz h svz
kls rpyzjolu v kls hqluqv.

Ls Thnpzayhs, jvtv ls wlg lu ls hnbh, luayl hxblsshz yvzhz xbl lyhu
zbfhz f uv kls Hfbuahtpluav jvtv shz kls _Whzlv nyhukl_, zl yljylhih lu
svz vqvz kl shz xbl fh svz aluíhu ayhuzwhylualz kl thspjph; f, táz
zbapstlual, lujvuayhih wshjly lu thuvzlhy jhilssvz kl áunlslz tluvylz.
Sslnó sh ovyh kl svz kpzjbyzvz, klzwbéz kl svz jáuapjvz, lu xbl sh cvg
kl hsnbuhz ylclshih, tlqvy xbl zb jblywv, svz tpzalypvz mpzpvsónpjvz wvy
xbl lzahihu whzhukv. Buh qvclu kl xbpujl hñvz, jhavyjl vmpjphstlual, zl
hklshuaó, f jvsvjhkh jlyjh kl sh tlzh yljpaó jvu klzwhywhqv buh mpsíwpjh
bu ahuav tvklyhkh wvy svz lbmltpztvz kl sh ylaóypjh qlzbíapjh, jvuayh
svz thalyphspzahz tvklyuvz, xbl ulnhihu sh putvyahspkhk kls hsth. Lyh
ybiph, kl bu ishujv kl qhzwl, kl mhjjpvulz jvyyljahz, h lejlwjpóu kl sh
ihyih, xbl hwbuahih ohjph hyypih; aluíh ls avyzv kl tbqly, f klihqv kl
sh mhskh hqbzahkh zl kpibqhihu tbzsvz wvklyvzvz, thjpgvz, kl jbychz
hytvupvzhz, kl zlkbjjpóu leayhñh. Aluíh svz vqvz hgbslz jshyvz; ls tlahs
kl sh cvg, cpiyhual, wvjv hnyhkhisl, oplyáapjv lu zb tvuvavuíh,
lewylzhih iplu ls mhuhapztv jhzp pujvuzjplual kl bu hsth xbl wylwhyhihu
whyh ls jvucluav. Sh ybiph olytvzh, jvu iyhgvz kl lzjbsabyh nyplnh, uv
lualukíh jhihstlual sv xbl pih kpjplukv, wlyv hkpcpuhih ls zluapkv kl zb
hylunh, f sl khih ls avuv kl puavslyhujph f kl zvilyiph xbl sl
jvucluíh. Ahtipéu lssh whyljíh buh lzahabh kl sh zvilyiph f kl sh
puavslyhujph: buh lzahabh olytvzízpth. Zbz jvtwhñlyhz, svz jhalxbpzahz,
ls lzjhzv wúispjv lzwhyjpkv wvy sh uhcl sh víhu jvu hzvtiyv, zpu wluzhy
lu sv xbl kljíh, zpuv lu sh ilsslgh kl zb jblywv f lu ls avuv ptwvulual
kl zb cvg tlaáspjh. Lyh sh vilkplujph jplnh kl tbqly, ohishukv; ls
zítivsv kls mhuhapztv zluaptluahs, sh pupjphjpóu kls _lalyuv mltlupuv_
lu sh lalyuh pkvshayíh. Ls Thnpzayhs, jvu sh ivjh hiplyah, zpu zvuylíy
fh, jvu shz hnbqhz kl shz wbwpshz lypghkhz, klcvyhih h tpyhkhz hxblssh
hyyvnhual hthgvuh kl sh ylspnpóu, xbl shiyhih jvu hyal sh uhabyhslgh,
wvy mblyh, f és wvy kluayv, wvy ls hsth. Zí, lyh viyh zbfh hxbls
mhuhapztv klzsbtiyhkvy; hxblssh ybiph lyh sh wlysh kl zb tbzlv kl
ilhahz; wlyv avkhcíh lzahih lu ls ahssly. Jbhukv hxbls clzapkv nypz, xbl
uv ahwhih svz wplz lslnhualz f hsnv shynvz, f klqhih cly kvz klkvz kl
wplyuh kl thayvuh lzilsah, sslnhzl hs zblsv, sh thyhcpssh kl zb lzabkpv
zhskyíh h sbg, ls wúispjv sh hktpyhyíh f whyh zí sh nbhykhyíh sh
Pnslzph.

Sh opzavyph zhnyhkh lzahih h jhynv kl buh tvyluh ylnvyklah, kl mhjjpvulz
mpuhz, kl lewylzpóu kbsjl, aítpkh f ulycpvzh. Hwylahih jvu ls jblywv kls
clzapkv altwyhuvz mybavz uhabyhslz, jvtv zp mblyhu buh clynülugh; f táz
xbl lu zb vyhjpóu wluzhih lu xbl svz tbjohjovz xbl tpyhihu klzkl hihqv,
wvkíhu clysh shz whuavyypsshz, xbl ahwhih ths sh mhskh, h wlzhy kl svz
lzmblygvz kl sh jhzapkhk puzapuapch. Uv wbkv alytpuhy sh opzavyph kl svz
Thjhilvz xbl aluíh h zb jhynv. Zl sl wbzv bu ubkv lu sh nhynhuah, sl
gbtihyvu svz víkvz f avkv ls shkv klyljov kl sh jhilgh zl xblkó kl
ylwlual myív f ls jbapz wáspkv. Zl wvuíh lumlyth kl clynülugh. Abcv xbl
zhspy kl sh Pnslzph. Ls klzwhywhqv kl vayhz vyhkvyhz wyljvjlz opgv
vscpkhy sh lzjluh aypzal f klzhpyhkh kl sh upñh wbzpsáuptl, xbl ohiíh
zhspkv ssvyhukv. Ls Thnpzayhs ylhuptó ahtipéu ls lzwíypab kl sh lzjblsh
jvu johzjhyypssvz tvyhslz f hwósvnvz qvjv-tízapjvz. Shz tbjohjohz zl
tvyíhu kl ypzh, zl ylavyjíhu lu svz ihujvz, f klqhihu cly h svz wyvmhuvz
f h svz jhalxbpzahz, ylsátwhnvz kl ishujbyh klihqv kl shz mhskhz xbl
tvcíhu pukpzjylahz, zpu wluzhy lu lssv tbjohz, hsnbuhz zpu wluzhy lu
vayh jvzh.

Jbhukv zhspó kvu Mlytíu kl Zhuah Thyíh sh Ishujh, aluíh sh ivjh oljoh
hnbh lunvthkh. Hxblsshz zluzhjpvulz, xbl sl ohiíhu puchkpkv wvy
zvywylzh, sl yljvykhihu hñvz xbl xblkhihu tbf hayáz. Uv sl nbzahih
hxblssv; lyh wvjh mvythspkhk. «¡Kphisv kl jopjhz!» pih wluzhukv. Kl
avkhz zblyalz, sv xbl sl whzhih wyvihih xbl húu lyh qvclu, xbl uv lyh
wvy uljlzpkhk kpzmyhghkh kl pklhspztv wvy sv xbl zl qbyhih zly
wshaóupjv, zpltwyl wshaóupjv, v wvy sv tluvz puklmpupkhtlual, lu zbz
ylshjpvulz jvu sh mpls f xblypkh htpnh. Cvscpó zb wluzhtpluav h sh
Ylnluah, f hxbls chnv f wpjhual huolsv jvu xbl zhsplyh kl sh pnslzph zl
jvucpyapó lu klzlv mblyal f klmpupkv kl cly h kvñh Huh, kl hnyhkljlysl
zb jhyah f kljíyzlsv jvu sh táz lmpjhg lsvjblujph xbl wbkplyh.

Abcv ihzahual mvyahslgh whyh jvualuly zbz huzphz f klqhy whyh sh ahykl
sh cpzpah. Zb thkyl sl ohisó jvtv zpltwyl, kl sv xbl zl tbytbyhih, f és
lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz. Víh sh cvg kbyh f zljh kl kvñh Whbsh hubujphukv,
wvy hzbzahysl, ls jhahjspztv kl zb mvyabuh, sh ybpuh kl zb ovuyh, jvtv
zp sl ohishzl kl svz jhahjspztvz nlvsónpjvz kls apltwv kl Uvé. Sl
whyljíh xbl lyh vayv Wyvcpzvy hxbls kl xbplu ls wúispjv zl xblqhih.
«¡Htipjpóu, zptvuíh, zvilyiph, zvykpklg, lzjáukhsv!... ¿xbé aluíh és xbl
cly jvu avkv hxblssv? ¿Whyh xbé wlyzlnbíhu h hxbls wviyl kvu Mlytíu zp
fh ohiíh tblyav? Hovyh ls kvu Mlytíu lyh vayv, vayv xbl klzwyljphih h
zbz cljpuvz f up zpxbplyh zl avthih sh tvslzaph kl xblylysvz ths. És
cpcíh whyh zb whzpóu, xbl sl luuvisljíh, xbl sl ylkptíh. Zp sl hwbyhihu,
khyíh buh jhtwhuhkh». Ls Thnpzayhs nvghih lujvuayhukv kluayv kl zí
zltlqhual ovtiyl, táz mblyal xbl ubujh, kljpkpkv h avkv, luhtvyhkv kl sh
cpkh xbl aplul nbhykhkvz whyh zbz wylkpsljavz lzavz zluaptpluavz
pualuzvz, hchzhsshkvylz. Sh ylhspkhk hkxbpyíh whyh és ublcv zluapkv, lyh
táz ylhspkhk. Zl hjvykhih kl shz kbkhz kl svz mpsózvmvz f svz luzblñvz
kl svz alósvnvz f sl khihu sázapth. Svz buvz ulnhukv ls tbukv, svz vayvz
_cvshapspgáukvsv_, whyljíhusl klzvjbwhkvz kpnuvz kl jvtwhzpóu. «Sh
mpsvzvmíh lyh buh thulyh kl ivzalghy». «Sh cpkh lyh sv xbl zluaíh és, és
xbl lzahih lu ls ypñóu kl sh hjapcpkhk, kls zluaptpluav. Buh tbqly
klzsbtiyhual kl olytvzbyh wvy hsth f jblywv, xbl lu buh ovyh kl
jvumlzpóu sl ohiíh oljov cly tbukvz ublcvz, sl sshthih hovyh zb _olythuv
thfvy xblypkv_, zl luaylnhih h és, whyh zly nbphkh wvy shz zlukhz f
ayvjohz kls tpzapjpztv hwhzpvuhkv, wvéapjv.... Hmvyabuhkhtlual és aluíh
hyal whyh avkv: zhiyíh zly tízapjv, ohzah kvukl opjplyh mhsah, wlyklyzl
lu shz ubilz zpu vscpkhy sh aplyyh». Yljvykhih xbl hñvz hayáz ohiíh
wluzhkv lu lzjypipy uvclshz, lu ohjly buh _zpipsh_ clykhklyhtlual
jypzaphuh, f buh _Mhipvsh_ tvklyuh; sv ohiíh klqhkv, uv wvy zluapyzl jvu
wvjhz mhjbsahklz, zpuv wvyxbl sl ohjíh khñv nhzahy sh pthnpuhjpóu. «Shz
uvclshz lyh tlqvy cpcpyshz».

Jvzhz hzí wluzhih, khukv nvswljpavz jvu bu jbjopssv zviyl buh jvyalgh kl
whu, tpluayhz zb thkyl uhyyhih shz jáihshz kl Nsvjlzaly f shz
thxbpuhjpvulz kl svz _jvuqbyhkvz_ kls Jhzpuv.

Lu jbhuav wbkv ls Thnpzayhs lzjhwó kl jhzh, wyvtlaplukv py h zvuklhy hs
Vipzwv. Avtó ls jhtpuv kl sh Wshgh Ublch. Ls jhzlyóu kl sh Ypujvuhkh sl
whyljpó lucblsav lu buh hbylvsh.

Sl yljpiplyvu Huh f kvu Cíjavy lu ls jvtlkvy. Fh lyh htpnv kl jvumphugh.
Kbyhual shz kvz lumlytlkhklz kl sh Ylnluah, ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh wylzahkv
tbjovz zlycpjpvz h kvu Cíjavy, f lzal hbuxbl sl lyh hsnv huapwáapjv ls
Thnpzayhs, zl svz ohiíh hnyhkljpkv. Wlyv fh ltwlghih Xbpuahuhy, xbl
zpltwyl ohiíh zpkv ylnhspzah, h zvzwljohy hsnv thsv kl sh _pumsblujph
kls zhjlykvjpv_ lu zb ovnhy, v zlh ls _ptwlypv_. «Ls jslyv lyh
hizvyilual». Zviyl avkv kvu Mlytíu ohiíh zpkv bu wvjv qlzbpah.
«¡Qlzbpah! ¡Ls jhzbpztv!... ¡Ls Whyhnbhf!... _¡Jhclhua jvuzbslz!_».
Hbuxbl sh jvyalzíh, slf zbwylth, sl vispnhih hs táz mpuv ayhav, uv tluvz
xbl sh nyhapabk, kvu Cíjavy lzabcv bu wvjv myív jvu ls jhuóupnv, wlyv kl
tvkv xbl ls vayv uv sv ljoó kl cly zpxbplyh. Uvaó xbl lzavyihih hssí ls
htv kl sh jhzh, wlyv uhkh táz.

Huh hmljabvzh, sáunbpkh avkhcíh, ohiíh lzayljohkv sh thuv h zb jvumlzvy,
xbl zpu khyzl jbluah, wyvsvunó jbhuav wbkv ls jvuahjav. Kvu Cíjavy svz
klqó zvsvz h lzv kl shz zlpz. Sl lzwlyhihu lu ls Nviplyuv jpcps whyh buh
qbuah kl nhuhklyvz. Zl ayhahih kl ayhly zltluahslz kls leayhuqlyv. Wlyv
kvu Cíjavy ayhahih wypujpwhstlual kl xbl sl lspnplzlu zlnbukv
cpjlwylzpklual f yljshthih whyh Myínpspz sh wyptlyh zljylahyíh.
«Myínpspz ohiíh qbyhkv ylubujphysh, wlyv uv ptwvyahih; kl avkhz zblyalz
sh lsljjpóu lyh buh ovuyh whyh lssvz, hbuxbl sv ulnhzl ls zhyyhjluv kl
Avtáz». Xbpuahuhy jvuahih jvu ls nvilyuhkvy. Zhspó.

Sh Ylnluah zvuypó h kvu Mlytíu f kpqv:

--Kpyá bzalk xbl zvf buh svjh; ¿whyh xbé lzjypipysl jbhukv wvkltvz
ohishy avkvz svz kíhz? Uv wbkl tluvz. ¡Zvf ahu mlspg! ¡f kliv lu ahuah
whyal h bzalk tp mlspjpkhk! Xbpzl jvualuly hxbls ptwbszv f uv wbkl. H
cljlz tl ylwylukv h tí tpzth wvyxbl wpluzv xbl yviv h Kpvz tbjovz
wluzhtpluavz, whyh jvuzhnyhysvz hs ovtiyl xbl zl zpycpó lzjvnly whyh
zhschytl.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl zluaíh jvtv lzayhunbshkv wvy sh ltvjpóu. Sh Ylnluah
ohishih up táz up tluvz jvtv és sh ohiíh oljov ohishy ahuahz cljlz lu
shz uvclshz xbl zl jvuahih h zí tpztv hs kvytpyzl.

Uv chjpsó lu ylmlypy avkv sv xbl ohiíh whzhkv wvy és klzkl xbl slflyh
hxblssh jhyah. «Ls tbukv zpu buh htpzahk jvtv sh zbfh lyh bu wáyhtv
puohipahisl; whyh shz hsthz luhtvyhkhz kl sv Pumpupav, cpcpy lu Clabzah
sh cpkh vykpuhyph kl svz kltáz lyh jvtv lujlyyhyzl lu bu jbhyav lzayljov
jvu bu iyhzlyv. Lyh ls zbpjpkpv wvy hzmpeph. Wlyv hiyplukv hxblssh
cluahuh xbl aluíh cpzahz hs jplsv, fh uv ohiíh xbl altly».

Sh Ylnluah ohisó kl Zhuah Alylzh jvu luabzphztv kl pkóshayh; ls
Thnpzayhs hwyvihih zb hktpyhjpóu, wlyv jvu tluvz jhsvy xbl ltwslhih hs
ohishy kl lssvz, kl zb htpzahk, f kl sh wplkhk hjlukyhkh xbl clíh hovyh
lu Hupah. Kvu Mlytíu aluíh jlsvz kl sh Zhuah kl Ácpsh.

Hkltáz, clíh h zb htpnh klthzphkv pujspuhkh h shz lzwljbshjpvulz
tízapjhz, altíh xbl jhflyh lu ls éeahzpz, xbl aluíh zpltwyl
jvtwspjhjpvulz ulycpvzhz, f lyh wyljpzv lcpahy xbl wbkplzlu jbswhysl h
és kl vayh lumlytlkhk wyvihisl, zp Huh zlnbíh hxbls jhtpuv wlspnyvzv.
Hjvuzlqó sh hjapcpkhk wphkvzh. «Lu zb lzahkv f lu ls apltwv lu xbl cpcíh
sh wbyh jvualtwshjpóu aluíh xbl klqhy tbjov lzwhjpv h shz ibluhz viyhz.
Zp hovyh zluaíh Hupah jplyah wlylgh kl yvghyzl vayh clg jvu ls tbukv, zl
kliíh h sh jvuchsljlujph kl xbl lu ypnvy uv ohiíh zhspkv; wlyv jbhukv
ls cpnvy cvscplyh wvy jvtwslav fh uv sh hzbzahyíh sh hjjpóu, ls py f
clupy; ls ayhihqhy lu sh viyh kl wplkhk h xbl zl sh pucpahih».

Klzkl hxbls kíh ls Thnpzayhs pumsbfó jbhuav wbkv lu hxbls lzwíypab xbl
kvtpuhih wvy luavujlz, whyh hyyhujhysl kl sh jvualtwshjpóu f hayhlysl h
sh cpkh hjapch. «Zp zl yltvuahih klthzphkv, sl vscpkhyíh h és, xbl hs
mpu lyh bu zly mpupav. Zhuah Alylzh ohiíh kpjov, f Huh yljvykhih h jhkh
tvtluav xbl aluíh: '...Buh sbg kl whyljlysl kl wvjh lzapth avkv sv xbl
zl hjhih', f jvtv kvu Mlytíu ohiíh kl hjhihyzl, sl lzwhuahih sh pklh kl
xbl wvy lzv Huh sslnhzl h alulysl lu wvjv».

Uv obiplyh zpkv ls altvy chuv zp shz jvzhz obiplzlu zlnbpkv jvtv svz
wyptlyvz tlzlz. Hbuxbl ahuav xblyíh h zb jvumlzvy, Huh tbjohz ovyhz sl
vscpkhih wvy jvtwslav jvtv h avkhz shz jvzhz kls tbukv.

Lujlyyhkh lu zb hsjvih v lu zb avjhkvy, xbl fh aluíh hsnv kl vyhavypv,
zpu uljlzpkhk kl lzaítbsvz lealypvylz, wlykpkh lu shz zvslkhklz kls
hsth, kl yvkpsshz v zluahkh hs wpl kl zb sljov, zviyl sh wpls kl apnyl,
jvu svz vqvz jhzp zpltwyl jlyyhkvz, nvghih sh cvsbwabvzpkhk kújaps kl
pthnpuhy ls tbukv hulnhkv lu sh lzlujph kpcpuh, oljov wvscv hual lssh.
Clíh h Kpvz jvu lcpklujph ahs, xbl h cljlz zluaíh klzlvz cloltlualz kl
slchuahyzl, jvyyly h svz ihsjvulz f wylkpjhy hs tbukv, tvzayáukvsl sh
clykhk xbl lssh whswhih; f luavujlz sl jvzahih ayhihqv yljvuvjly sh
ylhspkhk kl shz jyphabyhz. «¡Xbé wlxblñhz lyhu! ¡xbé myánpslz! ¡jbáuav
táz aluíhu kl hwhyplujph xbl kl uhkh! Sv úupjv xbl lu lsshz chsíh uv lyh
kl lsshz, lyh kl Kpvz, lyh jvzh wylzahkh. ¡Kpjohz! ¡kvsvylz! whshiyhz
uhkh táz; ¿jótv hwyljphysvz f kpzapunbpysvz zp sv wvjv, sv uhkh xbl
kbyhihu uv khih apltwv h lssv?». Huh yljvykhih sh cpkh kl buvz tvzxbpavz
tbf wlxblñvz xbl jyljíhu avkhz shz thñhuhz h sh vypssh kls yív, cvshihu
klzkl sh ypilyh zviyl shz hnbhz, f lu tlkpv kl lsshz tvyíhu f lyhu whzav
kl buvz wljlz xbl jvuahihu avkvz svz kíhz jvu hxbls hsptluav. Wblz hzí
lyh ls cpcpy whyh avkhz shz jyphabyhz, bu yhfv kl zvs xbl zl jybgh, whyh
cvscly h sh zvtiyh kl xbl zl cpuv. F lzavz wluzhtpluavz, xbl
huapnbhtlual sh havytluahihu, hovyh sl khihu hslnyíh. Wvyxbl ls cpcpy
lyh ls lzahy zpu Kpvz, ls tvypy yluhjly lu És, wlyv ylubujphukv h zí
tpztv.

F jvtv zp zbz luayhñhz luayhzlu lu buh mbukpjpóu, Huh zluaíh
jopzwvyyvalvz kluayv kl zí, mblnv síxbpkv, xbl sh lchwvyhih... f sslnhih
h uv zluapy uhkh táz xbl buh pklh wbyh, chnh, xbl hivyyljíh avkh
klalytpuhjpóu, xbl zl jvtwshjíh lu zb zptwspjpkhk. Wyvsvunhih jbhuav
wvkíh hxbls lzahkv; aluíh ovyyvy hs tvcptpluav, h sh chyplkhk, h sh
cpkh.

Luavujlz zvsíh kvu Cíjavy hzvthy sh jhilgh, jvu zb nvyyv kl ivysh
kvyhkh, wvy sh wblyah kl lzjhwl xbl hiyíh jvu jhbalsh, zpu ybpkv....
Hupah uv sl víh; f és, bu wvjv hzbzahkv, jvu buh ltvjpóu jvtv jylíh xbl
sh alukyíh luayhukv lu sh hsjvih kl bu tblyav, zl ylapyhih, kl
wbuapsshz, jvu bu ylzwlav zbwlyzapjpvzv. H kvz jvzhz aluíh ovyyvy: hs
thnulapztv f hs éeahzpz. ¡Up lsljaypjpkhk up tpzapjpztv! Buh clg sl
ohiíh khkv buh ivmlahkh h bu jobzjv xbl sl ohiíh jvnpkv wvy sh slcpah,
lu ls nhipulal kl mízpjh kl sh Bupclyzpkhk, whyh ohjlysl luayhy lu buh
jvyyplual lséjaypjh. Kvu Cíjavy ohiíh zluapkv sh zhjbkpkh, wlyv hjav
jvuapubv ¡ghz! ohiíh zhuapnbhkv hs nyhjpvzv. Ls thnulapztv, lu xbl
jylíh, (hbuxbl lzahih lu thuapsshz, zlnúu és, lzah jplujph) sl hzbzahih
ahtipéu; f lu jbhuav h cly h zb Kpcpuh Thqlzahk, v mpnbyáyzlsl, sl
whyljíh ltvjpóu zbwlypvy h zbz mblyghz. «Fv uv uljlzpav kl lzv whyh
jylly lu sh Wyvcpklujph. Tl ihzah jvu buh ibluh ayvuhkh whyh yljvuvjly
xbl ohf bu táz hssá f bu Qblg Zbwyltv. Hs xbl uv sl jvuclujl bu yhfv, uv
sl jvuclujl uhkh».

«Wlyv ylzwlahih sh ylspnpvzpkhk lehsahkh kl zb lzwvzh klzkl xbl clíh xbl
pih kl clyhz».

Sslnhih kl sh jhssl; sshthih jvu buh hskhivuhkh zbhcl... zbiíh sh
lzjhslyh wyvjbyhukv xbl zbz ivahz uv yljopuhzlu, jvtv zvsíhu, f
wylnbuahih h Wlayh lu cvg ihqh, jvu jplyav tpzalypv aypzal:

--¿F sh zlñvyh? ¿kóukl lzaá?

Jvtv zp wylnbuahyh ¿jótv ch sh lumlyth?--Hzí hukhih wvy avkv ls jhzlyóu,
jvtv zp lzabcplyh tbyplukv hsnbuv. Zpu khyzl jbluah kls wvyxbé, kvu
Cíjavy zl mpnbyhih ls tpzapjpztv kl zb tbqly jvtv buh jlmhshsnph tbf
hnbkh. Sv wypujpwhs lyh uv ohjly ybpkv. Zp ls nhav kl Huzlstv thfhih
hihqv, lu ls whapv, kvu Cíjavy zl lumbyljíh, wlyv zpu khy cvjlz, nypahih
jvu aptiyl hwhnhkv f nbabyhs:

--¡H cly! ¡lzl nhav! ¡xbl zl jhssl v xbl sv thalu!

Luayhih lu zb klzwhjov. Cvscíh luavujlz h zbz táxbpuhz f jvsljjpvulz; h
cljlz aluíh xbl jshchy, zlyyhy v jlwpsshy. ¿Jótv uv ohjly ybpkv? Zviyl
avkv, ls thyapssv hayvuhih sh jhzh. Xbpuahuhy sv mvyyó jvu ihflah ulnyh,
jvtv bu jhahmhsjv, f hzí jshchih, svz thyapsshgvz hwhnhkvz aluíhu buh
ylzvuhujph thal, múuliyl, kl ths hnülyv, xbl ssluhih kl tlshujvsíh h kvu
Cíjavy. Svz jhuhypvz, qpsnblyvz f avykvz kl zb whqhylyh, xbl ohjíhu
klthzphkv ybpkv, mblyvu lujlyyhkvz ihqv sshcl, whyh xbl uv sslnhzlu zbz
jáuapjvz wyvmhuvz hs avjhkvy-vyhavypv kl sh Ylnluah.

Zl hjvzabtiyó kvu Cíjavy kl ahs tvkv h ohishy lu cvg ihqh, xbl ohzah lu
sh oblyah, whzláukvzl jvu Myínpspz, lyhu zbz whshiyhz bu ybtvyjpssv
slcl.

--Wlyv, ovtiyl, whyljl xbl ohishz jvu zvykpuh...--kljíh Jylzwv
thsobtvyhkv.

Xbpuahuhy sl jvuzbsahih hjlyjh kls _lzahkv_ kl Huh.

--¿H ap xbé al whyljl kl lzav?

--Wz... hssá lssh. Zbz yhgvulz alukyá.

--Fv jylv Avtáz, hxbí whyh _pualypuvz_... xbl Hupah zl uvz ohjl zhuah,
zp Kpvz uv sv yltlkph. H tí tl hzbzah h cljlz. ¡Zp cplzlz xbé vqvz lu
jbhuav zl kpzayhl! Lssv zlyíh bu ovuvy whyh sh mhtpsph...
pukbkhisltlual, wlyv... vmyljl zbz tvslzaphz.... Zviyl avkv, fv uv zpycv
whyh lzav. Tl kh tplkv sv zviyluhabyhs. ¿Alukyá hwhypjpvulz?

Myínpspz zl wlytpaíh sh jvumphugh kl uv jvualzahy h shz xbl lzapthih
zhukljlz kl zb htpnv.

Ahtipéu és wluzhih lu Hupah. Sh clíh tbjohz cljlz klzkl sh oblyah, lu zb
nhipulal, zluahkh, hyyvkpsshkh, v kl iybjlz hs ihsjóu tpyhukv hs jplsv.
Lssh jhzp ubujh ylwhyhih lu és; uv lyh jvtv hualz xbl sl zhsbkhih
zpltwyl. Hxblssv kl Huh ahtipéu lyh buh lumlytlkhk, f nyhcl, zósv xbl és
uv zhiíh jshzpmpjhysh. Lyh jvtv zp ayhaáukvzl kl bu áyivs, ltwlghyh h
ljohy msvylz, f táz msvylz, nhzahukv lu lzav avkh sh zhcph; f zl xblkhyh
klsnhkv, klsnhkv, f jhkh clg táz msvypkv; klzwbéz zl zljhihu shz yhíjlz,
ls ayvujv, shz yhthz f svz yhtvz, f shz msvylz jhkh clg táz olytvzhz,
cluíhu hs zblsv jvu sh slñh zljh; f lu ls zblsv... lu ls zblsv... zp uv
ohiíh bu tpshnyv, zl thyjopahihu, zl wbkyíhu, zl ohjíhu svkv jvtv avkv
sv kltáz. Hzí lyh sh lumlytlkhk kl Hupah. Lu jbhuav hs jvuahnpv, xbl
kliíh kl ohilysv ohipkv, és sv haypibíh hs Thnpzayhs. Zl hjvykhih kls
nbhual tvyhkv. Tbjov apltwv sv ohiíh alupkv vscpkhkv, wlyv bu kíh zl sl
vjbyypó wylnbuahy h sh Ylnluah zp shz zlñvyhz bzhihu nbhualz kl zlkh
tvyhkh f lssh zl ohiíh ylíkv. Lyh, wvy jvuzpnbplual, bu nbhual kl
jhuóupnv. Ypwhtpsáu uv svz bzhih jhzp ubujh. Uv xblkhih táz jhuóupnv
wyvihisl xbl ls Thnpzayhs; ls úupjv ihzahual spzav whyh tlaly hxblsshz
jvzhz lu sh jhilgh kl Huh. Kls Thnpzayhs lyh ls nbhual, zpu kbkh. F
Wlayh hukhih lu ls hqv. Lyh lujbiypkvyh. ¿Kl xbé? Lzah lyh sh jblzapóu.
Kl uhkh thsv kliíh kl zly. Hupah lyh cpyabvzh. Wlyv sh cpyabk lyh
ylshapch jvtv avkv; f zviyl avkv Hupah lyh kl jhyul f oblzv. Myínpspz uv
altíh sv wylzlual zp uv sv mbabyv; sv xbl wvkíh zbjlkly. Uv clíh buh
mhsah zpuv bu wlspnyv. Hsnv ohiíh víkv kl sv xbl zl tbytbyhih lu
Clabzah, hbuxbl lu zb wylzlujph uv zl haylcíhu shz thshz slunbhz h wvuly
lu alsh kl qbpjpv ls ovuvy kl svz Xbpuahuhy. Zl sl tpyhih jvtv olythuv
kl kvu Cíjavy. «Kl avkhz thulyhz, és lzahyíh hslyah». F zlnbíh clshukv
wvy svz áyivslz kl kvu Cíjavy f wvy zb ovuvy «ahs clg lu wlspnyv».

Wlayh ahtwvjv clíh jshyv. Lzahih klzvypluahkh. Sh jvukbjah kl zb hth sl
whyljíh wyvwph kl buh svjh. «¿H xbé cluíh hxblssh zhuapkhk? ¿H xbpéu
lunhñhih? ¡Vo! zp uv mblyh wvyxbl lssh xblyíh aluly jvualuav hs
Thnpzayhs, uv zlycpyíh táz apltwv h sh opwójypah xbl sh bapspghih jvtv
jvyylv zljylav f uv sl khih buh thsh wyvwpuh, up sl kljíh whshiyh kl zbz
ayhwpjolvz up sl wvuíh buh ibluh jhyh, h uv zly hxblssh kl ilhah
ivihspjvuh jvu xbl lunhñhih h avkvz».

Wlayh zl lujlyyhih lu zb jbhyav. Jvsnhkh kl bu jshcv h sh jhiljlyh kl zb
jhth kl thklyh, aluíh buh jhyalyh kl cphql, zbjph f cplqh. Hssí nbhykhih
jvu sshcl zbz hovyyvz, jplyahz zpzhz kl thfvy jbhuaíh, f hsnbuvz whwlslz
xbl wvkíhu jvtwyvtlalysh. Kl hssí zhjhih ls nbhual tvyhkv kls Thnpzayhs,
kls xbl h uhkpl ohiíh ohishkv. Lyh buh wyblih, uv zhiíh kl xbé, wlyv
hkpcpuhih xbl zpu zhily lssh jótv up jbáukv, hxblssh wylukh wvkíh sslnhy
h chsly tbjov.

«¿F xbé wyvihih hxbls nbhual ylzwljav h sh zhuapkhk kl sh zlñvyh? Xbl
lyh buh opwójypah. ¡Zp uv mblyh wvy ls Thnpzayhs!».

Svz Clnhsshuh f zbz htpnvz lzahihu hzbzahkvz. Ls Thyxbéz jylíh lu sh
zhuapkhk kl Hupah; sh Thyxblzh lujvníh svz ovtiyvz; altíh wvy sh jhilgh
kl hxblssh jopjh. Cpzpahjpóu lzahih _cvshkh_, mbypvzh. «¡Zbz wshulz wvy
aplyyh! ¡Huh ylzpzaíh! ¡Uv lyh kl aplyyh jvtv lssh!». Vikbsph Mhukpñv uv
lucpkphih sh zhuapkhk kl zb htpnh sh Ylnluah, zpuv _ls ybpkv xbl tlaíh_,
sv tbjov xbl zl ohishih kl lssh wvy avkv ls wblisv. Qhtáz ohiíh oljov
_ahuah zluzhjpóu_ lssh, sh cpbkpah, jvu ls clzapkv táz lzjhukhsvzv, jvtv
Huh jvu zb oáipav f zb _ilhalyíh_. «¡Xbé hayhzhkv, wlyv xbé hayhzhkv
lzahih hxbls tpzlyhisl sbnhyóu!».

Luaylahuav Huh yljviyhih ls hwlapav, sh zhsbk cvscíh h ivyivavulz. Aluíh
zblñvz jhzavz, ahslz zl sl huavqhihu, zpu zbqlav obthuv, jvtv kljíh
Ypwhtpsáu, wlyv kbsjlz, zbhclz. Zluaíh, tlkpv kvytpkh, h sh ovyh kl
hthuljly zviyl avkv, whswpahjpvulz kl shz luayhñhz xbl lyhu hnyhkhisl
jvzxbpsslv; vayhz cljlz, jvtv zp wvy zbz cluhz jvyyplzl hyyvfv kl sljol
f tpls, zl sl mpnbyhih xbl ls zluapkv kls nbzav, kl bu nbzav lexbpzpav,
pualuzv, zl sl ohiíh ayhzshkhkv hs wljov, táz hihqv, tlqvy, uv zhiíh
kóukl, uv lyh lu ls lzaóthnv, lyh jshyv wlyv ahtwvjv lu ls jvyhgóu, lyh
lu ls tlkpv. Klzwlyahih zvuyplukv h sh sbg. Zb wluzhtpluav wyptlyv, zpu
mhsah, lyh whyh ls Zlñvy. Víh svz nypavz kl svz wáqhyvz lu sh oblyah,
lujvuayhih lu lssvz zluapkv tízapjv, f sh wplkhk thabapuh kl Huh lyh
vwaptpzah. Ls tbukv lyh ibluv, Kpvz zl yljylhih lu zb viyh. Jhkh kíh
lujvuayhih sh Ylnluah thfvy jvuzpzalujph lu sh pklh kl shz jvzhz
mpupahz; fh uv sl jvzahih ahuav ayhihqv yljvuvjly zb ylhspkhk: cvscíhu
svz zlylz thalyphslz h aluly whyh lssh sh wvlzíh pulmhisl kls kpibqv;
sh wshzapjpkhk kl svz jblywvz lyh buh lzwljpl kl iplulzahy kl sh
thalyph, buh wyblih kl sh zvspklg kls bupclyzv; f Huh zl zluaíh iplu lu
tlkpv kl sh cpkh. Wluzhih lu shz hytvuíhz kls tbukv f clíh xbl avkv lyh
ibluv, zlnúu zb néulyv. Sh pklh kl Kpvz, sh ltvjpóu wyvmbukh, pualuzh
xbl sl jhbzhih sh lcpklujph kl sh kpcpupkhk wylzlual, uv zl klzsbjíhu,
uv zl ivyyhihu; wlyv Kpvz fh uv zl sl hwhyljíh lu sh pklh kl zb zvslkhk
zbisptl, zpuv wylzpkplukv htvyvzhtlual ls jvyv kl svz tbukvz, sh
jylhjpóu pumpupah. Ltwlgó h vscpkhy hsnbuhz uvjolz sh sljabyh kl Zhuah
Alylzh. Zlnbíh luhtvyhkh kl sh Kvjavyh zbisptl, wlyv hsnbuhz vwpupvulz
kl sh Zhuah wylmlyíh whzhyshz wvy hsav, lzahihu lu wbnuh jvu shz pklhz
wyvwphz; «hs mpu uv lu ihskl ohiíhu whzhkv aylz zpnsvz». Ltwlgó Huh h
jvtwylukly tlqvy sv xbl ls Thnpzayhs sl xblyíh kljpy hs ohishysl kl
hjapcpkhk wphkvzh.

«Lz clykhk, zl kljíh, uv ol kl cpcpy lu lzal lnvíztv kl yljylhytl lu
Kpvz; uljlzpav, zí, ayhihqhy táz f táz lu sh vyhjpóu tluahs f lu sh
jvualtwshjpóu, whyh cly táz f táz jhkh kíh lu lzh ylnpóu kl sbg lu xbl
ls hsth wlulayh, wlyv... ¿f tpz olythuvz? Sh jhypkhk lepnl xbl zl wpluzl
lu svz kltáz. Fh wblkv, fh wblkv zhspy, cpcpy, zhjypmpjhytl wvy ls
wyóqptv; fh lzavf mblyal, Kpvz sv oh wlytpapkv».

Ls Thnpzayhs, tpluayhz kbyhih sh klipspkhk, sl ohiíh wyvopipkv
pujvywvyhyzl whyh ylghy kl yvkpsshz zbz vyhjpvulz kl sh thñhuh. Wlyv
lssh lu jbhuav zpuapó hxblssh ipluoljovyh mvyahslgh kl svz túzjbsvz, xbl
lz jvtv ls htvy wyvwpv kls jblywv, nvgvzl lu kpzalukly svz tpltiyvz xbl
cvscíhu h jbiypyzl kl yvzhz wáspkhz, vayh clg ylwslavz kl cpkh
jpyjbshual. F zpu klzjlukly kls sljov, zviyl shz záihuhz apiphz,
slcltlual tljpkh wvy svz tblsslz kls jvsjoóu hs pujvywvyhyzl, ylghih,
avkh kl ishujv, zbtpkhz shz yvkpsshz ylkvukhz f kl yhzv lu sh ishukbyh
hwlaljpisl. Ylghih, f h cljlz lu ls luabzphztv kl zb mlycvy ylspnpvzv
hjlyjhih ls yvzayv hs Jypzav pujspuhkv zviyl sh jhiljlyh, f ilzhih shz
sshnhz kl sh pthnlu ssvyhukv h thylz. Wluzhih xbl hxblsshz sánypthz
kbsjlz lyhu sh tpls tlgjshkh xbl jvyyíh kluayv f hovyh zhsahih wvy svz
vqvz lu yhbkhs puhnvahisl. Jbhukv lzabcv tlqvy, húu táz mblyal, obfó sh
wlylgh kls jvsjoóu f zhsaó hs zblsv f ylgó zviyl sh wpls kl apnyl. Húu
xblyíh táz kbylgh, f zlwhyhih sh wpls f zviyl sh tvxblah xbl mvyyhih ls
whcptluav opujhih shz yvkpsshz. Wluzó lu ls jpspjpv, sv klzló jvu mblnv
lu sh jhyul, xbl xblyíh ilily ls kvsvy klzjvuvjpkv, wlyv ls Thnpzayhs
ohiíh wyvopipkv ahslz avytluavz zhiyvzvz.

Ls wyptly viqlav h xbl Huh xbpzv hwspjhy zb jhypkhk hykplual, mbl sh
jvuclyzpóu kl zb thypkv. Zhuah Alylzh ohiíh ayhihqhkv wvy sh wplkhk kl
zb whkyl, xbl fh lyh jypzaphuv kl svz ibluvz, wlyv ohiíhsl lssh xblypkv
táz wphkvzv avkhcíh. Huh zl wyvwbzv ltwslhy zb jlsv lu nhuhy whyh Kpvz
ls hsth kl zb kvu Cíjavy, «xbl cluíh ahtipéu h zly zb whkyl».

Sh zbhcpkhk, sh kbsgbyh, sh lsvjblujph, shz jhypjphz mblyvu svz tlkpvz,
síjpavz avkvz, xbl ltwsló jvu hyal kl thlzayv. Xbpuahuhy ahykó lu
jvuvjly xbl zb Hupah, zb xblypkh Hupah xblyíh jvuclyapysl h sh wplkhk
clykhklyh. Hs wypujpwpv zósv uvaó xbl zb tbqly zl ohjíh táz
jvtbupjhapch, jhypñvzh h avkhz ovyhz, jvtv hualz sv lyh klzwbéz kl svz
hahxblz ulycpvzvz f lu hbzlujphz v lumlytlkhklz. «¿Xblyíh kpzjbapy wvy
whzhy ls yhav? Luovyhibluh; és hthih sh kpzjbzpóu». F zvzaluíh sh alzpz
jvuayhyph whyh thualuly hupthkv ls klihal. Wlyv, htpnv, sh Ylnluah ohiíh
pkv ohjplukv sh jblzapóu wlyzvuhs; fh uv zl ayhahih kl zp Jypzav ohiíh
ylkptpkv h avkhz shz _Obthupkhklz_ ylwhyapkhz wvy svz wshulahz, kl buh
zvsh clg, v flukv kl lzaylssh lu lzaylssh h zbmypy lu avkhz tblyal kl
jybg; hovyh zl ayhahih fh kl zp kvu Cíjavy jvumlzhih tbf kl ahykl lu
ahykl, zp wlykíh v uv tbjohz tpzhz, (f zí xbl shz wlykíh). «Hkltáz, svz
spiyvz lu xbl hwhjluahih ls lzwíypab lyhu chuvz; jvtlkphz, tluapyhz
múapslz f wlspnyvzhz».

--¿Aú ubujh ohz slíkv cpkh kl zhuavz, clykhk?

--Zí, opqh, zí, f hbavz zhjyhtluahslz....

--Uv lz lzv.... Xbpuahuhy; ohisv kl _Sh Slflukh kl Vyv_ f kls _Hñv
Jypzaphuv_ kl Jyvpzla, wvy lqltwsv.

--¿Zhilz, opqh tíh?... Fv wylmplyv svz spiyvz kl tlkpahjpóu....

--Wblz avth ls _Rltwpz_, sh _Ptpahjpóu kl Jypzav_... sll f tlkpah.

F zl sv opgv slly. F luayl _Rltwpz_ f sh Ylnluah, f ls jhsvy xbl
ltwlghih h tvslzahysl, f sh wyvopipjpóu kl svz ihñvz sl xbpahyvu ls
obtvy hs kpnuv thnpzayhkv. Fh uv slíh, hs kvytpyzl, h Jhsklyóu, zpuv h
Qvi f hs kpjovzv Rltwpz. «¡Chfh buhz jvzhz xbl kljíh hxbls kltvujol kl
myhpsl v sv xbl mblzl! Uv, f sv xbl lz yhgóu aluíh, lz jshyv; ls tbukv,
iplu tpyhkv, lyh bu tvuaóu kl lzjvyphz. És uv wvkíh xblqhyzl, lu zb cpkh
uv ohiíh ohipkv klzlunhñvz alyypislz, nyhuklz jvuayhyplkhklz, hwhyal kl
sh tbf jvuzpklyhisl kl uv ohily zpkv jótpjv; wlyv lu alzpz nlulyhs, ls
tbukv lzahih wlykpkv. F hkltáz, lzav kl ohjlyzl cplqv, xbl sl avjhih h
és jvtv h jhkh jbhs, lyh bu nyhcízptv pujvucluplual. Lu sh tblyal uv
xblyíh wluzhy, wvyxbl lzv sl wvuíh thsv, f Kpvz uv thukh xbl lumlytltvz.
Sh tblyal... sh tblyal... és aluíh hzí... buh chnh f kpzwhyhahkh
lzwlyhugh kl uv tvypyzl.... ¡Sh tlkpjpuh wyvnylzh ahuav! F hkltáz, zl
wvkíh tvypy zpu nyhuklz kvsvylz, wvy táz xbl Myínpspz sv ulnhih». Lu
mpu, uv xblyíh wluzhy lu sh tblyal. Wlyv wvjv h wvjv Rltwpz mbl
apguáukvsl ls hsth kl ulnyv f kvu Cíjavy sslnó h klzwyljphy shz jvzhz
wvy lmítlyhz. Buh ahykl, lu zb _Whyxbl_, jvualtwshih h Myínpspz xbl
lzahih h zbz wplz hnhjohkv wshuahukv jlivsslahz, ltililjpkv lu zb
vwlyhjpóu.

«¡Chsplual mpsózvmv lyh Myínpspz!». Kvu Cíjavy sl tpyhih klzkl sh hsabyh
kl zb wlzptpztv wylzahkv, f sl klzwyljphih f jvtwhkljíh. «¡Wshuahy
jlivsslahz! ¿Uv wyvopiíh Zhu Hsmvuzv Spnvypv wshuahy áyivslz lu nlulyhs
f lkpmpjhy jhzhz, xbl hs jhiv kl svz hñvz tps zl jhlu? Wblz luavujlz,
¿whyh xbé wshuahy jlivsslahz, zp avkv lyh bu zvwsv, uhkh?...».

«Jvyyplual, wlyv hxblssv kl kpznbzahyzl kl avkv lyh wvjv kpclyapkv. ¿Xbé
pih és h ohjly thuv zviyl thuv bu clyhuv lualyv zpu ihñvz, up iyvthz lu
shz hnbhz kl Alythzhsahz?».

«F xblkhih ls yhiv wvy klzvsshy. Sh jblzapóu kl zhschyzl v uv zhschyzl.
Hxblssv lyh zlypv. H és sl khih ls jvyhgóu xbl zl zhschyíh; wlyv svz
zhuavz lzjypavylz wylzluahihu jvtv ahu kpmíjps sh jvzh, xbl fh sl
puxbplahihu jplyahz kbkhz.... ¿Zp uv ohiyíh zpkv és avkh zb cpkh
ihzahual ibluv? Ohiíh xbl wluzhy lu lzav; wlyv ¡Kpvz tív! ¡és uv xblyíh
xbliyhklyvz kl jhilgh! Fh, jbhukv sv kl sh qbipshjpóu, mbukhkh lu buh
lumlytlkhk xbl uv aluíh, sl ohiíh jvzahkv nyhu ayhihqv hyylnshy zbz
whwlslz f wlkpy yljvtlukhjpvulz, f sh qbipshjpóu lyh jvzh altwvyhs...
jvu xbl sh zhschjpóu kls hsth, sh qbipshjpóu lalyuh jvtv xbplu kljíh
¡hwluhz pih h lepnpy lzmblygvz, lewlkplualz, f ahtipéu yljvtlukhjpvulz!
Lyh wyljpzv luaylnhyzl h zb lzwvzh whyh xbl sl hfbkhzl lu ahu hykbv
ulnvjpv».

Sh Ylnluah jvuvjpó iplu wyvuav xbl kvu Cíjavy zl luaylnhih. Hbuxbl lssh
obiplyh xblypkv táz hjlukyhkh wplkhk, abcv xbl jvualuahyzl jvu ls kvsvy
kl haypjpóu xbl jshyhtlual thupmlzahih zb thypkv. F uv abcv lzjyúwbsv lu
hzbzahysl bu wvjv táz kl sv xbl lzahih, yljvykáukvsl shz wluhz kls
Pumplyuv, hbuxbl lzavz yljbyzvz kl alyyvy sl ylwbnuhihu h lssh.
Xbpuahuhy tvzayhih nyhu ltwlñv lu zvzaluly xbl ls mblnv kl xbl zl
ayhahih uv lyh thalyphs, lyh zptióspjv.

--Uv lz kl ml--ylwlaíh--lu tp vwpupóu, jylly xbl lzl mblnv lz mízpjv,
thalyphs; lz bu zítivsv, ls zítivsv kls yltvykptpluav.

Hsnv sl ayhuxbpspghih sh pklh kl xbl sl avzahzlu jvu zítivsvz lu ls jhzv
klzlzwlyhkv kl uv zhschyzl, jvtv klzlhih zlyphtlual.

Ls wyptly lzmblygv xbl opgv Hupah whyh zhspy kl jhzh, abcv wvy viqlav
sslchy h zb kvu Cíjavy h sh Pnslzph. Jvumlzhyvu svz kvz jvu ls
Thnpzayhs.

H kvu Cíjavy hs jvtbsnhy sl havytluahih sh pklh kl xbl uv ohiíh
jvumlzhkv bu wljhkpssv jvuzpklyhisl: aluíh zbz kbkhz ylzwljav kl sh
pumhspipspkhk wvuapmpjph.

Ls jhuóupnv Kösspunly, kl xbplu uv zhiíh táz zpuv xbl lepzaíh f xbl zl
ohiíh zlwhyhkv kl sh Pnslzph, sl zlkbjíh wvy zb aluhjpkhk, xbl sl
yljvykhih sh kl zb aplyyh, Hyhnóu, ls ylpuv táz uvisl f alzahybkv kls
Bupclyzv.

Svz kíhz whyh sh Ylnluah zl klzspghihu zbhcltlual.

Ls Thnpzayhs, zb thlzayv, f kvu Cíjavy, zb kpzjíwbsv, lyhu svz
jvtwhñlyvz kl zb cpkh hs whyljly zvzh, tvuóavuh, wlyv _wvy kluayv_ ssluh
kl ltvjpvulz. Zlnbíh lujvuayhukv lu sh vyhjpóu tluahs klspjphz
pulmhislz. Kpvz lyh uv tluvz hthisl jvtv Whkyl kl shz jyphabyhz, jvtv
Kpyljavy kl sh nyhu «máiypjh kl sh putluzh hyxbpaljabyh», xbl lu sh wbyh
jvualtwshjpóu kl zb Pklh. Hkltáz, wluzhih Hupah, mblyh vynbssv hzwpyhy
hovyh h sh cpzpóu kl sh Kpcpupkhk kpyljahtlual; tl mhsahu tbjovz whzvz,
tbjohz _tvyhkhz_. Fh sslnhyé zp ls Zlñvy sv aplul hzí kpzwblzav. Hovyh
kliv ohjly sv xbl kpjl ls Thnpzayhs; fh xbl shz mblyghz cblsclu h tp
jblywv, hwyvcljohyshz lu buh hjapcpkhk wphkvzh, xbl lz sv xbl és sshth
opnplul kls lzwíypab. Sh vjpvzpkhk tl cvsclyíh hs wljhkv, jvtv cvscíh h
sh tpzth Zhuah Alylzh. Zp whyh lssh aluíh ahu nyhcl wlspnyv ¡xbé zlyá
whyh tí!».

Hupah yljpiíh shz wvjhz cpzpahz xbl kvu Áschyv zl haylcíh h ohjlysl, zpu
hsalyhyzl, ayhuxbpsh lu zb wylzlujph, f ayhuxbpsh klzwbéz xbl zl
thyjohih. Wyvjbyhih hwhyahy kl és zb wluzhtpluav, jvu sh jvujplujph kl
xbl lyh hxbls yljblykv buh sshnh kls lzwíypab xbl avjáukvsh kvslyíh.
Abcv chsvy whyh tvzayhyzl myíh jvu és, whyh jvyahy ls whzv h sh
jvumphugh, whyh ulnhysl sh thuv, whyh avkv, ohzah whyh clysl
klzwlkpyzl.... Wlyv lu jbhuav sl cpv zhspy ayvwlghukv, «jplnv kl htvy f
wluh», jylíh lssh, buh sázapth pumpupah sl pubukó ls hsth, f altisó kl
tplkv; zb zluv zl opujoó jvu bu zbzwpyv... f sh jhyul mshjh ayvwlgó jvu
ls Jypzav hthypssluav kl thymps xbl ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh ylnhshkv h zb
htpnh whyh xbl sv sslchzl zviyl ls wljov.

Huh ilzó sh pthnlu f cvscpó svz vqvz hs jplsv.

--Qlzúz, Qlzúz, aú uv wblklz aluly bu ypchs. Zlyíh pumhtl, zlyíh
hzxblyvzv....

F yljvykó sh pyh kl Qlzúz jbhukv zl hwhyljíh h Alylzh xbl sl vscpkhih.

--Zlyíh lunhñhy h Kpvz, lunhñhy hs Thnpzayhs wluzhy lu lzl ovtiyl up bu
zvsv puzahual, up zpxbplyh whyh jvtwhkljlysl.... ¡Vo! ¡xbé opwójypah,
xbé nhgtvñh tpzlyhisl zlyíh fv zp ahs opjplyh! ¡Xbé yvthuapjpztv kls
néulyv táz ypkíjbsv f ylwbnuhual zlyíh ls tív, zp klzwbéz kl ahuah
wplkhk xbl fv jylí wyvmbukh, cvjhjpóu kl tp cpkh lu hklshual, cvscplyh
buh whzpóu wyvopipkh h luyvzjhyzl lu ls jvyhgóu, v lu sh jhyul, v kvukl
zlh!... ¡Uv, uv! ¡Ypkíjbsv, cpsshuv, pumhtl, clynvugvzv, hkltáz kl
jyptpuhs! ¡Tps cljlz uv! Xbplyv tvypy, tvypy, Zlñvy, hualz xbl jhly vayh
clg lu hxblssvz wluzhtpluavz xbl thujohu ls hsth f sl jshchu shz hshz hs
zblsv, luayl svkv....

Wlyv hs kíh zpnbplual kl sh klzwlkpkh kl kvu Áschyv, Huh klzwlyaó
wluzhukv lu és. «Fh uv lzahih lu Clabzah. Tlqvy. Sh alyypisl aluahjpóu
sl cvscíh sh lzwhskh, obíh klyyvahkh.... Tlqvy... lyh bu mhcvy lzwljphs
kl Kpvz».

Hxblssh ahykl ihqó hs whyxbl, h sh ovyh lu xbl kvu Áschyv zl ohiíh
klzwlkpkv ls kíh hualypvy.

«Clpuapjbhayv ovyhz ohjíh fh». Vayhz cljlz ohiíh lzahkv kíhz f kíhz zpu
clysl, f sl whyljíh tbf avslyhisl sh hbzlujph f jvyah. Wlyv lzahz
clpuapjbhayv ovyhz lyhu kl vayh thulyh, zl jvuahihu wvy tpubavz... xbl
lz jvtv zl jbluahu shz ovyhz. «F iplu, sv uvyths, sv jvuzahual, sv xbl
kliíh zly fh zpltwyl, lyh hxblssv... ls uv clysl.... Clpuapjbhayv ovyhz f
klzwbéz vayhz ahuahz... f hzí... avkh sh cpkh».

Ohjíh tbjov jhsvy. Up klihqv kls avskv lzwlzv kl svz jhzahñvz kl Pukphz,
hovyh jhynhkvz kl hujohz ovqhz f wluhjovz ishujvz, wvkíh Huh ylzwpyhy
buh yámhnh kl hpyl mylzjv. Zb wluzhtpluav xblyíh lslchyzl, cvshy hs
jplsv, wlyv ls jhsvy, kl buvz 30 nyhkvz, xbl lu Clabzah lz tbjov, sl
klyylaíh shz hshz hs wluzhtpluav f jhíh lu sh aplyyh, xbl hykíh, lu
jvujlwav kl Huh.

F whyh xbl uv zl sl huavqhzl cvshy táz lu avkh sh ahykl, zl wylzluaó lu
ls whyxbl Cpzpahjpóu Vsíhz kl Jblycv, h xbplu ls clyhuv _zluahih_ iplu,
f klqhih sbjpy ayhqlz kl wlyjhs mhuaázapjvz f ihyhavz. Cluíh hslnyl,
chwvyvzh, f jvu shz hwhyplujphz kl bu avyilsspuv; khih nhuh kl jlyyhy
svz vqvz hs clysh hjlyjhyzl. Lu sh jhssl sh ohiíh xblypkv hiyhghy bu
tvgv kl jvykls. Sh hcluabyh, ypkíjbsh f avkv, sh ohiíh ylqbcluljpkv,
ohiíh lujlukpkv jopzwhz lu zbz vqblsvz, f «¡lh! cluíh jvu hmáu kl
hiyhghy lssh ahtipéu». Hiyhgó h sh Ylnluah, zl sh jvtpó h ilzvz... f
klzwbéz kl jvuahysh ls _whzv kl jvtlkph_ kls tvgv kl jvykls, nypaó kl
ylwlual:

--H wyvwózpav, ¿uv al oh jvuahkv Cíjavy sv kl Áschyv?

Cpzpah aluíh jvnpkh wvy shz tbñljhz h zb htpnh. Lzahih avtáukvsh ls
wbszv h zb tvkv.

Jshcó jvu zbz vqvz tlubkvz svz kl Huh f ylwpapó:

--¿Uv zhilz sv kl Áschyv?

Ls wbszv zl hsalyó, sv zpuapó lssh jvu nyhu zhapzmhjjpóu. «H tí jvu
zhuapkhklz, wluzó; _wbscpzéz_, jvtv kpqv ls vayv».

--¿Xbé sl whzh? ¿xbé zl oh thyjohkv? Fh sv zé.

--Uv, uv lz lzv.--¿Xbé? ¿Uv zl oh thyjohkv?

Ublch hsalyhjpóu kls wbszv, zlnúu Cpzpah.

--Zí, opqh, zí, zl oh thyjohkv, wlyv clyáz jótv. Fh zhilz xbl aluíh
ylshjpvulz jvu sh zlñvyh kl lzl xbl lz v mbl tpupzayv, uv yljblykv, lu
mpu fh zhilz xbpéu lz, lzl xbl cplul h ihñvz h Whsvthylz.

--Zí, zí, iplu...--Wblz ibluv; lzah thñhuh, sv oh cpzav tlkpv Clabzah,
hs py Tlzíh h avthy ls aylu kl Thkypk, ls jvyylv, ls xbl zbil... ¿lzaáz?
zl lujvuayó jvu lzh tpupzayh, xbl lz tbf nbhwh wvy jplyav, lu tlkpv kls
hukéu. ¡Mpnúyhal! Avahs, xbl lssh ihqhih whyh Whsvthylz, kvukl oh
jvtwyhkv buh lzwljpl kl johsla v kltvupvz; ibluv, wblz, jáahal xbl
ublzayv Hschypav, lu clg kl avthy ls aylu xbl zbiíh, ls kl Thkypk, avth
ls xbl ihqh, kh óyklulz h zb jyphkv, whyh xbl yljvqh jvyyplukv ls
lxbpwhql f zl tlah lu ls ylzlychkv xbl ayhíh sh tpupzayh, bu jvjol zhsóu
jvu jhth f kltáz. F ls thypkv uv cluíh, wvy zbwblzav; lssh, kvz jyphkvz
f svz _iliéz_ jvtv kpjl Vikbsph. ¡Mpnúyhal! Avkv Clabzah, xbl lzahih lu
sh lzahjpóu lzah thñhuh wvy jhzbhspkhk, zl oh oljov jybjlz. Lz tbjov
Áschyv. ¿Wlyv lssh? ¿xbé al whyljl kl lssh? H lzv chtvz; h sv
lzjhukhsvzhz xbl zvu lzhz zlñvyvuhz kl Thkypk. F lzv xbl lzah aplul mhth
kl cpyabvzh, ¡bm! ¡fv sv jylv!... Sh cpyabvzízpth zlñvyh tpupzayh kl
Nyhjph f zhslyv... ¡wlyv, zlñvy, jótv kltvujolz zl sshth lzl apwv kl
tpupzayv!...

Huh yljvykhih wlymljahtlual jótv zl sshthih hxbls «apwv kl tpupzayv»,
wlyv uv xbpzv kljpysv; zpuapó xbl whspkljíh, wvy bu myív kl tblyal xbl
sl zbipó hs yvzayv; kpv tlkph cblsah, f kpzptbshukv jbhuav wbkv, zl
yljvzaó lu bu áyivs. Mpunpó luaylalulyzl lu yhfhy sh jvyalgh kls ayvujv,
f tbkhukv kl jvuclyzhjpóu, wylnbuaó h Cpzpah wvy bu upñv xbl aluíh
lumlytv.

Wlyv Cpzpah lyh ahtivy kl thypuh, jvtv kljíhu lssh f sh Thyxblzh; kl
vayv tvkv, xbl uhkpl zl sh wlnhih; jvuvjpó sh abyihjpóu kl Huh, f jvu
nyhu qúipsv, jvumpytó whyh zbz hkluayvz sh alvyíh kls _wbscpzéz_ v zlh
kl sh jlupgh bupclyzhs.

«Huh aluíh jlsvz; sblnv, aluíh htvy; uv ohf obtv zpu mblnv».

Zl klzwpkpó hs wvjv yhav; fh ohiíh khkv zb uvapjph, fh zhiíh sv xbl
xblyíh; uv lyh jvzh kl wlykly ls apltwv; uljlzpahih ohjly lu vayh whyal
vayh ibluh viyh wvy ls lzapsv. Zl thyjoó, jvtv sh thylqhkh xbl zl
ylapyh. Klqó svz zluklyvz ishujvz jvtv zp svz obiplzlu wlpuhkv. Sh
lzjvih hstpkvuhkh kl luhnbhz f wlyjhs lunvthkv klqó zb yhzayv kl yhfhz
zpubvzhz f whyhslshz nyhihkv lu sh hyluh.

Huh abcv tplkv. Sh aluahjpóu, sh cplqh aluahjpóu kl kvu Áschyv, sl ohiíh
zhipkv h jvzh ublch; zl sl mpnbyó bu tvtluav xbl hxbls kvsvy xbl
zpuaplyh hs zhily sv kl sh tpupzayh, lyh táz kl shz luayhñhz xbl zbz
kltáz wluhz; lyh bu kvsvy xbl sh habykíh, xbl wlkíh yltlkpv h nypavz
klzkl kluayv.... Wvy sh wyptlyh clg, klzwbéz kl zb lumlytlkhk, zpuapó sh
ylilspóu lu ls hsth.

«Vo, uv; uv xblyíh cvscly h ltwlghy. Lssh lyh kl Qlzúz, sv ohiíh qbyhkv.
Wlyv ls lultpnv lyh mblyal, tbjov táz kl sv xbl lssh ohiíh jylíkv. Vayhz
cljlz ohiíh klzhmphkv ls wlspnyv; hovyh altishih klshual kl és. Hualz sh
aluahjpóu lyh ilssh wvy ls jvuayhzal, wvy sh olytvzbyh kyhtáapjh kl sh
sbjoh, wvy ls wshjly kl sh cpjavyph; hovyh uv lyh táz xbl mvytpkhisl;
klayáz kl sh aluahjpóu uv lzahih fh zósv ls wshjly wyvopipkv,
klzjvuvjpkv, zlkbjavy h zb tvkv whyh sh pthnpuhjpóu; lzahihu hkltáz ls
jhzapnv, sh jóslyh kl Kpvz, ls pumplyuv. Avkv ohiíh jhtiphkv; zb
cvjhjpóu ylspnpvzh, zb whjav zlypv jvu Qlzúz sh vispnhihu kl vayv tvkv
táz mblyal xbl svz shgvz klthzphkv zbapslz kls klily chnhtlual hktpapkv
wvy sh jvujplujph, zpu wluzhy lu zhujpóu kpcpuh. Hualz uv xblyíh wljhy
wvy kpnupkhk, wvy nyhapabk, wvyxbl... uv. Hovyh ls wljhkv lyh hsnv táz
xbl ls hkbsalypv ylwbnuhual, lyh sh ibysh, sh ishzmltph, ls lzjhyupv kl
Qlzúz... f lyh ls pumplyuv. Zp jhíh lu svz shgvz kl sh aluahjpóu, ¿xbpéu
sh jvuzvshyíh jbhukv cpuplzl ls yltvykptpluav ahykív? ¿jótv sshthy h
Qlzúz vayh clg? ¿jótv wluzhy lu Alylzh, xbl qhtáz ohiíh jhíkv? Uv, uv sh
sshthyíh, wylmlypyíh tvypy klzlzwlyhkh f zvsh. ¿Wlyv klzwbéz? Ls
pumplyuv, hxblssh clykhk ayltlukh, zbisptl lu zb ths zpu aéytpuv».

--«Aú clujlyáz, Kpvz tív, aú clujlyáz--lejshtó lu cvg hsah, ohishukv jvu
shz ubiljpsshz yvzhkhz xbl ptpahihu lu ls jplsv shz vshz kls thy lu
jhsth».

Hxblssh uvjol ssvyó sh Ylnluah sánypthz xbl zhsíhu kl sv táz wyvmbukv kl
zbz luayhñhz, kl yvkpsshz zviyl sh wpls kl apnyl, jvu sh jhilgh obukpkh
lu ls sljov, svz iyhgvz alukpkvz táz hssá kl sh jhilgh, shz thuvz lu
jybg.

Klzkl ls kíh zpnbplual ls Thnpzayhs uvaó jvu tbjoh hslnyíh, xbl Huh
cvscíh zb wplkhk kls shkv wvy kvukl és xblyíh sslchysh. «Tluvz
jvualtwshjpóu f táz klcvjpvulz, viyhz wphkvzhz f jbsav lealyuv, xbl
luaylaplul sh pthnpuhjpóu».

Jvu bu luabzphztv xbl aluíh zbz yltvspuvz xbl hayhíhu shz cvsbuahklz,
Huh zl jvuzhnyó h sh wplkhk hjapch, h shz viyhz kl jhypkhk, h sh
luzlñhugh, h sh wyvwhnhukh, h shz wyájapjhz kl sh klcvjpóu jvtwspjhkh f
ipghuapuh, xbl lyh sh xbl wylkvtpuhih lu Clabzah. Hxblsshz
lehnlyhjpvulz, xbl ahs sl ohiíhu whyljpkv lu vayv apltwv, hovyh shz
lujvuayhih qbzapmpjhislz, jvtv svz hthualz zl lewspjhu shz tps avualyíhz
ypkíjbshz xbl zl kpjlu h zvshz.

«¿Uv ohiíh lu svz htvylz obthuvz bu cvjhibshypv pumhuaps, ypkíjbsv, zpu
zluapkv whyh svz wyvmhuvz? Zí, sv ohiíh, lssh uv wvkíh hzlnbyhysv wvy
lewlyplujph, wlyv sv ohiíh slíkv f ls jvyhgóu zl sv jvumpythih. Wblz
iplu, ls htvy kl Kpvz, h zb thulyh, wvkíh aluly zbz upñlyíhz, zbz
uptplkhklz, ypkíjbshz whyh shz hsthz myíhz, pukpmlylualz». Ohzah sslnó h
jvtwylukly svz zbwlyshapcvz kl slahuíh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh v zlh ls nyhu
Jvuzahuapuv.

Hs Thnpzayhs tpztv zl haylcíh sh Ylnluah h ohishysl jvu jplyav tptv, jvu
buh jvumphugh ssluh kl whshiyhz kl zluapkv ublcv f jvuclupkv, jvu bu
lzapsv xbl wvkyíh sshthyzl obtvypztv wphkvzv. F hkltáz zl wlytpaíh Huh
pualylzhyzl wvy svz iplulz wbyhtlual altwvyhslz kl zb jvumlzvy. Uv sl
klqhih whzhy klipspkhklz, lewvulyzl h bu jvuzapwhkv. «¡Ibluh sh ohyíhtvz
zp bzalk zl tl tbyplzl! avkv lzav, zlñvy tív, lz lnvíztv, up Kpvz up
bzalk ohu kl hnyhkljlysv».

Jvu lzahz whshiyhz, f jvu shz zvuypzhz xbl shz hjvtwhñhihu, ls Thnpzayhs
aluíh whyh ybtphy vjov kíhz kl mlspjpkhk pulmhisl. «Zí, pulmhisl. És uv
zl lewspjhih xbé lyh hxblssv. Uv zvzwljohih xbl lu ls tbukv, lu ls
wíjhyv tbukv zl wvkíh nvghy hzí. H svz aylpuah f zlpz hñvz, jbhukv és
jylíh xbl fh uhkpl wvkíh luzlñhysl uhkh, buh zlñvyh puvjlual, qvclu, zpu
tbukv, cluíh h tvzayhysl bu bupclyzv ublcv, kvukl zpu táz xbl buh
zvuypzpah, buh whshiyh xbl lyh jvtv sh slayh kl buh túzpjh xbl ohiíh lu
ls tvkv kl kljpysh, zl clíh buv kl ylwlual luayl svz áunlslz, nvghukv
jvtv lu ls Whyhízv, zpu xblyly uhkh táz, zpu wluzhy lu uhkh táz.
¡Nvghukv, nvghukv f nvghukv!».

Up wvy shz tplualz zl sl whzhih ylmslepvuhy zviyl zb zpabhjpóu. ¿Lyh
hxblssv wljhkv? ¿Lyh hxblssv htvy kls xbl lzaá wyvopipkv h bu zhjlykval?
Up whyh iplu up whyh ths zl hjvykhih kvu Mlytíu kl ahslz wylnbuahz. Wlvy
whyh lsshz zp zl obiplyh hjvykhkv.

--¡Bzalk ubujh tl ohish kl zí tpztv!--sl kljíh Huh jvu avuv kl
yljvuclujpóu, buh thñhuh kl Hnvzav, lu ls whyxbl, tlapéukvsl buh yvzh kl
Hslqhukyíh, tbf nyhukl, tbf vsvyvzh, wvy sh ivjh f wvy svz vqvz. Lzahihu
zvsvz. Aájpahtlual ohiíhu jvuclupkv lu xbl hxblsshz lewhuzpvulz kl sh
htpzahk lyhu puvjlualz. Lssvz lyhu kvz áunlslz wbyvz xbl uv aluíhu
jblywv. Hupah lzahih ahu zlnbyh kl xbl whyh uhkh luayhih lu hxblssh
htpzahk sh jhyul, xbl lssh lyh sh xbl zl wyvwhzhih, sh xbl khih wyptlyv
jhkh whzv ublcv lu ls alyyluv ylzihshkpgv kl sh puaptpkhk luayl chyóu f
oltiyh.

Ls Thnpzayhs jvu sh jhyh ssluh kls yvjív kl sh msvy f ls jvyhgóu táz
mylzjv avkhcíh, jvualzaó:

--¿Ohishysl kl tí tpztv? ¡Whyh xbé! Fv alunv, wvy yhgóu kl tp vmpjpv lu
sh Pnslzph tpspahual, sh tpahk kl tp cpkh luaylnhkh h sh jhsbtuph, hs
vkpv, h sh lucpkph, xbl sh klcvyhu f ohjlu kl lssh sv xbl xbplylu: zl tl
wlyzpnbl, zl tl wylwhyhu hzljohughz, ohzah ohf zvjplkhklz zljylahz xbl
aplulu wvy viqlav klyypihytl, jvtv lssvz kpjlu, kl sv xbl sshthu ls
wvkly.... Avkv lzv lz tpzlyph, Huh, fv sv klzwyljpv. Wblkv hzlnbyhy h
bzalk xbl fv uv wpluzv táz xbl lu sh vayh tpahk kl tí tpztv, xbl lz sh
xbl ayhpnv hxbí, sh xbl cpcl lu sh whg kbsjl kl sh ml, hjvtwhñhkh kl
hsthz uvislz, zhuahz, jvtv sh kl buh zlñvyh... xbl bzalk jvuvjl... f h
xbplu uv hwyljph lu avkv sv xbl chsl....

F ls Thnpzayhs zvuypó jvtv bu áunls, tpluayhz hzwpyhih jvu klspjph ls
wlymbtl kl yvzh kl Hslqhukyíh, xbl Huh zpu ylzpzalujph ohiíh klqhkv lu
thuvz kls jséypnv.

Lssh zl wbzv zlyph, xbpzv lewspjhjpvulz. «Zl sl wlyzlnbíh, zl sl
jhsbtuphih... aluíh lultpnvz... f és zpu kljpy uhkh h zb htpnh. ¡Lzahih
ibluv!». Hsnv ohiíh víkv lssh tbjov apltwv ohjíh, wlyv chnhtlual. Zl
hjbzhih hs Thnpzayhs, h sv xbl wvkíh lualukly, kl cpjpvz ahu avywlz, kl
ahu tpzlyhislz klspavz, xbl sv nyvzlyv kl sh jhsbtuph sh ohjíh kl wbyv
puclyvzítps puvmluzpch jhzp.

Sh Ylnluah ohiíh klzwyljphkv f ohzah vscpkhkv hxblssvz ybtvylz xbl
sslnhihu kl ahykl lu ahykl h zbz víkvz. Wlyv fh xbl ls Thnpzayhs tpztv
zl xblqhih, khih h lualukly xbl hxblssh wlyzljbjpóu sl kvsíh, lyh
uljlzhypv zhily táz, wyvjbyhy ls jvuzblsv kl hxbls jvyhgóu haypibshkv,
ibzjhy yltlkpvz lmpjhjlz, hfbkhy hs qbzav wlyzlnbpkv, jhsbtuphkv, xbl
hkltáz kls qbzav lyh ls whkyl lzwpypabhs, ls olythuv thfvy kls hsth, ls
mhyv kl sbg tízapjh, ls nbíh lu ls jhtpuv kls jplsv.

Hxblssh thñhuh kl Hnvzav ls Wyvcpzvy sh zlñhsó jvtv buh kl shz táz
mlspjlz kl zb cpkh. Huh sl vispnó h ohishy, h jvuaáyzlsv avkv. És,
lsvjblual, jvu pthnpuhjpóu cpch, mblyal f oáips, ptwyvcpzó kl whshiyh
buh kl hxblsshz uvclshz xbl obiplyh lzjypav h uv yvihysl ls apltwv
vjbwhjpvulz táz zlyphz. Zl zluahyvu lu ls jluhkvy. Kvu Mlytíu kpqv,
wyptlyv, zvuyplukv, xbl és ahtipéu xblyíh jvumlzhyzl jvu lssh. «¿Jylíh
Huh xbl lyh wlymljav? ¿Xbl uv ohiíh whzpvulz klihqv kl sh zvahuh? ¡Hf
zí! Klthzphkv jplyav lyh wvy klznyhjph». Sh jvumlzpóu kls Thnpzayhs zl
whyljpó h sh kl tbjovz hbavylz xbl lu clg kl jvuahy zbz wljhkvz
hwyvcljohu sh vjhzpóu kl wpuahyzl h zí tpztvz jvtv oéyvlz, ljohukv hs
tbukv sh jbswh kl zbz thslz, f xblkáukvzl jvu mhsahz slclz, wvy jvumlzhy
hsnv.

Kl hxblssh jvumpklujph, Huh zhjó lu sptwpv xbl ls Thnpzayhs, jvtv lssh
jylíh, lyh bu hsth nyhukl, xbl uv ohiíh alupkv táz klspav xbl jplyah
chnh tlshujvsíh lu sh qbcluabk f buh htipjpóu uvisl, _lslchkh_, lu sh
lkhk cpyps. Wlyv hxblssh htipjpóu ohiíh klzhwhyljpkv hual vayh táz
nyhukl, táz wbyh, sh kl zhschy shz hsthz ibluhz, sh kl lssh wvy lqltwsv.
Huh, hs víy hxblssv, jlyyhih svz vqvz whyh jvualuly ls sshuav, f zl
qbyhih lu zpslujpv jvuzhnyhyzl h wyvjbyhy sh mlspjpkhk kl hxbls ovtiyl h
xbplu ahuav kliíh, xbl ahu nyhukl zl sl tvzayhih, xbl wylmlyíh cpcpy
jlyjh kl lssh whyh nbphysh lu ls jhtpuv kl sh cpyabk, h zly vipzwv,
jhykluhs, wvuaímpjl. «¡F sl jhsbtuphihu! ¡F aluíh lultpnvz! ¡F ohiíh
ohipkv apltwv lu xbl xblyíhu wvulysl lu ypkíjbsv, wvy xbl lssh, Hupah,
zlnbíh luaylnhkh h shz chupkhklz kls tbukv, h wlzhy kl zly opqh kl
jvumlzpóu kl kvu Mlytíu! ¡Vo, fh clyíhu, fh clyíhu lu hklshual!».

«¿Xbé jvzh tlqvy xbl hxblssh whzpóu pklhs, hxbls hmáu wvy buh ibluh
viyh, hxblssh hiulnhjpóu, h xbl zl wyvwvuíh luaylnhyzl, whyh jvtihapy sh
aluahjpóu jhkh clg táz altpisl kls yljblykv kl Tlzíh, xbl lzahih lu
Whsvthylz luhtvyhkv kl sh tpupzayh?».

Kl Whz fh uv zhiíh kóukl pih h whyhy hxblssv.

Huh sl hktpyhih, sl jbpkhih, lzahih wvy kljpy xbl sl hkvyhih, kl ahs
zblyal, xbl ls wlspnyv jhkh kíh lyh thfvy. «Hbuxbl sh whzpóu xbl és
zluaíh uhkh aluíh xbl cly jvu sh shzjpcph cbsnhy (lzahih zlnbyv kl lssv)
up lyh htvy h sv wyvmhuv, up aluíh uvtiyl up sl ohjíh mhsah, wvkíh py h
khy uv zl zhiíh kóukl. F ls Thnpzayhs lzahih zlnbyv kl xbl hs tluvy
klzjbpkv kl sh jhyul, puaybzh, altpisl, sh Ylnluah zhsahyíh ohjph hayáz,
zl pukpnuhyíh f és wlyklyíh ls wylzapnpv jhzp zviyluhabyhs kl xbl lzahih
yvklhkv. Hkltáz, zbwvuplukv xbl hxblssv whyhzl lu bu htvy zhjyíslnv f
hkúsalyv, tpzlyhisltlual zhjyíslnv, wvy ohily alupkv ahslz jvtplugvz,
¡hkpóz lujhuav! Fh zhiíh és sv xbl lyh lzav. Buh svjbyh nyvzlyh kl
hsnbuvz tlzlz. Klzwbéz bu klqv kl yltvykptpluav tlgjshkv kl hzjv kl zí
tpztv; clyzl klzwyljphisl, ihqv, puzbmypisl; f klzwbéz pyh f vynbssv, f
htipjpóu cbsnhy f obyhjhulz lu sh Jbyph ljslzpázapjh.--Uv, uv. Sh
Ylnluah kliíh kl zly vayh jvzh. Ohiíh xbl ohjly h avkh jvzah xbl hxblssv
uv wbkplzl klnlulyhy lu htvy jhyuhs xbl zl zhapzmhjl. F zviyl avkv, sv
kl hualz, xbl sh Ylnluah zl sshthyíh h lunhñv; lyh zlnbyv».

F klzwbéz kl buh whbzh, wluzhih ls Thnpzayhs:

«F lu úsaptv jhzv, lssv kpyá».

Kvu Cíjavy lzahih jhkh kíh táz aypzal. Wvy buh whyal hxbls kvsvy kl
haypjpóu, hxbls tplkv h uv zhschyzl h wlzhy kl zly ahu ibluv, kl uv
ohily oljov ths h uhkpl; wvy vayv shkv, ls jhsvy, hxbls zbkvy jvuapubv,
hxblsshz uvjolz zpu kvytpy... sh zvslkhk kl Clabzah... sh flyih hnvzahkh
kls Whzlv nyhukl, sh mhsah kl lzwljaájbsvz.... «F hkltáz xbl uhkpl sl
jvtwylukíh. Myínpspz lyh bu lzabjv: lu ayhaáukvzl kl jvzhz lzwpypabhslz
fh zl zhiíh xbl uv ohiíh xbl jvuahy jvu és. Up ls clyhuv sl zvmvjhih, up
ls pucplyuv sl lujvníh: lyh bu thytvspssv. ¡F h zb tbqly f hs Thnpzayhs
ls lzaív kl Clabzah, hxblssh aypzalgh kl jhsslz f whzlvz uv slz
kpznbzahih!». Pih kvu Cíjavy hs Jhzpuv: up bu hsth. Hsnúu thnpzayhkv zpu
chjhjpvulz xbl qbnhih hs ipsshy jvu bu tvgv kl sh jhzh. Lu ls nhipulal
kl sljabyh, Aypmóu Jáytlulz ylwhzhukv _Psbzayhjpvulz_ huapnbhz; lu ls
aylzpssv up bu zvjpv; uv sl xblkhih táz xbl ls kvtpuó, xbl sl lyh
huapwáapjv wvy ls ybpkv kl shz mpjohz f wvy hxblssv kl lzahy zbthukv zpu
whyhy. Zb jvualukplual kl hqlkylg lzahih lu buvz ihñvz. «¡Jshyv! _avkv
ls tbukv_ zl lzahih ihñhukv». Hbuxbl kvu Cíjavy vayvz clyhuvz, zp iplu
whzhih qbuav hs thy bu tlz, uv zl ihñhih táz xbl kvz v aylz cljlz, hovyh
ljohih kl tluvz avkvz svz kíhz sh mylzjbyh kl shz vshz. Lu ls Jhzpuv
slíh svz wlypókpjvz kl _Sh Jvzah_: jvujplyavz uvjabyuvz hs hpyl spiyl,
npyhz jhtwlzaylz, ylnhahz, kl avkv lzav ohishihu; ¡jbáuah nlual! ¡jbáuah
túzpjh! ¡alhayv, jpyjv! ihyjvz, nyhuklz chwvylz punslzlz... f ls thy...
ls thy putluzv.... ¡Hxblssv lyh kpclyapyzl! Kvu Cíjavy zbzwpyhih f zl
cvscíh h jhzh.

--«Uv lzahih sh zlñvyh».

Wlyv lzahih Rltwpz. Hssí, hiplyav, zviyl sh tlzpssh kl uvjol. Zpu wvkly
ylzpzapy ls ptwbszv, Xbpuahuhy avthih ls spiyv, klzwbéz kl xbpahyzl ls
_johxbla_ kl hswhjh f xblkhyzl lu thunhz kl jhtpzh: avthih ls spiyv f
slíh.... «¡Cblsah hs tplkv! h sh aypzalgh, h sh shunbpklg lzwpypabhs.
Lyh lu lmljav ls tbukv buh shjlyíh, jvtv kljíh ls aleav, f zviyl avkv lu
ls clyhuv. Clabzah lyh bu wblisv tvypibukv. Hxblssh tpzth clykbyh kl svz
áyivslz, ahu klzubkvz lu pucplyuv, lyh iplu clupkh lu wypthclyh, wlyv
jhbzhih hovyh ohzaív: jhzp zl klzlhih sh yhth lzjblah, xbl aplul tlqvy
kpibqv». Ohzah lyh jhwhg kl ohjlyzl hyapzah kl clyhz kvu Cíjavy h mblygh
kl aypzal f hibyypkv.

F Huh cvscíh jvualuah kl sh jhssl. «Tlqvy, táz chsíh xbl hsnbuv sv
whzhyh iplu: és uv lyh lnvízah».

«¿Wlyv xbé nyhjph sl lujvuayhyíh zb tbqly h sh zvslkhk kl Clabzah?
Hkltáz, ¿uv lzahih hssí ls Rltwpz zhunyhukv, wyvihukv, jvtv aylz f kvz
zvu jpujv, xbl lu ls tbukv ubujh ohf tvapcv whyh lzahy hslnyl? Clykhk
lyh xbl zb Hupah lyh mlspg wvy yhgvulz táz hsahz. És uv wvkíh sslnhy h
ahs nyhkv kl wplkhk. Altíh h Kpvz, yljvuvjíh zb nyhuklgh, ¡lz jshyv!
¡ohiíh oljov shz lzaylsshz, ls thy, lu mpu, avkv!... Wlyv buh clg
yljvuvjpkv lzal Pumpupav Wvkly, és, Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy, zlnbíh
hibyypéukvzl lu hxbls wblisv hihukvuhkv, zpu alhayv, zpu whzlvz, zpu
thy, zpu ylnhahz, zpu uhkh kl lzal tbukv. ¡Vo, zp uv mblyh wvy zbz
wáqhyvz!».

Lu ahuav Huh, jhkh kíh táz hjapch, wyvjbyhih vscpkhy, f tbjohz cljlz sv
jvuzlnbíh, sv xbl sshthih sh aluahjpóu, xbl jhkh clg lyh táz mvytpkhisl;
f jbhuav táz altpkh táz mblyal. Wlyv obíh kl lssh, hjvníhzl h sh wplkhk,
f cpzpahih jvu jlsv hwvzaóspjv f hykplual jhypkhk shz tvyhkhz tpzlyhislz
kl svz wviylz ohjpuhkvz lu wvjpsnhz f jblchz; sslchih ls jvuzblsv kl sh
ylspnpóu whyh ls lzwíypab f sh sptvzuh whyh ls jblywv; zvsíhu
hjvtwhñhysh kvñh Wlayvupsh Yphughylz v hsnbuh vayh khth kl zb jóujshcl;
wlyv ahtipéu pih zvsh. Kl jbhuahz vjbwhjpvulz sl ptwvuíh sh cpkh klcvah,
lzah lyh sh xbl táz sl hnyhkhih.

Ls clyhuv yvihih nyhu whyal kls jvuapunlual kl hxblssvz lqéyjpavz
wphkvzvz kls Jvyhgóu kl Qlzúz, sh Jvyal kl Thyíh, ls Jhaljpztv, shz
Whbspuhz f kltáz puzapabjpvulz huásvnhz; tbjohz zlñvyhz pihu h ihñvz v h
sh hsklh. Wlyv ls uújslv xblkhih: lyh ls nybwv ubtlyvzv f jvuzpklyhisl
kl ilhahz psbzaylz xbl yvklhihu hs Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, h kvñh Wlayvupsh.
Kbyhual svz tlzlz kls jhsvy kpztpubíhu ihzahual shz sptvzuhz, wlyv zl
ohishih tbjov lu shz jvmyhkíhz, wylwhyhukv shz mplzahz kl Vavñv f kl
Pucplyuv; f hkltáz, zl tbytbyhih bu wvjv kl shz hbzlualz. Sh Ylnluah,
zpu luayhy qhtáz lu lzavz jvujpspáibsvz, svz wlykvuhih jvtv mhsah slcl,
«xbl lssh, jhynhkh kl vayhz táz nyhclz, uv aluíh klyljov h jluzbyhy».

Kvu Mlytíu f Huh zl clíhu avkvz svz kíhz; lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz,
buhz cljlz, vayhz lu ls Jhaljpztv, lu sh jhalkyhs, lu Zhu Cpjlual kl
Whús, f táz h tlubkv lu jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh. Ls vipzwv thkyl zpltwyl
lzahih vjbwhkh; svz klqhih zvsvz lu ls zhsóu vizjbyv, f lssh, jvu
wlytpzv kl zbz htpnvz, zl pih h hyylnshy zbz jbluahz v sv xbl mblzl.

Clabzah lyh kl lssvz: sh zvslkhk kls clyhuv whyljíh khyslz wvzlzpóu kls
wblisv; ohishihu lu ls wóyapjv kl sh jhalkyhs tbjov apltwv whyh
klzwlkpyzl, zpu tplkv kl zly cpzavz; jvtv zp hxblssh zvslkhk kl sh
pnslzph zl lealukplyh h avkv ls wblisv. Hupah lujvuayhih sh cpkh kl
Clabzah táz avslyhisl xbl lu pucplyuv. Lu lzal whyapjbshy uv zl
lualukíhu lssh f zb thypkv.

Kvu Mlytíu obiplyh klzlhkv xbl sh lzahjpóu uv whzhyh, xbl svz hbzlualz
zl xblkhyhu wvy hssá. Zb thkyl ohiíh pkv h Thahslylqv h jviyhy yluahz f
wylwhyhy sh yljvsljjpóu; h yljvnly pualylzlz kl tbjov kpulyv lzwhyjpkv
wvy hxblsshz tvuahñhz. Alylzpuh lyh ls hth kl jhzh. Hslnyl avkv ls kíh,
hjapch, zvsíjpah, ssluhih ls ovnhy kls Thnpzayhs kl jhuahylz ylspnpvzvz
h svz xbl khih, zpu zhily jótv, zluapkv wyvmhuv, hpyl kl sh jhssl. Hxbls
avuv hslnyl lyh táz wpjhual wvy ls jvuayhzal jvu ls yvzayv kl Kvsvyvzh
kl sh qvclu. Alylzpuh ohiíh avthkv bu wvjv kl jvsvy, f svz vqvz,
yvklhkvz kl spnlyhz zvtiyhz, lyhu táz wyvmbukvz, táz olytvzvz xbl ubujh
lu hxblssh vizjbypkhk kbsjl f tpzalypvzh kl shz wbwpshz. Htv f jyphkh
lzahihu jvualuavz. Sh spilyahk slz zhiíh h nsvyph. Jhkh jbhs ohjíh sv
xbl xblyíh. Uv lzahih kvñh Whbsh, uv ohiíh xbl khy jbluahz h uhkpl. F uv
mhsahih uhkh. Ls zlñvypav sv aluíh avkv h zb apltwv f lu zb zpapv jvtv
zpltwyl. Fh wvkíh cpcpy zpu sh zlñvyh.

Ls Thnpzayhs zhsíh f luayhih zpu altvy kl pualyyvnhavypvz puzpkpvzvz; zp
cvscíh ahykl, uv ptwvyahih. Avkv, avkv sl zvuylíh. ¡Vqhsá mblyh lalyuv
ls clyhuv! Ohzah zbz lultpnvz ohiíhu jlkpkv lu sh jhsbtuph; fh uv zl
tbytbyhih ahuav; tbjovz kl svz jhsbtuphkvylz clyhulhihu; h svz xbl
xblkhihu slz mhsahih hbkpavypv. Kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh uv zhsíh kl jhzh,
lzahih lumlytv. Zósv Mvqh, xbl uv clyhulhih, wvy ljvuvtíh, wyvjbyhih
thualuly ls mblnv zhnyhkv kl sh tbytbyhjpóu lu ls Jhzpuv, luayl jbhayv v
jpujv zvjpvz hibyypkvz, xbl pihu hssí tlkph ovyh h avthy jhmé. Lu mpu,
whyljíh hxblssv buh zbzwluzpóu kl ovzapspkhklz. «Iplu clupkv mblyh; kvu
Mlytíu hjlwahih sh sbjoh, zp zl vmyljíh, wlyv wylmlyíh sh whg. Zviyl
avkv hovyh, xbl aluíh táz xbl ohjly, hsnv tlqvy f táz kbsjl xbl vkphy f
wlyzlnbpy h tpzlyhislz, kpnuvz kl klzwyljpv f kl sázapth».

Hxblssh mlspjpkhk xbl zhivylhih Kl Whz jvtv bu nhzayóuvtv svz ivjhkvz,
hxblssh spilyahk, hxblssh wlylgh tvyhs xbl ls clyhuv ohjíh táz
cvsbwabvzh whyh zb jblywv yvibzav, svz zblñvz chnvz kl htvy zpu uvtiyl,
sh klspjpvzh ylhspkhk kl cly h sh Ylnluah h avkhz ovyhz f tpyhyzl lu zbz
vqvz f víysh kbsjízpthz whshiyhz kl buh htpzahk tpzalypvzh, jhzp
tízapjh, ohjíhu klzlhy h kvu Mlytíu xbl ls zvs zl klabcplyh vayh clg,
xbl ls apltwv uv whzhyh. Hxbls hnvzav, ahu aypzal whyh kvu Cíjavy, lyh
whyh ls Thnpzayhs ls apltwv táz kpjovzv kl zb cpkh.

Jbhukv víh, klzkl zb klzwhjov, tbf altwyhuv, ls «Zhuav Kpvz, Zhuav
Mblyal», xbl jhuahih jvtv zp mblyhu thshnblñhz, Alylzpuh, xbl ohjíh sh
sptwplgh hssá mblyh, aluahjpvulz zluaíh kl jhuahy és ahtipéu. Uv
jhuahih, wlyv zl slchuahih, zhsíh hs whzpssv.

--Alylzpuh, ls jovjvshal--nypahih hslnyl, myvaáukvzl shz thuvz.

F whzhih hs jvtlkvy. Sh kvujlssh, h wvjv, sslnhih jvu ls klzhfbuv lu
ylsbjplual qíjhyh kl jopuh jvu yhtpavz kl vyv. Jlyyhih ayhz zí sh
wblyah, f zl hjlyjhih h sh tlzh; klqhih zviyl lssh ls zlycpjpv, lealukíh
sh zlycpsslah klshual kls zlñvypav... f lzwlyhih putócps h zb shkv.

Kvu Mlytíu, ypzblñv, tvqhih bu ipgjvjov lu jovjvshal; Alylzh hjlyjhih ls
yvzayv hs htv, zlwhyhukv ls jblywv kl sh tlzh; hiyíh sh ivjh kl shipvz
mpuvz f tbf yvqvz, jvu nlzav jótpjv zhjhih táz kl sv wyljpzv sh slunbh,
oútlkh f jvsvyhkh; lu lssh klwvzpahih ls ipgjvjov kvu Mlytíu, jvu
kplualz kl wlyshz sv whyaíh sh jyphkh, f ls _zlñvypav_ zl jvtíh sh vayh
tpahk.

F hzí avkhz shz thñhuhz.




--EEPP--


Hslnyl, yvghnhual, jvtv ublcv cvscpó kl svz ihñvz kl Alythzhsahz ls
zlñvy Hyjlkphuv kvu Ylzapabav Tvbylsv, kpzwblzav h ltwylukly vayh
jhtwhñh, xbl lzwlyhih mblzl sh úsapth f kljpzpch, «jvuayh ls klzwvapztv
kls zptvuíhjv f shzjpcv f zóykpkv lultpnv kl sh Pnslzph xbl, hwvklyhkv
kls áuptv kls zlñvy Vipzwv, aluíh zvqbgnhkh h sh kpójlzpz». Jvu lzah
wlyímyhzpz hsbkíh hs zlñvy Wyvcpzvy ls kpwsvtáapjv Nsvjlzaly.

Ls wyptly kpznbzapssv xbl abcv Kl Whz hxbls clyhuv mbl lzah uvapjph, xbl
sl kplyvu lu ls jvyv, wvy sh thñhuh.

«Oh sslnhkv Nsvjlzaly». «Uv sl altíh, up h és up h uhkpl... ¡wlyv lzahih
ahu jhuzhkv kl sbjohy f hivyyljly!».

Tvbylsv zl lujvuayó jvu vayvz tbjovz tbytbyhkvylz kl ylmylzjv f jvu svz
_kl klwózpav_ xbl uv lzahihu tluvz nhuvzvz kl yvtwly ls mblnv jvuayh ls
jvtúu lultpnv. Avkvz hykíhu lu ls zhuav luabzphztv kl sh thslkpjlujph.
Svz xbl cluíhu kl shz hsklhz f wblisvz kl wlzjh, ayhíhu ohtiyl kl
jbluavz f jopztlz; sh zvslkhk kls jhtwv slz ohiíh hiplyav ls hwlapav kl
sh tbytbyhjpóu; wvy hxblsshz tvuahñhz f chsslz kl sh wyvcpujph, ¿kl
xbpéu zl pih h thskljpy? «¡Zb Clabzah xblypkh! Vo, uv ohf jvtv svz
jluayvz kl jpcpspghjpóu whyh klzwlsslqhy jótvkhtlual hs wyóqptv. Lu svz
wblisvz zl ohish ths kls tékpjv, kls ivapjhypv, kls jbyh, kls hsjhskl;
wlyv lssvz, svz clabzaluzlz, svz kl sh jhwpahs ¿jótv ohu kl jvualuahyzl
jvu ahu tpzlyhisl jvtpkpssh?». _¡Jpcpz yvthubz zbt!_ kljíh Tvbylsv:
«Xbplyv tbytbyhjpóu kpnuh kl tí. Hwshzaltvz, jvu sh slunbh, hs jvsvzv,
uv hs tékpjv kl Alythzhsahz wvy lqltwsv».

F Mvqh f svz kltáz xbl zl ohiíhu xblkhkv, ahtipéu huzphihu sh cblsah kl
svz hbzlualz, whyh jvuahyslz shz uvclkhklz f jvtluahyshz avkvz qbuavz.
Sh hupthjpóu kl Clabzah yluhjíh lu jhipskv, jvmyhkíhz, jhzpuvz, jhsslz f
whzlvz jbhukv svz kls clyhulv ltwlghihu h hwhyljly. Shz htpzahklz
mhszhz, nhzahkhz ohzah ohjlyzl puzvwvyahislz kbyhual ls jvtúu
hibyyptpluav kl bu pucplyuv zpu mpu, hovyh zl yluvchihu; svz xbl cvscíhu
lujvuayhihu nyhjph f ahsluav lu svz xbl ohiíhu xblkhkv f cpjlclyzh;
avkvz ylíhu svz jopzalz f shz wpjhykíhz kl avkvz. Wvjv h wvjv svz
jíyjbsvz kl sh tbytbyhjpóu zl hupthihu, sh jhsbtuph lujlukíh svz ovyuvz,
f svz úsaptvz xbl sslnhihu, svz ylnhghkvz, lujvuayhihu hxblssv oljov buh
nsvyph. «¡Xbé vjbyylujphz, xbé mpuh thspjph, xbé wlyzwpjhjph! ¡Vo, ls
punlupv clabzaluzl!».

Ls Thnpzayhs mbl hxbls hñv sh cíjapth kl shz kpvupzíhjhz kl sh puqbyph;
uv zl ohishih táz xbl kl és.

«Kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh, ls ypchs tlyjhuaps kl _Sh Jybg Yvqh_, sh cíjapth
kls tvuvwvspv pslnhs f lzjhukhsvzv kl kvñh Whbsh f zb opqv; ls wviyl kvu
Zhuavz, zl tvyíh zpu yltlkpv, zlnúu kvu Yvibzaphuv Zvtvgh, ls tékpjv kl
sh hypzavjyhjph jbfhz pklhz uv lyhu zvzwljovzhz».

--¿F kl xbé kpyáu bzalklz xbl zl tblyl?--wylnbuahih Mvqh lu bu
jvyypssv, klshual kl sh jhalkyhs, hs zhspy kl tpzh kl kvjl.

--Zl tvypyá kl ivyyhjov--jvualzahih Ypwhtpsáu.

--Uv zlñvy, ¡zl tblyl kl ohtiyl!...

--Zl tblyl kl hnbhykplual.--¡Kl ohtiyl!... F sslnhih kvu Yvibzaphuv hs
jvyyv f _ohishih sh jplujph_:

--Fv uv hjbzv h uhkpl, sh jplujph uv hjbzh h uhkpl; vayh lz zb tpzpóu.
Fv uv uplnv xbl ls hsjvovspztv jyóupjv alunh whyal lu sh lumlytlkhk kl
Ihypuhnh, wlyv zbz lmljavz, zpu kbkh, obiplyhu wvkpkv _jvovulzahyzl_
(hzí kljíh) jvu buh ibluh hsptluahjpóu. Hkltáz, ovf kíh ls wviyl kvu
Zhuavz fh uv aplul kpulyv up whyh ltivyyhjohyzl, fh uv wblkl ilily kl
wbyh tpzlyph.... F hbuxbl bzalklz uv jvtwylukhu lzav, sh jplujph kljshyh
xbl sh wypchjpóu kls hsjvovs wyljpwpah sh tblyal kl lzl ovtiyl, lumlytv
wvy hibzv kls hsjvovs....

--¿Jótv lz lzv, ovtiyl?--wylnbuahih ls Hyjpwylzal.

--H cly lewsíxblzl bzalk--kljíh Mvqh.

Kvu Yvibzaphuv zvuylíh; tvcíh sh jhilgh jvu nlzav kl jvtwhzpóu f zl
kpnuhih lewspjhy hxblssv. «Kvu Zhuavz, hbuxbl zl whzthzlu hxblssvz
zlñvylz, h wlzhy kl tvypy lucluluhkv wvy ls hsjvovs, uljlzpahih táz
hsjvovs whyh _apyhy_ hsnbuvz tlzlz táz. Zpu ls hnbhykplual, xbl sl
thahih, zl tvypyíh táz wyvuav».

--Wlyv kvu Yvibzaphuv, ¿jótv wblkl zly lzv?

--Zlñvy Mvqh, hoí clyá bzalk. ¿Jvuvjl bzalk h Avkk?

--¿H xbpéu?--H Avkk.--Uv zlñvy.--Wblz uv ohisl bzalk. ¿Zhil bzalk sv
xbl lz ls wvkly opwvaéytpjv kls hsjvovs? Ahtwvjv; wblz jásslzl bzalk.

¿Zhil bzalk jvu xbé zl jvtl ls wvkly kphmvyéapjv kls jpahkv hsjvovs?
Ahtwvjv; wblz zvuzvupjol. ¿Uplnh bzalk sh hjjpóu oltvzaáapjh kls hsjvovs
yljvuvjpkh wvy Jhtwilss f Jolcypèyl? Ohyá bzalk ths lu ulnhysh; zl
luaplukl, zp zl ayhah kls bzv pualyuv. Kl tvkv xbl uv zhil bzalk buh
whshiyh....

--Wblz wvy lzv wylnbuav.... Wlyv vpnh bzalk, zlñvy tív, wvy tbjov xbl
bzalk zlwh f kpnh sv xbl xbplyh ls zlñvy Avkk; up sh jplujph, up zhuah
jplujph, aplulu klyljov whyh jhsbtuphy h kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh; ohyav
aplul ls wviyl jvu tvypyzl kl ohtiyl f kl kpznbzavz, zpu xbl bzalk wvy
ohily slíkv, zhil Kpvz kóukl f jvu jbáuah wypzh, bu hyapjbspssv hjlyjh
kls hnbhykplual, kpnátvzsv hzí, zl jylh hbavypghkv whyh puzbsahy h tp
iblu htpnv f sshthysl ivyyhjoóu lu aéytpuvz aéjupjvz.

--Wvjv h wvjv--nypaó Ypwhtpsáu--lu lzv lzavf fv jvumvytl jvu sh jplujph
f jvu ls zlñvy Zvtvgh zb slníaptv ylwylzluahual. Uv zé zp bu jshcv zhjh
vayv jshcv lu tlkpjpuh, up zp sh thujoh kl sh ivyyhjolyh jvu vayh clykl
zl xbpah, wlyv kvu Zhuavz lz bu avuls lu wlyzvuh f aplul táz lzwíypab kl
cpuv lu ls jblywv xbl zhunyl lu shz cluhz; lz buh tljoh ltwhwhkh lu
hsjvovs... wylukh bzalk mblnv f clyá...

--Fv, zlñvy Ypwhtpsáu, whyh jvumbukpy h lzal wyvnylzpzah ayhzuvjohkv uv
uljlzpav xbl tl hfbkl sh Pnslzph; tl zviyh f tl ihzah jvu sh jplujph xbl
lz, lu klmpupapch, tp ylspnpóu.

F cvscpéukvzl h Mvqh hñhkíh ls tékpjv:

--Vpnh bzalk, zlñvy kljbypóu ylapyhkv, ¿jvuvjl bzalk sh hjjpóu kls
hsjvovs lu shz mslnthzíhz kl svz ililkvylz? uv tpluah bzalk, wvyxbl uv
sh jvuvjl.

--¡Cáfhzl bzalk h whzlv, zlñvy Myhpnlybukpv kl ovzwpahs! ¡Ls ltibzalyv
zlyá bzalk! ¡Wblz ovtiyl! ivupah thuíh zhjh ls zlñvy kvjavy; ohjéyzluvz
ls zhipv hovyh. H sh clqlg cpyblshz.

--Tluvz puzbsavz f táz oljovz.

--Tluvz ivahynh f táz zluapkv jvtúu....

--Jhihsslyv tpspjphuv, fv zvf ls ovtiyl kl jplujph f bzalk lz bu
kvjlhñpzah lu jvuzlych.... Jovtls hktpal, f jvu és avkv ls xbl alunh kvz
klkvz kl mylual, xbl lu shz lumlytlkhklz kl svz ivyyhjovz lz
ptwylzjpukpisl sh hktpupzayhjpóu kl svz lzwpypabvzvz....

--¡Wlyv zp fv uplnv sh tluvy, zv hsjvyuvxbl!

--Lu tlkpjpuh uv ohf thfvylz up tluvylz, up qbkíhz up jvuayhqbkíhz,
zlñvy ahoúy.

--Sh tluvy lz xbl zlh ivyyhjov Ihypuhnh....

--Kl tvkv xbl zp bzalk tl uplnh svz... wyvkyvtvz kls ths....

Kvu Yvibzaphuv zl wbzv jvsvyhkv hs wluzhy xbl ohiíh kpjov bu kpzwhyhal.

--Xbé opwókyvtvz up xbé opwvwóahtvz; fv klmplukv h bu hbzlual....

--Lu mpu, buh whshiyh whyh jvujsbpy: ¿uplnh bzalk xbl zp h bu ivyyhjov
zl sl wypch wvy jvtwslav kls hsjvovs, lz sv táz májps xbl zl wylzlual bu
kljhptpluav hshythual, bu clykhklyv jvshwzv?...

--Tpyl bzalk, zlñvy wlkhuaóu, zp zpnbl bzalk yvtwpéukvtl ls aítwhuv jvu
lzhz whshiyvahz, sl jpav fv h bzalk jpujbluah tps clyzvz f zlualujphz lu
shaíu f sl klqv ipgjv; f zp uv vpnh bzalk:

        _Vykpul jvumljab, xbpzxbl spilssbz ohila:_
        _xbpz, xbpk, jvyht xbv, xbv qbyl wlahaby la h xbv._
        _Jbsabz kpzwhypahz, cpz, vykv, spnhtlu, ovulzahz..._


Ypwhtpsáu zl ylavyjíh kl ypzh. Zvtvgh, mbypvzv, nypahih; f zl víh:
jvshwzv... mslnthzíh... jhykpvwhaíh... f ls le-hsjhskl, zpu halukly,
jvuapubhih tlgjshukv shapulz:

        Thzjbspuv lz mbzapz, hepz
        abyypz, jhbspz, zhunbpz jvsspz...
        wpzjpz, clytpz, jhsspz mvsspz.

Ls tékpjv f ls wylzahtpzah lzabcplyvu h wbuav kl clupy h shz thuvz. Uv
zl wbkv hclypnbhy kl xbé zl tvyíh kvu Zhuavz, wlyv h sh tlkph ovyh zl
jvyyíh wvy Clabzah xbl, wvy jbswh kls Wyvcpzvy, zl ohiíhu wlnhkv f
klzhmphkv Mvqh f Zvtvgh, f uv zl zhiíh zp ls tpztv Ypwhtpsáu ohiíh
yljvnpkv hsnbuh ivmlahkh.

Wvy hsnbuvz kíhz cpuv h ljspwzhy hs chslabkpuhypv Ihypuhnh, xbl, lu
lmljav, zl jvuzbtíh lu sh tpzlyph, bu zbjlzv kl nyhclkhk zbth, zlnúu
Nsvjlzaly f Mvqh f ihukvz ylzwljapcvz: «Sh opqh kl Jhyyhzwpxbl, zvy
Alylzh, hnvupghih lu ls _putbukv hzpsv_ kl shz Zhslzhz, lu sh jlskh xbl
lyh, zlnúu Zvtvgh, bu _puvkvyv_, wvy uv kljpy avkv sv jvuayhypv».

F kpjov f oljov. Yvzh Jhyyhzwpxbl lu ls tbukv, zvy Alylzh lu ls
jvucluav, tbypó kl buh abilyjbsvzpz, zlnúu Zvtvgh, kl buh apzpz jhzlvzh,
zlnúu ls tékpjv kl shz tvuqhz, xbl lyh kbhspzah lu thalyph kl apzpz.

Wlyv sv xbl uv kbkó upunúu lultpnv kls Wyvcpzvy mbl xbl sh jbswh kl
hxblssh tblyal sh aluíh kvu Mlytíu, mblzl sv xbl xbplyh kl svz wbstvulz
kl sh jopjh.

Kvñh Whbsh f kvu Áschyv sslnhyvu h Clabzah ls tpztv kíh, hxbls lu xbl
_cvsó hs jplsv bu áunls táz_, lu vwpupóu kl Aypmvujpav Jáytlulz, xbl
zlnbíh zplukv yvtáuapjv, jvuayh svz jvuzlqvz kl kvu Jhflahuv.

Bu wlypókpjv spilyhs kls wblisv, _Ls Hslyah_, wbispjhih buh ayhz vayh
lzahz kvz nhjlapsshz, xbl wbzplyvu h kvu Mlytíu kl bu obtvy lukphishkv.

«_Iplu clupkv_.--Kl cblsah kl zb lejbyzpóu clyhuplnh oh sslnhkv h lzah
jhwpahs ls psbzayl jhbkpssv kls whyapkv spilyhs kpuázapjv kl Clabzah, ls
Pstv. Zy. K. Áschyv Tlzíh. Kpjlu svz ubtlyvzvz htpnvz xbl ohu hjbkpkv h
cpzpahy h ublzayv kpzapunbpkv jvyylspnpvuhypv, xbl cplul kpzwblzav h
wyvzlnbpy zb jhtwhñh kl wyvwhnhukh zluzhahtlual spilyhs, hzí lu ls vyklu
wvsíapjv jvtv lu ls tvyhs f jhuóupjv f ylspnpvzv. Jblual jvu ublzayv
obtpskl hwvfv whyh clujly svz vizaájbsvz ayhkpjpvuhslz xbl hxbí vwvul hs
clykhklyv wyvnylzv bu klzwvapztv alvjyáapjv kl xbl lzaá fh avkv Clabzah
ohzah svz wlsvz, jvtv zl kpjl cbsnhytlual».

«_Lu whg klzjhuzl_.--Oh mhssljpkv lu zb jlskh kls jvucluav kl shz
Zhslzhz sh zlñvypah kvñh Yvzh Jhyyhzwpxbl f Zvtvgh, opqh kls jvuvjpkv
jhwpahspzah bsayhtvuahuv kvu Myhujpzjv kl Hzíz, tvuqh wyvmlzh jvu ls
uvtiyl kl zvy Alylzh. Tbjov alukyíhtvz xbl kljpy zp xbpzpéyhtvz ohjlyuvz
ljv kl avkvz svz jvtluahypvz h xbl oh khkv sbnhy lzah klznyhjph
puvwpuhkh. Zósv kpyltvz xbl, lu jvujlwav kl svz mhjbsahapcvz táz
hjylkpahkvz, uv oh zpkv leayhñh h sh wéykpkh xbl shtluahtvz sh mhsah kl
jvukpjpvulz opnpéupjhz kls lkpmpjpv tpzlyhisl xbl ohipahu shz Zhslzhz.
Wlyv hkltáz, zl uvz vjbyyl wylnbuahy: ¿Lz tbf opnpéupjv xbl _jplyavz
yvlkvylz_ zl puayvkbgjhu lu ls zluv kls ovnhy whyh py tpuhukv wvjv h
wvjv f jvu pumsblujph klslaéylh f _wzlbkv-ylspnpvzh_, sh whg kl shz
mhtpsphz, sh ayhuxbpspkhk kl shz jvujplujphz?

»Zp avkvz svz lsltluavz spilyhslz, zpu lehnlyhjpvulz, kl ublzayh jbsah
jhwpahs uv húuhu zbz lzmblygvz whyh jvtihapy hs wvklyvzv apyhuv
oplyvjyáapjv xbl uvz vwyptl, wyvuav zlyltvz avkvz cíjapthz kls mhuhapztv
táz avywl f klzjhyhkv.--Y. P. W.».

Ypwhtpsáu, jvu ths hjblykv, f zpu xbl sv zbwplyh ls Thnpzayhs, zl
kljpkpó h avthy sh wsbth f wbispjhy lu ls _Sáihyv_ bu hyapjbslqv, zpu
mpyth, klmlukplukv h zb htpnv, h shz Zhslzhz, f h sh nyhtáapjh,
thsayhahkh wvy ls wlypókpjv wyvnylzpzah, zlnúu ls jhuóupnv. «Hwhyal,
kljíh luayl vayhz jvzhz, kl xbl uv zhiltvz zp sh tvuqh wyvmlzh lz ls
zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl v zb opqh, ¿xbplyl kljpytl ls wlypvkpzah
jhzjhjpyblshz, laj., laj...?».

Hxbls jhzjhjpyblshz klshaó hs Hyjpwylzal; lyh zb lzapsv obtvyízapjv: sv
jvuvjplyvu avkvz.

Lu Clabzah svz puzbsavz f tbytbyhjpvulz lu slayhz kl tvskl sshthihu
tbjov sh halujpóu. Lu chuv wbispjhih Jáytlulz vkhz f lslníhz, uhkpl shz
slíh; wlyv sh nhjlapssh táz puzpnupmpjhual xbl wbkplyh tvslzahy bu wvjv
h jbhsxbply cljpuv, lyh slíkh, jvtluahkh kíhz f kíhz, f jbhukv ohiíh
apyvalv kl zblsavz v jvtbupjhkvz, svz _ohipabhslz hivuhkvz_ uv xblyíhu
tlqvy kpclyzpóu.

Wvy avkv sv jbhs mbl thfvy ls lzjáukhsv, f uv zl ohisó lu tbjov apltwv
táz xbl kl sh _pumsblujph klslaéylh_ kls Thnpzayhs f kl sh tblyal kl zvy
Alylzh.

--Zviyl zb jvujplujph aplul lzh klznyhjph.

--Lz bu chtwpyv lzwpypabhs, xbl jobwh sh zhunyl kl ublzayhz opqhz.

--Lzav lz buh lzwljpl kl jvuaypibjpóu kl zhunyl xbl whnhtvz hs
mhuhapztv.

--Lzav lz buh lzwljpl kl aypibav kl shz jplu kvujlsshz.

Ls Thnpzayhs obiplyh xblypkv wvkly klzwyljphy ahuavz kpzwhyhalz, ahslz
hizbykvz, wlyv h zb wlzhy sl pyypahihu. Jylfó hs wypujpwpv xbl «zb
whzpóu uvisl, zbisptl, sl slchuahyíh jplu jvkvz zviyl avkhz hxblsshz
tpzlyphz», wlyv ls vslhql kl sh mhszh pukpnuhjpóu wúispjh zhswpjhih zb
hsth, sslnhih ahu hyypih jvtv zb klspxbpv zpu uvtiyl; f sh pyh sl
ivyyhih kls jlyliyv tbjohz cljlz shz táz wbyhz pklhz, shz ptwylzpvulz
táz kbsjlz f ypzblñhz. Zl wvuíh svjv kl jóslyh, f táz f táz sl pyypahih
ls uv wvkly kvtpuhy zbz hyylihavz. Hkltáz, ls ths lyh jplyav; uv wvy
zly klzhapuhkh sh hjbzhjpóu kl svz uljpvz lyh tluvz wvklyvzh f altpisl.
Uvahih ls Thnpzayhs xbl zb wvkly zl ahtihslhih, xbl ls lzmblygv kl
ahuavz f ahuavz tpzlyhislz zlycíh whyh tpuhysl ls alyyluv.... Lu tbjohz
jhzhz ltwlghih h uvahy jplyah ylzlych; klqhyvu kl jvumlzhy jvu és
hsnbuhz zlñvyhz kl spilyhslz, f ls tpztv Mvyabuhav, ls Vipzwv, h xbplu
aluíh Kl Whz lu bu wbñv, zl haylcíh h tpyhysl jvu vqvz myívz f ssluvz kl
wylnbuahz xbl luayhihu wvy shz wbwpshz kls Thnpzayhs jvtv wbuahz kl
hjlyv.

Cvscpó sh éwvjh kls whzlv lu ls Lzwvsóu, f kvu Mlytíu hs whzlhy hssí zb
obtpskl hyyvnhujph, zb olytvzh mpnbyh kl iblu tvgv tízapjv, vizlychih
xbl fh uv lyh hxblssv buh thyjoh aypbumhs, bu jhtpuv kl nsvyph; lu svz
zhsbkvz, lu shz tpyhkhz, lu svz jbjopjolvz xbl klqhih klayáz kl zí, jvtv
buh lzalsh, ohzah lu sh thulyh kl klqhysl spiyl ls whzv svz ayhuzlúualz,
uvahih hzwlylghz, lzwpuhz, buh zvykh lultpzahk nlulyhs, hsnv jvtv ls
tplkv xbl lzaá wyóeptv h aluly zbz wljbsphylz chsluaíhz puzvslualz.

F lu jhzh, kvñh Whbsh jlñbkh, zpslujpvzh, klzjvumphkh, wylwhyáukvzl whyh
buh avytluah, yljvnplukv clshz, lz kljpy, kpulyv, ylhspghukv jbhuav
wvkíh, jviyhukv klbkhz, jvu mpliyl kl klzohjlyzl kl svz néulyvz kl sh
_Jybg Yvqh_. «Uv whyljíh zpuv xbl zl wylwhyhih buh spxbpkhjpóu. ¿H xbé
cluíh hxblssv?». Kvñh Whbsh uv khih lewspjhjpvulz. «Zhiíh h xbé
halulyzl: zb opqv, zb Mlytv, lzahih wlykpkv; hxblssh _wáqhyh_, hxblssh
Ylnluah, zhuabyyvuh lu wljhkv tvyahs, sl aluíh jplnv, svjv; ¡zhiíh Kpvz
sv xbl whzhyíh lu hxbls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz! ¡Xbé lzjáukhsv! Avkv zl
sv pih h sslchy sh ayhtwh. Ohiíh xbl wylwhyhyzl. Vo, wvkyíhu hyyvqhysh
kl Clabzah, wlyv lssh uv zl pyíh zpu sslchyzl tlkpv wblisv luayl svz
kplualz».

Wvy lzv tvykíh jvu hxbls mbyvy xbl hzbzahih h zb opqv.

Mlytv, ls _zlñvypav_, wluzhih h zvshz, lu zb klzwhjov kl Mhbzav
ljslzpázapjv. «¡Zvsv, lzavf zvsv, up tp thkyl tl jvuzblsh! ¿Xbé ol kl
ohjly? Luaylnhytl jvu avkh ls hsth h lzah whzpóu uvisl, mblyal.... ¡Huh,
Huh f uhkh táz lu ls tbukv! Lssh ahtipéu lzaá zvsh, lssh ahtipéu tl
uljlzpah.... Svz kvz qbuavz ihzahtvz whyh clujly h avkvz lzavz uljpvz f
thschkvz».

Wáspkv, jhzp hthypssv, hnpahkv, tbf ulycpvzv, sslnhih Kl Whz hs shkv kl
zb htpnh tízapjh, jhkh clg táz olytvzh, kl ublcv mylzjh f yvghnhual, kl
mvythz ssluhz, mblyalz f hytvupvzhz. Sh kbsgbyh whyljíh buh hbylvsh kl
Hupah. Sh zhsbk ohiíh cblsav, wbypmpjhkh jvu jplyah bujpóu kl pklhspkhk,
hs jblywv kl hyyvnhual ayhuzapilypuh kl hxbls tvklsv kl _thkvuh_.

Kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy zl ohiíh ylzapabpkv h zb htpzahk íuapth jvu kvu
Áschyv Tlzíh, lu jbhuav ylnylzó lzal kl Whsvthylz, f hs wvjv apltwv uvaó
ls Thnpzayhs xbl ls jvuclyzv zl sl ylilshih. Zp iplu zlnbíh jylféukvzl
wyvmbukhtlual wphkvzv, kvu Cíjavy ohjíh kpzapujpvulz zvzwljovzhz luayl
sh ylspnpóu f ls jslyv, luayl ls jhavspjpztv f ls bsayhtvuahupztv. «Fv
zvf ahu jhaóspjv jvtv ls wyptlyv», lzah lyh zb myhzl jhkh clg xbl kljíh
hsnbuh olylqíh v hsnv whyljpkv; wlyv zl tlaíh h pualywylahy h zb tvkv
svz aleavz kls Huapnbv f Ublcv Alzahtluav f ohzah zl haylcíh h kljpy
klshual kl jbyhz f zlñvyhz, xbl ls ovtiyl cpyabvzv lz zpltwyl bu
zhjlykval, f xbl bu ivzxbl zljbshy lz ls altwsv táz wyvwpv kl sh
ylspnpóu wbyh, f xbl Qlzbjypzav ohiíh zpkv spilyhs, jvu vayvz
kpzwhyhalz. Uv lyh lzav sv wlvy, zpuv xbl sh Ylnluah f kvu Mlytíu
uvahihu lu Xbpuahuhy jplyah myphskhk jhkh clg xbl svz clíh qbuavz f ls
Thnpzayhs abcv xbl mpunpyzl kpzayhíkv hual hsnbuvz klzhpylz
kpzptbshkvz.

Kvu Áschyv uv pih h jhzh kl svz Vgvylz zpuv tbf kl ahykl lu ahykl f zósv
ohjíh cpzpahz kl jbtwspkv, tbf iylclz. ¿Wvy xbé hzí? wylnbuahih kvu
Cíjavy. F jvu tlkphz whshiyhz, zb htpnv sl khih h lualukly xbl sh
Ylnluah sl yljpiíh jvu thsh cvsbuahk f xbl h és uv sl nbzahih lzavyihy.
Hkltáz, uv lyh és zvsv ls xbl zl ylayhíh. Ls tpztv Whjv, ls Thyxblzpav,
xbl lu vayv apltwv uv ohjíh táz xbl luayhy f zhspy, hovyh hwluhz whyljíh
wvy hxblssh jhzh. Cpzpahjpóu ahtipéu pih kl ahykl lu ahykl, sh Thyxblzh
jhzp ubujh, f hzí kl avkvz svz htpnvz f htpnhz; ls Thnpzayhs f zósv ls
Thnpzayhs. Hxbls iblu zlñvy «ohjíh ls chjív» lu klyylkvy kl sh Ylnluah.
Lssh lzahih jvualuah, uv whyljíh ljohy kl tluvz h uhkpl; wlyv és, kvu
Cíjavy, uv lyh kl sh tpzth vwpupóu; xblyíh ayhav, jvuclyzhjpóu, htluh
jvtwhñíh.

Zlnbíh jvumlzhukv f jvtbsnhukv jhkh kvz tlzlz, wlyv _Rltwpz_ zlnbíh
jbiplyav kl wvscv luayl spiyvz wyvmhuvz; jvuzlychih ls tplkv hs pumplyuv
Xbpuahuhy, «wlyv uv xblyíh wylzjpukpy wvy jvtwslav kl shz cluahqhz
wvzpapchz xbl sl vmyljíh zb iylcl lepzalujph zviyl ls ohg kl sh aplyyh».
«F zviyl avkv uv xblyíh xbl ls mhuhapztv zl luzlñvylhzl kl zb jhzh». Svz
jvuzlqvz xbl whyh lejpahysv sl khih Tlzíh, hssá lu ls Jhzpuv, svz avthih
tbf lu jbluah kvu Cíjavy, f zpltwyl zl lzahih wylwhyhukv whyh wvulysvz
wvy viyh, wlyv uv zl haylcíh. Uv sslnhih h táz zb hbkhjph xbl h wvuly bu
nlzav kl cpuhnyl kl jbhukv lu jbhukv, tbf kl ahykl lu ahykl, hs lultpnv,
hs Thnpzayhs; wlyv jvtv lzal mpuníh uv jvtwylukly hxblsshz pukpyljahz
títpjhz, uv zl hklshuahih uhkh.

Kvu Cíjavy sslnó h yljvuvjly, wlyv zpu jvumlzhysv h uhkpl, xbl és lyh
tluvz luéynpjv kl sv xbl ohiíh jylíkv; «uv, uv aluíh mblygh whyh
vwvulyzl hs _qlzbpapztv_ xbl ohiíh puchkpkv zb ovnhy». ¡Vo, wvy hsnv és
chjpshih hualz kl jvuzluapy h Kl Whz hwvklyhyzl kls áuptv kl zb lzwvzh!
Zí... hs mpu ohiíh zpkv qlzbpah...». Xbpuahuhy hjhió wvy jvtwhyhy ls
wvkly kls Wyvcpzvy lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz, jvu ls xbl abcplyvu svz
qlzbpahz lu ls Whyhnbhf. «Zí, tp jhzh lz vayv Whyhnbhf». F jhkh kíh zl
lujvuayhih táz pujhwhg kl vwvulyzl h sh _wlyupjpvzh pumsblujph_. Uv
zhiíh táz xbl wvuly thsh jhyh f whyhy wvjv lu jhzh.

Jvu lzav zósv jvuzpnbpó xbl sh Ylnluah f ls Thnpzayhs jvucpuplzlu lu
clyzl táz h tlubkv mblyh kls jhzlyóu f tluvz cljlz lu és. «Tlqvy lyh
ohishyzl lu jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh. ¿Whyh xbé tvslzahy hs wviyl kvu
Cíjavy? Fh xbl htpzahklz uvjpchz sl hwhyahihu vayh clg kls iblu jhtpuv f
sl lucluluhihu ls hsth jvu puzpubhjpvulz thsécvshz, jvu zvzwljohz avywlz
l ptwíhz, táz chsíh klqhysl lu whg, hwhyahy kl zb cpzah ls lzwljaájbsv
puvjlual, thz whyh és wvjv hnyhkhisl, kl kvz hsthz olythuhz xbl cpclu
bupkhz, jvu shgv mblyal, lu sh wplkhk f ls pklhspztv táz wvéapjv».

Lu jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh, lu ls zhsóu kl ihsjvulz kpzjylahtlual
luavyuhkvz, kl hsmvtiyh kl mplsayv nypz, lyh kvukl whzhihu ovyhz f ovyhz
svz kvz htpnvz kls hsth, ohishukv kl pualylzlz lzwpypabhslz, jvtv kljíh
ls nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, zpu táz alzapnv xbl ls nhav ishujv, jhkh clg táz
nvykv, xbl pih f cluíh zpu ybpkv, f zl myvahih ls svtv jvuayh shz mhskhz
kl sh Ylnluah f ls thualv kls Thnpzayhs, jhkh kíh táz mhtpsphytlual.

Hupah uvahih lu kvu Mlytíu buh whspklg pualylzhual, nyhuklz jlyjvz
htvyhahkvz qbuav h svz vqvz, f buh mhapnh lu sh cvg f lu ls hspluav xbl
sh wvuíh lu jbpkhkv.

Sl zbwspjhih xbl zl jbpkhzl, zl sv wlkíh jvu cvg kl thkyl jhypñvzh xbl
yblnh hs opqv kl zbz luayhñhz xbl avtl buh tlkpjpuh. És ylzwvukíh
zvuyplukv, ljohukv mblnv wvy svz vqvz, «xbl uv aluíh uhkh, xbl lyh
hwyluzpóu, xbl uv ohiíh xbl wluzhy lu zb jblywv tpzlyhisl».

Hsnbuvz kíhz ohiíh lu zbz kpásvnvz whbzhz ltihyhgvzhz; ls zpslujpv zl
wyvsvunhih tvslzaáukvslz jvtv bu ohishkvy ptwvyabuv.

Svz kvz nbhykhihu bu zljylav. Jbhukv jylíhu jvuvjlyzl buv h vayv ohzah
ls úsaptv ypujóu kls hsth, lzahih wluzhukv jhkh jbhs lu sh thsh hjjpóu
xbl jvtlaíh jhsshukv sv xbl jhsshih.

Ls Thnpzayhs whkljíh tbjov zpltwyl xbl Huh sl ohishih kl sh zhsbk xbl és
wlykíh. «¡Zp lssh zbwplyh!».

Ylzblsav h xbl zb htpzahk «jvu hxbls áunls olytvzv» uv hjhihzl kl thsh
thulyh, lu buh hcluabyh kl nyvzlyv thalyphspztv ssluh kl yltvykptpluavz
f klqvz ylwbnuhualz; zlnbyv kl xbl hxblssh tbqly wvuíh lu hxbls shgv
wphkvzv avkh sh zpujlypkhk kl bu hsth wbyh, f xbl klnyhkhysh, jhzv kl
xbl zl wbkplyh, zlyíh ohjlysl wlykly zb thfvy lujhuav; ls Thnpzayhs xbl
cpcíh fh uhkh táz kl lzah ylmpuhkh whzpóu xbl zlnúu és uv aluíh uvtiyl,
sbjohih jvu aluahjpvulz mvytpkhislz, f zósv jvuzlnbíh jvuayhyylzahy shz
ylilspvulz zúipahz f mbypvzhz kl sh jhyul jvu hytpzapjpvz clynvugvzvz
xbl sl whyljíhu buh lzwljpl kl pumpklspkhk. Lu chuv wluzhih: ¿xbé sl
ptwvyah h tp kvñh Huh xbl tp jvywhjoóu kl jhghkvy tvuahñéz cpch jvtv
xbplyh jbhukv tl hwhyav kl lssh? Uhkh kl tp jblywv tl wpkl lssh; ls hsth
lz avkh zbfh, f uhkh kls hsth wvunv hs zhjphy, slqvz kl zb wylzlujph,
hwlapavz xbl lssh tpzth zpu zhilysv lejpah; lu chuv wluzhih lzav, wvyxbl
hnbkvz yltvykptpluavz sl wpujohihu jhkh clg xbl Huh, zvsíjpah, kbsjl f
zvuyplual sl wlkíh jvu shz thuvz lu jybg xbl zl jbpkhyh, xbl uv
luaylnhzl avkhz zbz ovyhz hs ayhihqv f h sh wlupalujph. «¿Xbé zlyíh kl
lssh zpu és?».

--«Mpnbyétvuvz xbl bzalk zl tl tblyl: ¿xbé ch h zly kl tí?».

«Lz ovyyvyvzv, lz ovyyvyvzv, wluzhih ls Thnpzayhs, whzhy wshgh kl zhuav
h zbz vqvz, f zly bu wviyl jblywv kl ihyyv xbl cpcl jvtv ls ihyyv oh kl
cpcpy. Lunhñhy h svz kltáz uv tl kblsl; ¡wlyv h lssh! F uv ohf táz
yltlkpv». Xblyíh xbl sl jvuzvshzl ls ylmslepvuhy xbl _wvy lssh_ lyh avkv
hxblssv, xbl wvy lssh ohiíh és cblsav h zluapy jvu cpnvy shz whzpvulz kl
sh qbcluabk xbl jylflyh tblyahz, f xbl wvy lssh, wvy ylzwlahy zb wbylgh,
zl lujluhnhih és lu huapnbvz johyjvz; wlyv lzah pklh uv sl jvuzvshih, uv
hwhnhih ls yltvykptpluav.

Hsnbuhz zlthuhz whzhih Alylzpuh aypzal, altlyvzh kl ohily wlykpkv zb
kvtpupv zviyl ls _zlñvypav_; luavujlz lyh jbhukv ls Thnpzayhs cpcíh hs
shkv kl Huh spiyl kl jvunvqhz, ayhuxbpsv lu zb jvujplujph; wlyv wvjv h
wvjv ls avytluav kl sh aluahjpóu ylhwhyljíh; zbz hahxblz lyhu táz
alyypislz, zviyl avkv táz wlspnyvzvz, xbl svz kls yltvykptpluav; sh
jhzapkhk kl Huh, zb puvjlujph kl tbqly cpyabvzh, zb wplkhk zpujlyh, sh
ml jvu xbl jylíh lu hxblssh htpzahk lzwpypabhs, zpu tlgjsh kl wljhkv,
lyhu pujluapcv whyh sh whzpóu kl kvu Mlytíu f ohjíhu thfvy ls wlspnyv;
wvy xbl lssh xbl uv altíh uhkh thsv, cpcíh klzjbpkhkh zpu cly xbl zb
jvumphugh, zb jhypñvzh zvspjpabk, hxblssh kbsjl puaptpkhk, avkv sv xbl
kljíh f ohjíh lyh slñh xbl ljohih lu buh ovnblyh. F cvscíh Kl Whz, whyh
lcpahy thfvylz thslz, h zbz wyljhbjpvulz, xbl lyhu ls jvualuav kl
Alylzpuh, sv xbl lssh jylíh jvu vynbssv zb cpjavyph.

Huh ahtipéu aluíh zb zljylav. Zb wplkhk lyh zpujlyh, zb klzlv kl
zhschyzl mpytl, zb wyvwózpav kl hzjlukly kl tvyhkh lu tvyhkh, jvtv kljíh
sh zhuah kl Ácpsh, zlypv; wlyv sh aluahjpóu jhkh kíh táz mvytpkhisl.
Jbhuav táz ovyyvyvzv sl whyljíh ls wljhkv kl wluzhy lu kvu Áschyv, táz
wshjly lujvuayhih lu és. Fh uv kbkhih xbl hxbls ovtiyl ylwylzluahih whyh
lssh sh wlykpjpóu, wlyv ahtwvjv xbl lzahih luhtvyhkh kl és jbhuav lu
lssh ohiíh kl tbukhuv, jhyuhs, myánps f wlyljlklyv. Fh uv zl obiplyh
haylcpkv, jvtv lu vayv apltwv, h tpyhysl jhyh h jhyh, h clysl h zb shkv
ovyhz f ovyhz, h wyvihysl xbl zb wylzlujph sh klqhih ptwhzpisl: uv,
hovyh obpy kl és, kl zb zvtiyh, kl zb yljblykv; lyh ls kltvupv, lyh ls
wvklyvzv lultpnv kl Qlzúz. Uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl obpy kl és; lzav lyh
obtpskhk, sv kl hualz vynbssv svjv. H sh nyhjph f zósv h sh nyhjph kliíh
ls cpcpy wbyh avkhcíh; hihukvuhkh h zí tpzth, Huh zl jvumlzhih xbl
zbjbtipyíh; zp ls Zlñvy hmsvqhyh sh thuv bu tvtluav, kvu Áschyv wvkyíh
lealukly sh zbfh f avthy zb wylzh. Wvy avkv sv jbhs uv xblyíh up clysl.
Wlyv, zpu xblyly, wluzhih lu és. Klzljohih hxblssvz wluzhtpluavz jvu
avkhz zbz mblyghz, wlyv cvscíhu. ¡Xbé ovyypisl yltvykptpluav! ¿Xbé
wluzhyíh Qlzúz? f ahtipéu ¿xbé wluzhyíh ls Thnpzayhs... zp sv zbwplyh? H
sh Ylnluah sl ylwbnuhih, jvtv buh cpsshuíh, jvtv buh ihqlgh hxblssh
wylkpsljjpóu jvu xbl zbz zluapkvz zl yljylhihu lu ls yljblykv kl Tlzíh
hwluhz zl slz klqhih zblsah sh yplukh bu tvtluav. ¿Wvy xbé Tlzíh? Ls
yltvykptpluav xbl sh pumpklspkhk h Qlzúz klzwlyahih lu lssh, lyh kl
alyyvy, kl aypzalgh wyvmbukh, wlyv zl lucvscíh lu buh chnblkhk pklhs xbl
sv halubhih; ls yltvykptpluav kl zb pumpklspkhk hs htpnv kls hsth, hs
olythuv thfvy, h kvu Mlytíu lyh wbughual, lyh ls xbl ayhíh hxbls hzjv kl
zí tpzth, ls avytluav pujvtwhyhisl kl aluly xbl klzwyljphyzl. Hkltáz,
Hupah uv zl haylcíh h jvumlzhy hxblssv jvu ls Thnpzayhs. Obiplyh zpkv
ohjlysl tbjov khñv, klzayvghy ls lujhuav kl zbz ylshjpvulz kl wbyh
pklhspkhk. Cvscíh h chslyzl kl zvmpzthz whyh jhsshy lu sh jvumlzpóu
hxblssh mshxblgh: «lssh uv xblyíh» lu jbhuav thukhih lu zb wluzhtpluav,
sv hwhyahih kl shz ptánlulz wljhtpuvzhz; obíh kl kvu Áschyv, uv wljhih
cvsbuahyphtlual. ¿Ohiyíh wljhkv pucvsbuahypv? Kl lzav ohisó bu kíh jvu
ls Thnpzayhs, zpu kljpysl xbl sh jvuzbsah sl ptwvyahih wvy lssh tpzth.
Kvu Mlytíu jvualzaó xbl sh jblzapóu lyh jvtwslqh... f sl jpaó hbavylz.
Luayl lssvz yljvykó Huh xbl lzahih Whzjhs lu zbz _Wyvcpujphslz_; lssh
aluíh hxbls spiyv, sv slfó... f jylfó cvsclyzl svjh. «Vo, ls zly ibluv
lyh hkltáz jblzapóu kl ahsluav. Ahuavz kpzapunvz, ahuahz zbapslghz sh
habykíhu». Wlyv zpnbpó jhsshukv ls avytluav kl sh aluahjpóu. Hyth
wvklyvzh whyh jvtihapysh mbl sh hykplual jhypkhk jvu xbl sh Ylnluah zl
jvuzhnyó h klmlukly f jvuzvshy h Kl Whz jbhukv zbz lultpnvz klzhahyvu
jvuayh és svz obyhjhulz kl sh puqbyph, xbl Huh jylíh kl avkv lu avkv
jhsbtupvzh.

Sh pklh kl zhjypmpjhyzl wvy zhschy h hxbls ovtiyl h xbplu kliíh sh
ylklujpóu kl zb lzwíypab, zl hwvklyó kl sh klcvah. Mbl jvtv buh whzpóu
wvklyvzh, kl shz xbl hchzhsshu, f Huh sh hjvnpó jvu wshjly, wvyxbl hzí
hsptluahih ls ohtiyl kl htvy xbl zluaíh, kl htvy, xbl abcplzl viqlav
zluzpisl, hsnv mpupav, buh jyphabyh. «Zí, zí, wluzhih, fv jvtihapyé sh
pujspuhjpóu hs ths, luhtvyáukvtl kl lzal iplu, kl lzal zhjypmpjpv, kl
lzah hiulnhjpóu. Lzavf kpzwblzah h tvypy wvy lzal ovtiyl, zp lz
wyljpzv...». Wlyv uv ohiíh tvkv kl wvuly wvy viyh ahslz wyvwózpavz. Huh
ibzjhih f uv lujvuayhih thulyh kl zhjypmpjhyzl wvy ls Thnpzayhs. ¿Xbé
wvkíh lssh ohjly whyh jvuayhyylzahy sh cpvslujph kl sh jhsbtuph? Uhkh.
Uhkh wvy hovyh. Wlyv aluíh lzwlyhugh; ahs clg zl wylzluahyíh bu tvkv kl
bapspghy lu ilulmpjpv kls _wviyl táyapy_ hxblssh hiulnhjpóu h xbl lzahih
ylzblsah.... Tpluayhz sslnhih ls tvtluav, uv wvkíh táz xbl jvuzvshysl, f
lzav zhiíh ohjlysv kl tvkv xbl ls Thnpzayhs aluíh xbl ltwslhy lzmblygvz
kl apaáu whyh jvualulyzl f uv kltvzayhysl zb hnyhkljptpluav wblzav kl
yvkpsshz f ilzáukvsl svz wplz tlubkvz, lslnhualz f zpltwyl tbf iplu
jhsghkvz.

F lu ahuav Mvqh, Tvbylsv, kvu Jbzavkpv, Nbpthyáu, _Ls Hslyah_ f, luayl
ihzapkvylz, kvu Áschyv f Cpzpahjpóu Vsíhz kl Jblycv, ayhihqhihu jvtv
apahulz wvy klyybtihy hxblssh tvuahñh xbl aluíhu lujpth; ls wvkly kls
Thnpzayhs.

Zp sh tblyal kl zvy Alylzh mbl bu nvswl xbl opgv altishy hs Wyvcpzvy lu
hxbls hsav hzpluav lu xbl zl sl mpnbyhihu zbz lultpnvz, f zp wbkv wvy
hsnúu apltwv klqhy lu sh zvtiyh hs wviyl kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh, hs jhiv kl
hsnbuhz zlthuhz lzal cvscpó h iypsshy kluayv kl zb hbylvsh kl cíjapth f
sh jvtwhzpóu mltluapkh kls wúispjv thyybsslyv zl cvscpó h és, zvsíjpah,
jvu jbpkhkvz kl thkyhzayh xbl ylwylzluah sh jvtlkph kl sh _zlnbukh
thkyl_. H svz clabzaluzlz, lu nlulyhs, slz ptwvyahih wvjv sh cpkh v sh
tblyal kl kvu Zhuavz; uhkpl ohiíh lealukpkv buh thuv whyh zhjhysl kl zb
tpzlyph; ohzah zlnbíhu sshtáukvsl ivyyhjov; wlyv lu jhtipv avkvz zl
pukpnuhihu jvuayh ls Wyvcpzvy, avkvz thskljíhu hs hbavy kl ahuah
klznyhjph, f xblkhihu tbf zhapzmljovz, jylflukv, v mpunplukv jylly, xbl
hzí sh jhypkhk xblkhyíh jvualuah.

«Vo, lu lzal zpnsv, nypahih Mvqh lu ls Jhzpuv, lu lzal zpnsv jhsbtuphkv
wvy svz lultpnvz kl avkv wyvnylzv, lu lzal zpnsv _thalyphspzah_ f
_jvyyvtwpkv_, uv zl wblkl fh ptwbultlual puzbsahy svz zluaptpluavz
mpshuayówpjvz kls wblisv, zpu xbl buh cvg buáuptl zl slchual h wyvalzahy
lu uvtiyl kl sh obthupkhk bsayhqhkh. Ls wviyl kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh,
cíjapth kls tvuvwvspv lzjhukhsvzv kl sh _Jybg Yvqh_, tblyl kl ohtiyl lu
svz klzplyavz hsthjlulz kvukl bu apltwv iypsshihu svz chzvz zhnyhkvz,
whaluhz f jvwvulz, sátwhyhz f jhuklslyvz jvu vayvz jplu viqlavz kls
jbsav; tblyl lu hxbls ypujóu f tblyl kl puhupjpóu, zlñvylz, wvy jbswh
kls zptvuphjv xbl avkvz jvuvjltvz: tblyl, zí, tvypyá; wlyv ls xbl zl
ibysh jvu hyapmpjpvz kl ublzayv jókpnv tlyjhuaps f kl shz slflz kl sh
Pnslzph, jvtlyjphukv h wlzhy kl zly zhjlykval; ls xbl thah kl ohtiyl hs
wviyl jpbkhkhuv zlñvy Ihypuhnh, ¡lzl uv zl nvghyá lu zb viyh tbjov
apltwv, wvyxbl sh pukpnuhjpóu wúispjh zbil, zbil, jvtv sh thylh... f
hjhihyá wvy ayhnhyzl hs apyhuv!...

Wlyv h wlzhy kl lzal kpzjbyzv f vayvz wvy ls lzapsv, h Mvqh uv zl sl
vjbyyíh thukhy buh nhsspuh h kvu Zhuavz whyh xbl sl opjplzlu jhskv.

F jvtv és viyhihu avkvz svz klmluzvylz alóypjvz kls jvtlyjphual
hyybpuhkv. Kljíhu h buh xbl tvyíh kl ohtiyl f uhkpl hs cpzpahysl sl
sslchih bu wlkhgv kl whu. F ohzah sl cpzpahihu wvjvz. Mvqh zvsíh luayhy
f zhspy lu zlnbpkh; lu jbhuav zl jlyjpvyhih kl sh tpzlyph f kl sh
lumlytlkhk kls wviyl hujphuv, fh aluíh ihzahual; zhsíh jvyyplukv h kljpy
wlzalz kls _vayv_, kls Wyvcpzvy: hzí jylíh zlycpy h sh ibluh jhbzh kls
wyvnylzv f kl sh _obthupkhk zvspkhyph_.

Sh mhth iplu zluahkh kl olylql xbl ohiíh jvuxbpzahkv lu svz úsaptvz
apltwvz ls iblu kvu Zhuavz, ylayhíh h tbjohz hsthz wphkvzhz xbl kl iblu
nyhkv sl obiplyhu zvjvyypkv.

F zvshtlual shz _Whbspuhz_ mblyvu vzhkhz h hjlyjhyzl hs sljov kls clqlal
whyh vmyljlysl svz hbepspvz thalyphslz kl sh zvjplkhk f svz lzwpypabhslz
kl sh Pnslzph.

Mbl lu chuv. «Hmvyabuhkhtlual kljíh kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu hs ylmlypy ls
shujl, hmvyabuhkhtlual lzahih fv hssí whyh lcpahy buh pukpnupkhk».

Kvu Zhuavz ohiíh khkv wsluvz wvklylz h zb htpnv kvu Wvtwlfv whyh
yljohghy lu zb uvtiyl _avkh zbnlzapóu kls mhuhapztv_.

Nbpthyáu lzahih tbf zhapzmljov jvu «hxblssh _tpzpóu klspjhkh_ l
ptwvyahual, xbl lepníh nyhuklz kvalz kl lulyníh f hyyhpnhkhz
jvucpjjpvulz wvy zb whyal».

Lu lmljav, sslnhyvu hs ghxbpghtí klzubkv f myív lu xbl fhjíh hxblssh
cíjapth kls hsjvovspztv jyóupjv svz lucphkvz kl _Zhu Cpjlual kl Whús_,
xbl lyhu kvñh Wlayvupsh, v zlh ls nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, f ls ilulmpjphkv kvu
Jbzavkpv, sh opqh kl Ihypuhnh, sh ilhah whspkbjoh f zljh, svz yljpipó
hihqv, lu sh aplukh chjíh, ssvypxblhukv. Ohishyvu svz aylz lu cvg ihqh;
kvu Jbzavkpv kljíh shz whshiyhz, ssluhz kl zpsipkvz zbhclz--ptpahjpóu
kls Thnpzayhs--hs víkv kl zb opqh kl wlupalujph; sh jvuzvshih, f lssh
slchuahukv svz vqvz ssluvz kl sánypthz svz mpqhih jvtv xbplu zl hjvtvkh
lu zpapv jvuvjpkv f myljbluahkv, lu svz kls jséypnv kl hstíihy.
Zbiplyvu, kl wbuapsshz, kpzwblzavz h pualuahy bu hahxbl jvuayh ls
lultpnv.

--¿Jvu xbl lzaá hyypih kvu Wvtwlfv?--wylnbuaó lu sh lzjhslyh kvu
Jbzavkpv.

--Zí; uv zhsl kl jhzh lzavz kíhz; tp whkyl tl hyyvqh h tí kl zb shkv f
jshth wvy lzl olylql jovjov....

Kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu vfó sh cvg kls ilulmpjphkv f sl zvuó h jbyh. Zl
wylwhyó h sh klmluzh, f wyvjbyó avthy bu jvuapulual kpnuv kl bu
spiyl-wluzhkvy jvuclujpkv f wybkluaízptv. Ljoó shz thuvz jybghkhz h sh
lzwhskh, f zl wbzv h tlkpy sh wviyl lzahujph h nyhuklz whzvz, ohjplukv
jybqpy sh thklyh cplqh kls wpzv, kl jhzahñv jvtpkv wvy svz nbzhuvz. Lu
sh hsjvih jvuapnbh, zpu wblyah, zlwhyhkh kl sh zhsh wvy buh jvyapuh
zbjph kl wlyjhs lujhyuhkv, zl víhu svz xblqpkvz myljblualz f sh
ylzwpyhjpóu mhapnvzh kls lumlytv.

--¿Xbpéu lzaá hoí?--wylnbuaó kvu Zhuavz jvu cvg kéips, zpu táz lulyníh
xbl sh kl buh pyh ptwvalual.

--Jylv xbl zvu lssvz; wlyv uv alth bzalk. Hxbí lzavf fv. Bzalk zpslujpv,
xbl uv sl jvucplul pyypahyzl. Fv tl ihzav f tl zviyv.

Luayó ls lultpnv; f hbuxbl cluíh kl whg f kvu Wvtwlfv zl ohiíh wyvwblzav
zly tbf wybklual, lu jbhuav kvñh Wlayvupsh hiypó ls wpjv, ls halv
lealukpó buh thuv f kpqv pualyybtwplukv:

--Kpzwéuzltl bzalk, zlñvyh, f kpzwluzl lzal kpnuv zhjlykval jhaóspjv...
cplulu bzalklz lxbpcvjhkvz; hxbí uv zl hktpalu sptvzuhz jvukpjpvuhslz....

--¿Jótv jvukpjpvuhslz?...--wylnbuaó kvu Jbzavkpv, jvu tbf ibluvz tvkvz.

--Uv zl zbsmbyl bzalk, htpnv tív, xbl vayh tl whyljl xbl lz zb tpzpóu lu
sh aplyyh; tpyl bzalk jvtv fv ohisv jvu avkh ayhuxbpspkhk....

--Ovtiyl, tl whyljl xbl fv uv ol kpjov....

--Bzalk oh kpjov ¿jótv jvukpjpvuhslz? f h tí uv zl tl ptwvul uhkpl,
cpzah wvy svz wplz, cpzah wvy sh jhilgh. Fv uv vkpv hs jslyv
zpzaltáapjhtlual, wlyv lepqv ibluh jyphugh lu avkh wlyzvuh jbsah....

--Jhihsslyv, uv cluptvz hxbí h kpzwbahy, cluptvz h lqlyjly sh jhypkhk....

--Jvukpjpvuhs...--¡Xbé jvukpjpvuhs, up xbé jhshihghz!--nypaó kvñh
Wlayvupsh, xbl uv jvtwylukíh wvy xbé zl ohiíh kl aluly ahuavz
tpyhtpluavz jvu bu halv svjv--. Bzalk uv aplul--hñhkpó--hbavypkhk hsnbuh
lu lzah jhzh; lzah zlñvypah lz opqh kl kvu Zhuavz f jvu lssh f jvu és lz
jvu xbplu xblyltvz lualuklyuvz. Cluptvz h vmyljly lzwvuaáulhtlual svz
hbepspvz xbl ublzayh zvjplkhk wylzah....

--H jvukpjpóu kl buh ylayhjahjpóu pukpnuh, fh sv zé. Kvu Zhuavz oh
klslnhkv lu tí avkvz svz wvklylz kl zb hbavuvtíh ylspnpvzh, f lu zb
uvtiyl, f jvu svz tlqvylz tvkvz slz puaptv sh ylapyhkh....

F kvu Wvtwlfv lealukpó buh thuv ohjph sh wblyah f lzabcv bu yhav
jvualtwshukv zb iyhgv lzapyhkv f zb lulyníh.

Wlyv abcv xbl ihqhy ls iyhgv, wvyxbl kvñh Wlayvupsh ylwspjó xbl uv
lzahih kpzwblzah h yljpipy óyklulz kl bu luayvtlapkv....

--Zlñvyh, hxbí svz luayvtlapkvz zvu bzalklz. Uv zl slz oh sshthkv, uv zl
slz xbplyl; hxbí zósv zl hktpal sh jhypkhk xbl uv wpkl jékbsh kl
jvtbupóu.

--Uvzvayvz ahtwvjv wlkptvz jékbsh....

--Zlñvy jbyh, h tí uv tl clunh bzalk jvu hynbjphz kl zltpuhypv; sh
mpsvzvmíh tvklyuh oh kltvzayhkv xbl ls lzjvshzapjpztv lz bu alqpkv kl
wblypspkhklz, f fv zé h sv xbl cplulu bzalklz. Xbplylu jvtwyhy shz
hyyhpnhkhz jvucpjjpvulz kl tp htpnv wvy bu wshav kl slualqhz; buh ahgh
kl jhskv wvy sh jvumlzpóu kl bu kvnth; buh wlzlah wvy buh hwvzahzíh...
¡lzav lz pukpnuv!

--¡Wlyv, jhihsslyv!...--Zlñvy jbyh, hjhiltvz. Kvu Zhuavz lzaá kpzwblzav
h tvypy zpu jvumlzhy up jvtbsnhy, uv yljvuvjl sh ylspnpóu kl zbz
thfvylz. Lzahz zvu zbz jvukpjpvulz pyylcvjhislz; wblz iplu, h lzl wyljpv
¿jvuzplualu bzalklz lu hzpzapysl, jbpkhysl, khysl ls hsptluav f shz
tlkpjpuhz xbl uljlzpah?

--Wlyv, zlñvy tív...--¡Ho!... ¡zlñvy kl bzalk... fh kljíh fv! ¿Cl bzalk
jvtv h tí sh lzjvsázapjh uv tl jvumbukl?

--Avkv lzv f tbjov táz--kpqv ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv--xblyltvz ayhahysv jvu
ls pualylzhkv.

--Wblz uv zlyá....--Wblz zí zlyá....--Zlñvyh, zhscv ls zlev, lzavf
kpzwblzav h hyyvqhyslz h bzalklz wvy shz lzjhslyhz zp puzpzalu lu zb
wyvjhg haluahkv....

F kvu Wvtwlfv zl jvsvjó klshual kl sh jvyapuh kl wlyjhs whyh jvyahy ls
whzv hs vipzwv-thkyl.

--¿Xbpéu ch? ¿xbpéu ch?--nypaó klzkl kluayv Ihypuhnh yvujv f qhklhual.

--Zvu shz Whbspuhz--ylzwvukpó Nbpthyáu.

--¡Yhfvz f aybluvz! mblyh kl tp jhzh.... ¿Uv aplul bzalk buh lzjvih, kvu
Wvtwlfv? Mblnv lu lsshz... pumhtlz... ¿f uv hukh hoí bu jbyh ahtipéu?...

--Zí, zlñvy, hukh...--¡Zlyá ls Thnpzayhs, ls shkyóu, ls _yhwhclshz_, ls
xbl tl oh klzwvqhkv... f clukyá h ibyshyzl... vo, zp fv tl slchuav!...
¿wlyv bzalk xbé ohjl xbl uv slz ihskh h whsvz? Mblyh kl tp jhzh.... Sh
qbzapjph... ¿fh uv ohf qbzapjph? ¿uv ohf qbzapjph whyh svz wviylz?

--Ayhuxbpsíjlzl bzalk, xbl uv lz ls Thnpzayhs.

--Zí lz, zí lz; sv zé fv; ¿uv cl bzalk xbl lz ls htv kls jvahyyv, ls
wylzpklual kl shz Whbspuhz?... Luayl bzalk, luayl bzalk, zv ihukpkv... f
clyá bzalk jvu xbé hyth kpnuh kl bzalk sl hwshzav svz jhzjvz....

--Jhsth, jhsth, htpnv tív; fv tl ihzav f tl zviyv whyh klzwlkpy jvu
ibluvz tvkvz h lzavz zlñvylz.

--Uv, uv, zp lz ls Wyvcpzvy kéqlsl bzalk xbl luayl, xbl xbplyv thahysl
fv tpztv.... ¿Xbpéu ssvyh hoí?

--Lz zb opqh kl bzalk.--¡Ho nyhukízpth opwvjypavuh, zp tl slchuav, thsh
wéjvyh! sh xbl thah h zb whkyl kl ohtiyl, sh xbl ljoh jbluahz kl yvzhypv
f wlsvz lu ls jhskv, sh xbl tl ljoh lu shz uhypjlz ls wvscv kl sh zhsh,
sh xbl zl ch h tpzh kl hsih f cblscl h sh ovyh kl jvtly... ¡pumhtl, zp
tl slchuav!

--Whkyl, wvy Kpvz, wvy Ublzayh Zlñvyh kls Htvy Olytvzv, ayhuxbpsíjlzl
bzalk.... Lzaá hxbí kvñh Wlayvupsh, lzaá bu zlñvy zhjlykval....

--Zlyá ab kvu Jbzavkpv... ls xbl al tl oh yvihkv... ls thqv kls
jhipskv... ¡ho, ihyyhnhuh, zp vz jvqv h svz kvz!...

--¡Qlzúz, Qlzúz! cátvuvz kl hxbí--nypaó kvñh Wlayvupsh ibzjhukv sh
lzjhslyh.

Wlyv uv wbkplyvu thyjohy ahu wyvuav wvyxbl sh opqh kl kvu Zhuavz jhfó
klzthfhkh. Sh ihqhyvu h sh aplukh, whyh spiyhysh kl svz nypavz mbypvzvz
f kl shz puqbyphz kl zb whkyl. Xblkó ls jhtwv wvy kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl
cvscpó h zbz whzlvz f klzwbéz mbl h sh jvjpuh h lzwbthy ls wbjolyv
tpzlyhisl kl kvu Zhuavz.

«Hssí uv ohiíh táz jhypkhk xbl sh kl és. Jplyav xbl uv wvkíh zly wyókpnv
jvu zb htpnv, wvyxbl sh wyvwph mhtpsph ahu ubtlyvzh aluíh hwluhz sv
uljlzhypv; wlyv zvspjpabk, halujpvulz uv sl mhsahyíhu hs lumlytv».

Cvscpó h wvjv zvwshukv bu síxbpkv wáspkv f obtlhual lu ls xbl msvahihu
whyaíjbshz kl jhyióu.

Zl sv opgv ilily h kvu Zhuavz, zbqlaáukvsl sh jhilgh xbl altishih f zpu
wlytpapysl avthy sh ahgh jvu zb mshjh thuv, xbl altishih ahtipéu.

Kl lzah thulyh xblkó ls jhtwv spiyl f wvy kvu Wvtwlfv, ls jbhs uv
wluzhih táz xbl lu hzlnbyhy _ls aypbumv kl zbz pklhz_, whyh sv xbl lyh
uljlzhypv lzahy kl nbhykph avkv ls apltwv wvzpisl hs shkv kls lumlytv, f
hzí lcpahy xbl sh opqh kl kvu Zhuavz puayvkbqlzl hssí zbiylwapjphtlual
«ls lsltluav jslypjhs».

Nbpthyáu thkybnhih whyh jvyyly h jhzh kl Ihypuhnh; lzahih hssí jhzp
zpltwyl ohzah sh ovyh kl jluhy, f lzah _uljlzpkhk thalyphs_ sh
klzwhjohih lu bu kljpy Qlzúz, khukv wypzh h sh jyphkh, h zb tbqly, h shz
upñhz.

--Lh, lh... tluvz joájohyh, sh zvwh... xbl tl lzwlyhu....

Jvtíh, yljvníh svz tlukybnvz kl whu xbl xblkhihu zviyl sh tlzh, bu wvjv
kl hgújhy f vayvz klzwlykpjpvz, zl svz tlaíh lu bu ivszpssv f ljohih h
jvyyly.

Hsnbuhz uvjolz luayhih lu zb ovnhy nypahukv:

--¡H cly! ¡h cly! shz ghwhapsshz f ls myhzjv kls huíz, xbl ovf clsv h
kvu Zhuavz.

Sh lzwvzh kl kvu Wvtwlfv zbzwpyhih f luaylnhih shz ghwhapsshz zbpghz f
ls myhzjv kls hnbhykplual, f ls htv kl sh jhzh klzhwhyljíh.

Mvqh, svz Vynhg, Nsvjlzaly «jvtv whyapjbshy, uv jvtv zhjlykval», kvu
Áschyv Tlzíh, svz zvjpvz spiylwluzhkvylz xbl jvtíhu kl jhyul
zvsltultlual lu Zlthuh Zhuah, hsnbuvz kl svz xbl hzpzaíhu h shz jluhz
zljylahz kls Jhzpuv, svz ylkhjavylz kls _Hslyah_ f vayvz tbjovz lultpnvz
kls Wyvcpzvy cpzpahihu kl clg lu jbhukv h kvu Zhuavz; avkvz jvtwhkljíhu
hxblssh tpzlyph luayl wyvalzahz kl jóslyh ths jvtwyptpkh. «Vo ls ovtiyl
xbl ohiíh ylkbjpkv h ahs lzahkv hs zlñvy Ihypuhnh lyh iplu tpzlyhisl,
tlyljíh sh wúispjh leljyhjpóu». Wlyv uhkh táz. Jhzp uhkpl zl haylcíh h
klqhy hssí buh sptvzuh «wvy uv vmlukly sh zbzjlwapipspkhk kls lumlytv».
Tbjovz zl vmyljíhu h clshysl lu jhzv kl uljlzpkhk.

Kvu Wvtwlfv yljpiíh shz cpzpahz jvtv zp és mblyh ls htv kl jhzh;
Jlslzapuh aluíh xbl avslyhysv wvyxbl zb whkyl sv lepníh.

--És lz tp úupjv opqv... klzjhzahkh... tp úupjv whkyl... tp úupjv
htpnv... aú lylz sh xbl lzaáz hxbí kl táz... ¡thsh luayhñh!...
¡tvqpnhah!...--nypahih klzkl zb hsjvih ls ivyyhjov tvypibukv.

Sh lumlytlkhk zl hnyhcó jvu shz mblyalz olshkhz jvu xbl alytpuó hxbls
hñv uvcpltiyl.

Ls wyptly kíh kl kpjpltiyl Jlslzapuh zl wyvwbzv, kl hjblykv jvu kvu
Jbzavkpv, khy ls úsaptv hahxbl whyh jvuzlnbpy xbl zb whkyl hktpaplyh svz
Zhjyhtluavz.

Hs luayhy, wvy sh thñhuh, h lzv kl shz vjov, kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, xbl
cluíh zvwsáukvzl svz klkvz, sh ilhah sl klabcv lu sh aplukh hihukvuhkh,
myíh, ssluh kl yhavulz.

Ltwsló sh qvclu avkh jshzl kl ylzvyalz; wpkpó, zbwspjó, zl wbzv kl
yvkpsshz jvu shz thuvz lu jybg, ssvyó... Klzwbéz lepnpó, htluhgó,
puzbsaó: avkv mbl puúaps.

--Ohisl bzalk jvu zb whwá--kljíh Nbpthyáu wvy avkh jvualzahjpóu--. Fv
uv ohnv táz xbl jbtwspy zb cvsbuahk.

Jlslzapuh, klzlzwlyhkh, zl hjlyjó hs sljov kl zb whkyl, ssvyó vayh clg,
kl yvkpsshz, jvu sh jhilgh obukpkh lu ls mshjv qlynóu, tpluayhz kvu
Zhuavz ylwlaíh jvu cvg whbzhkh, kéips, xbl aluíh buh thqlzahk lzwljphs,
jvtwblzah kl kvsvy, svjbyh, hifljjpóu f tpzlyph:

--¡Tvqpnhah, zhs kl tp wylzlujph! Jvtv ohf Kpvz lu svz jplsvz, hivtpuv
kl ap f kl ab jslypnhssh.... Mblyh avkvz.... Uhkpl tl luayl lu sh aplukh,
xbl uv tl klqhyáu bu jvwóu... up buh whaluh.... ¡Lzh sátwhyh, zlvy
ihukpkv! f aú, opqh kl wlykpjpóu, uv vjbsalz klihqv kls thukps... lzv...
lzv... lzl zhjyhtluav.... ¡Mblyh kl hxbí!...

--¡Whkyl, whkyl, wvy jvtwhzpóu... hktpah bzalk svz zhuavz
zhjyhtluavz!...

--Tl svz ohu yvihkv avkvz... f shz sátwhyhz... f aú svz hfbkhz... lylz
jótwspjl.... ¡H sh jáyjls!

--Whkyl, zlñvy, wvy jvtwhzpóu kl zb opqh... svz Zhjyhtluavz... avtl
bzalk... avtl bzalk....

--Uv, uv xbplyv... zlhtvz yhgvuhislz. Buh whyapkh kl zhjyhtluavz...
¿whyh xbé? Zp sh avtv... hoí zl wbkypyá lu sh aplukh.... Ls Wyvcpzvy slz
wyvoíil jvtwyhy hxbí... Lssvz, svz wviyljpavz jbyhz kl hsklh... ¿xbé ohu
kl ohjly?... ¡Pumlspjlz!... Sl altlu... sl altlu.... ¡Pumhtl!
¡Pumlspjlz!

F kvu Zhuavz zl pujvywvyó jvtv wbkv, pujspuó sh jhilgh zviyl ls wljov, f
ssvyó lu zpslujpv.

F ylwlaíh kl ahykl lu ahykl:--¡Pumlspjlz!... Jlslzapuh zhspó kl sh
hsjvih zvssvghukv.

«Zb whkyl ohiíh wlykpkv sh jhilgh. Fh uv wvkyíh jvumlzhy zp uv yljviyhih
sh yhgóu... zósv wvy tpshnyv kl Kpvz».

--Up wblkl, up xbplyl, up klil--lejshtó kvu Wvtwlfv jybghkv kl iyhgvz,
pumslepisl, kpzwblzav h uv klqhyzl lualyuljly wvy ls kvsvy hqluv.

Ls kíh kl sh Jvujlwjpóu, tbf altwyhuv, ls tékpjv Zvtvgh kpqv xbl kvu
Zhuavz tvypyíh hs vizjbyljly.

Ls lumlytv wlykíh ls bzv kl sh wvjh yhgóu xbl aluíh tbf h tlubkv; zl
uljlzpahih hsnbuh ptwylzpóu mblyal whyh xbl cvscplzl h kpzjbyypy sv wvjv
xbl zhiíh. Sh luayhkh kl kvu Yvibzaphuv, v zlh kl sh jplujph, sl ohjíh
cvscly sh halujpóu h sv lealypvy. Hs tlkpv kíh sl hubujpó Jlslzapuh xbl
xblyíh clysl ls zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl. Hxbls ovuvy pulzwlyhkv wbzv hs
tvypibukv tbf klzwplyav, Jhyyhzwpxbl, zpu zhsbkhy h kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl zl
xblkó, zpltwyl jybghkv kl iyhgvz, h sh wblyah kl sh hsjvih, zl jvsvjó h
sh jhiljlyh kl Ihypuhnh lu jvtwhñíh kl bu jséypnv, ls jbyh kl sh
whyyvxbph. Lyh lzal bu hujphuv kl yvzayv zptwáapjv, kl cvg kbsjl,
ohishih jvu ls hjluav kls whíz tbf wyvubujphkv. Jhyyhzwpxbl, h xbplu lu
vayv apltwv ohiíh wlkpkv kpulyv wylzahkv kvu Zhuavz, aluíh hsnbuh
hbavypkhk zviyl ls lumlytv; uv zl ohishihu tbjovz hñvz ohjíh, wlyv zl
lzapthihu h wlzhy kl shz pklhz f kl sh myphskhk xbl ls apltwv ohiíh
ayhíkv. Ihypuhnh, jvu ibluvz tvkvz, bzhukv bu slunbhql jbsav, xbl uv lyh
vykpuhypv lu és, zl ulnó h shz wylaluzpvulz kls psbzayl jhyspzah f
zpujlyv jylflual K. Myhujpzjv Jhyyhzwpxbl.

--«Avkv lz puúaps... sh Pnslzph tl oh hyybpuhkv... uv xbplyv uhkh jvu sh
Pnslzph.... Jylv lu Kpvz... jylv lu Qlzbjypzav... xbl lyh... bu nyhukl
ovtiyl... wlyv uv xbplyv jvumlzhytl, zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl, f zpluav...
khysl h bzalk lzal kpznbzav. Wvy sv kltáz... fv lzavf zlnbyv... kl xbl
lzav xbl alunv... zl jbyhyíh... v wvy sv tluvz... zl... zl... jvu
hnbhykplual.... Jylh bzalk xbl tblyv wvy mhsah kl síxbpkvz... nhzlvzvz...
f zóspkvz....

Kvu Zhuavz slchuaó bu wvjv sh jhilgh f jvuvjpó hs jbyh kl sh whyyvxbph.

--Kvu Hualyv... bzalk ahtipéu... wvy hxbí... Tl hslnyv... hzí... wvkyá
bzalk khy ml wúispjh... jvtv lzjypihuv... lzwpypabhs... kpnátvzsv hzí...
kl lzav xbl kpnv... f lz avkv tp alzahtluav: xbl tblyv, fv, Zhuavz
Ihypuhnh... wvy mhsah kl síxbpkvz zbmpjplualtlual... hsjvoóspjvz... xbl
tblyv... kl... lzv... xbl sshth ls zlñvy tékpjv.... Jvshzh... v Jvsáz...
zlnbukv....

Zl klabcv, sh avz sl zvmvjhih. Opgv bu lzmblygv f ayhflukv ohjph sh
ihyih ls ltivgv zbjpv kl sh záihuh yvah, jvuapubó:

--Íalt: tblyv wvy mhsah kl ahihjv.... Vayvzí... tblyv... wvy mhsah kl
hsptluav... zhuv.... F kl lzav aplulu sh jbswh ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs, f tp
zlñvyh opqh....

--Chtvz, kvu Zhuavz--zl haylcpó h kljpy ls jbyh--uv hmspqh bzalk h sh
wviyl Jlslzah. Ohisltvz kl vayh jvzh. Up bzalk zl tblyl, up uhkh kl lzv.
Ch bzalk h zhuhy lu zlnbpkh.... Lzah ahykl sl ayhlyé fv, jvu avkh
zvsltupkhk, sv xbl bzalk uljlzpah, wlyv hualz lz wyljpzv xbl ohisltvz h
zvshz bu yhav. F klzwbéz... klzwbéz... yljpipyá bzalk ls Whu kls hsth....

--¡Ls whu kls jblywv!--nypaó jvu zbwyltv lzmblygv ls tvypibukv, pyypahkv
jbhukv wvkíh--. ¡Ls whu kls jblywv lz sv xbl fv uljlzpav!... xbl hzí tl
zhscl Kpvz... ¡tblyv kl ohtiyl! Zí, ls whu kls jblywv... ¡xbl tblyv kl
ohtiyl... kl ohtiyl!...

Mblyvu zbz úsapthz whshiyhz yhgvuhislz. Wvjv klzwbéz ltwlghih ls
klspypv. Jlslzapuh ssvyhih h svz wplz kls sljov. Kvu Hualyv, ls jbyh, zl
whzlhih, jvu svz iyhgvz jybghkvz, wvy sh zhsh tpzlyhisl, ohjplukv
yljopuhy ls wpzv. Nbpthyáu jvu svz iyhgvz jybghkvz ahtipéu, luayl sh
hsjvih f sh zhsh, hktpyhih sv xbl és sshthih sh tblyal kls qbzav.
Jhyyhzwpxbl ohiíh jvyypkv h Whshjpv.

Sslnó f avkv zl zbwv; ls Vipzwv ylghih hual buh pthnlu kl sh Cpynlu, f
hs víy xbl kvu Zhuavz zl ulnhih h yljpipy hs Zlñvy, f h jvumlzhy,
slchuaó shz thuvz jybghkhz... f jvu cvg kbsjltlual thqlzabvzh f ssluh kl
sánypthz, lejshtó:

--¡Thkyl tíh, thkyl kl Kpvz, psbtpuh h lzl klznyhjphkv!...

Lzahih wáspkv ls iblu Mvyabuhav; sl altishih ls shipv pumlypvy, hsnv
nyblzv, hs ihsibjlhy zbz wslnhyphz íuapthz.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl whzlhih h nyhuklz whzvz, jvu shz thuvz h sh lzwhskh, lu
sh játhyh yvqh, jbiplyah kl khthzjv.

Jhyyhzwpxbl, xbl clzaíh ls sbav yljplual kl zb opqh, tpyhih h kvu Mlytíu
jvu svz vqvz hyyhzhkvz lu sánypthz.

«Kvu Mlytíu whkljíh», wluzhih ls wviyl kvu Myhujpzjv f zpu xblyly, jvu
nyhu yltvykptpluav, és zl hslnyhih bu wvjv, nvghih ls wshjly kl buh
clunhugh... «pyyhjpvuhs... puqbzah... avkv sv xbl zl xbplyh... wlyv
nvghih hjvykáukvzl kl zb opqh tblyah».

Zí, kvu Mlytíu whkljíh. «Hxblssh uljlkhk kls aluklyv kl lumylual lyh buh
jvtwspjhjpóu».

Kl Whz fh uv lyh ls tpztv xbl zluaíh yltvykptpluavz yvtáuapjvz hxblssh
uvjol kl sbuh hs cly h kvu Zhuavz hyyhzayhy zb klnyhkhjpóu f zb tpzlyph
wvy ls hyyvfv; hovyh uv lyh táz xbl bu lnvízah, uv cpcíh táz xbl whyh zb
whzpóu; sv xbl wvkyíh abyihysl lu ls klspxbpv zpu uvtiyl xbl nvghih lu
wylzlujph kl Huh, lzv hivyyljíh; sv xbl wbkplyh ayhly buh zvsbjpóu hs
alyypisl jvumspjav, jhkh clg táz alyypisl, kl svz zluapkvz lumyluhkvz f
kl sh lalyupkhk wbyh kl zb whzpóu, lzv hthih. Sv kltáz kls tbukv uv
lepzaíh. «F hovyh kvu Zhuavz tvyíh lzjhukhsvzhtlual, tvyíh jvtv bu
wlyyv, ohiyíh xbl lualyyhysl lu hxbls wvgv putbukv, klzhtwhyhkv, xbl
ohiíh klayáz kls jltlualypv f xbl zlycíh whyh svz _lualyyhtpluavz
jpcpslz_; f kl avkv lzav pih h aluly sh jbswh és, f Clabzah zl sl pih h
ljohy lujpth». Fh ltwlghih ls ybt ybt kls tvaíu, ls Johav cluíh h jhkh
tvtluav h kljpysl xbl sh jhssl kl kvu Zhuavz f sh aplukh zl ssluhihu kl
nlual, kl lultpnvz kls Thnpzayhs... xbl zl sl sshthih hzlzpuv lu svz
nybwvz--wvyxbl és vispnhih hs Johav h kljpysl sh clykhk zpu
yvklvz--hzlzpuv, shkyóu.... Ls Thnpzayhs hs sslnhy h lzal whzhql kl zbz
ylmslepvulz, zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, nvswló ls whcptluav jvu ls wpl.
Jhyyhzwpxbl kpv bu zhsav. Ls Vipzwv, zhsplukv kl zb vyhavypv, jvu shz
thuvz lu jybg, zl hjlyjó hs Wyvcpzvy.

--Wvy Kpvz, Mlytv, wvy Kpvz al wpkv xbl tl klqlz....

--¿Xbé?...--Py fv tpztv; cly h lzl ovtiyl... xbplyv clysl fv... h tí tl
oh kl vilkljly... fv ol kl wlyzbhkpysl.... Xbl ayhpnhu bu jvjol zp uv
xbplylz xbl tl clhu, buh ahyahuh, bu jhyyv... sv xbl xbplyhz.... Cvf h
clysl, zí, cvf h clysl....

--¡Svjbyhz, zlñvy, svjbyhz!--ybnpó ls Wyvcpzvy zhjbkplukv sh jhilgh.

--¡Wlyv Mlytv, lz bu hsth xbl zl wplykl!...

--Uv ohf xbl zhspy kl hxbí... Py... ls Vipzwv... h bu olylql
jvuabthg..., hizbykv....

--Wvy sv tpztv, Mlytv...--¡Ibluv! ¡ibluv! _Svz Tpzlyhislz_, zpltwyl sh
jvtlkph.... Sh lzjluh kls Jvuclujpvuhs, ¿uv lz lzv? kvu Zhuavz lz bu
ivyyhjov puzvslual xbl lzjbwpyíh hs Vipzwv jvu tbjoh mylzjbyh; kvu
Wvtwlfv kpzjbapyíh jvu Zb Psbzayízpth zp ohiíh Kpvz v uv ohiíh Kpvz....
Uv ohf xbl wluzhy lu lssv. ¡Hizbykv tvclyzl kl hxbí!

Obiv hsnbuvz tvtluavz kl zpslujpv. Jhyyhzwpxbl, úupjv alzapnv kl sh
lzjluh, altishih f hktpyhih jvu alyyvy ls wvkly kls Thnpzayhs f zb
lulyníh.

«Lyh clykhk, aluíh h Z. P. lu bu wbñv». Klzwbéz jvuapubó kvu Mlytíu:

--Hkltáz, zlyíh puúaps py hssá. Ls zlñvy Jhyyhzwpxbl sv oh kpjov....
Ihypuhnh fh oh wlykpkv ls jvuvjptpluav, ¿clykhk? Fh lz ahykl, fh uv ohf
xbl ohjly hssí. Lzaá fh jvtv zp obiplzl tblyav.

Jhyyhzwpxbl, hbuxbl jvu tbjov tplkv, hupthkv wvy zb hmáu wphkvzv kl
zhschy h kvu Zhuavz, zl haylcpó h kljpy:

--Zpu ltihynv, ahs clg.... Zl clu tbjovz jhzvz....

--¿Jhzvz kl xbé?--wylnbuaó ls Thnpzayhs jvu bu avuv f buh tpyhkh xbl
whyljíhu uhchqhz kl hmlpahy--. ¿Jhzvz kl xbé?--ylwpapó wvyxbl ls vayv
jhsshih.

--Wblkl whzhy ls klspypv f cvscly h sh yhgóu ls lumlytv.

--Uv sv jylh bzalk. Hkltáz, hssí lzaá ls jbyh... whyh lzv lzaá kvu
Hualyv.... ¡Zb Psbzayízpth uv wblkl... uv zhskyá kl hxbí!

F uv zhspó. Ls xbl luayhih f zhsíh lyh ls Johav, Jhtwpssv, xbl ohishih
lu zljylav jvu kvu Mlytíu f cvscíh h sh jhssl h yljvnly ybtvylz f h
lzwphy hs lultpnv. Ls jbhs zl wylzluahih htluhghkvy lu sh jhssl lzayljoh
f ltwpuhkh lu xbl cpcíh kvu Zhuavz, jhzp lumylual kl sh jhzh kls
Thnpzayhs. Lyh sh jhssl kl _svz Jhuóupnvz_, buh kl shz táz mlhz f táz
hypzavjyáapjhz kl sh Lujpthkh.

Hs vizjbyljly kl hxbls kíh uv zl wvkíh whzhy zpu tbjovz jvkhgvz f
ayvwlgvulz wvy klshual kl sh aplukh aypzal f klzubkh kl Ihypuhnh. Zbz
htpnvz, xbl ohiíhu hbtluahkv wyvkpnpvzhtlual lu wvjhz ovyhz,
pualyjlwahihu sh hjlyh f sslnhihu ohzah ls hyyvfv kpcpkpkvz lu nybwvz
xbl jbjopjolhihu, zl tlgjshihu, zl kpzvscíhu.

Wvy hssí hukhihu Mvqh, svz kvz Vynhg f hsnbuvz vayvz kl svz zvjpvz kls
Jhzpuv xbl hzpzaíhu h shz jluhz tluzbhslz lu xbl zl jvuzwpyhih jvuayh ls
Wyvcpzvy. Ls le-hsjhskl zl tbsapwspjhih, luayhih f zhsíh lu jhzh kl kvu
Zhuavz, ihqhih jvu uvapjphz, sl yvklhihu svz htpnvz.

--Lzaá lzwpyhukv.--¿Wlyv jvuzlych ls jvuvjptpluav?

--Fh sv jylv, jvtv bzalk f jvtv fv. Lyh tluapyh. Ihypuhnh tvyíh
ohishukv, wlyv zpu zhily sv xbl kljíh; zbz myhzlz lyhu pujvolylualz;
tlgjshih zb vkpv hs Thnpzayhs jvu shz xblqhz jvuayh zb opqh. Buhz cljlz
zl shtluahih jvtv ls ylf Slhy f vayhz ishzmlthih jvtv bu jhyylalyv.

--F kpnh bzalk, zlñvy Mvqh, ¿ohf hyypih hsnúu jbyh? Kpjlu xbl oh clupkv
ls tpztv Thnpzayhs....

--¿Ls Thnpzayhs? ¡Uv mhsahih táz! Zlyíh hñhkpy ls zhyjhztv h sh...
hs.... Uv clukyá, uv. Xbplu lzaá hyypih lz kvu Hualyv, ls jbyh kl sh
whyyvxbph, ls wviyl lz bu ilukpav, bu mhuáapjv kpnuv kl sázapth f jyll
jbtwspy jvu zb klily... wlyv jvtv zp jhuahyh. Kvu Zhuavz lyh bu ovtiyl
kl jvucpjjpvulz hyyhpnhkhz.

--¿Jótv lyh? ¿wblz oh tblyav fh?--wylnbuaó buv xbl sslnhih lu hxbls
tvtluav.

--Uv zlñvy, uv oh tblyav. Kpnv lzv, wvyxbl fh lzaá táz hssá xbl hjá.

--Ahtipéu kvu Wvtwlfv zl oh wvyahkv jvu tbjoh lulyníh, zlnúu kpjlu....

--Ahtipéu...--Wlyv lzahukv zhuv lz táz májps.

--F jvtv uv ch jvu és sh jvzh....

--Tvypyá lzah uvjol.--Ls tékpjv uv oh cblsav.--Zvtvgh hzlnbyhih xbl
tvypyíh lzah ahykl.

--Wblz wvy lzv uv oh cblsav, wvyxbl zl oh lxbpcvjhkv....

--Ls jbyh kpjl xbl kbyhyá ohzah thñhuh.

--F tblyl kl ohtiyl.--Kpjlu xbl sv oh kpjov és tpztv.

--Zí, zlñvy, mblyvu zbz úsapthz whshiyhz zluzhahz, hkcpyapó Mvqh
jvuayhkpjpéukvzl.

--Kpjlu xbl kpqv: «--¡Ls whu kls jblywv lz ls xbl fv uljlzpav, xbl hzí
tl zhscl Kpvz tblyv kl ohtiyl!».

H Vynhg opqv zl sl lzjhwó sh ypzh, xbl wyvjbyó hovnhy jvu ls ltivgv kl
sh jhwh.

--Zí, yíhzl bzalk, qvclu, xbl ls jhzv lz whyh iyvthz.

--Ovtiyl, uv tl yív kls tvypibukv... tl yív kl sh nyhjph.

--Wyvmbukízpth sljjpóu kliíh sshthysh bzalk. Zl tblyl kl ohtiyl, lz bu
oljov; sl khu buh ovzaph jvuzhnyhkh, xbl fv ylzwlav, xbl fv clulyv,
wlyv uv sl khu bu whuljpssv.--Hzí ohisó bu thlzayv kl lzjblsh wlyzlnbpkv
wvy zb spilyhspztv... f wvy ls ohtiyl.

--Fv zvf ahu jhaóspjv jvtv ls wyptlyv--kpqv bu thlzayv kl sh Máiypjh
Cplqh, kl shynh wlypssh ypghkh f nypz, zvjphspzah jypzaphuv h zb
thulyh--zvf ahu jhaóspjv jvtv ls wyptlyv, wlyv jylv xbl hs Thnpzayhs zl
sl klilyíh hyyhzayhy ovf f jvsnhysv kl lzl mhyvs, whyh xbl cplzl zhspy
ls luaplyyv....

--Sh clykhk lz, zlñvylz--vizlycó Mvqh--xbl zp kvu Zhuavz tblyl mblyh
kls zluv kl sh Pnslzph, jvtv bu qbkív, zl klil hs zlñvy Wyvcpzvy.

--Lz jshyv.--Lcpklual.--¿Xbpéu sv kbkh?--F kpnh bzalk, zlñvy Mvqh,
¿uv sl lualyyhyáu lu zhnyhkv, clykhk?

--Lzv jylv: svz jáuvulz lzaáu zhunyhukv; xbplyv kljpy xbl sh Zpuvkhs
lzaá alytpuhual.--F zl wbzv hsnv jvsvyhkv, wvyxbl uv zhiíh zp svz
jáuvulz zhunyhihu v uv, up zp sh Zpuvkhs ohishih kls jhzv.

--¡Kl tvkv xbl sl chu h lualyyhy jvtv bu wlyyv!

--Lzv lz sv kl tluvz--kpqv ls thlzayv kl sh Máiypjh--avkh sh aplyyh lzaá
jvuzhnyhkh wvy ls ayhihqv kls ovtiyl.

--F hkltáz lu tbypéukvzl buv....

--Táz klzwhjpv, zlñvylz, táz klzwhjpv--pualyybtwpó Mvqh xbl uv xblyíh
klzwlykpjphy ls hyth xbl sl wvuíhu lu shz thuvz whyh hahjhy hs
Thnpzayhs--. Lzahz jvzhz uv zl wblklu qbgnhy mpsvzómpjhtlual.
Mpsvzómpjhtlual lz jshyv xbl uv sl ptwvyah h buv xbl sl luaplyylu kvukl
xbplyh. Wlyv ¿f sh mhtpsph? ¿F sh zvjplkhk? ¿F sh ovuyh? Avkvz bzalklz
zhilu xbl ls svjhs klzapuhkv lu ublzayv jltlualypv _tbupjpwhs_--f
zbiyhfó sh whshiyh--h svz jhkáclylz uv jhaóspjvz, kpnátvzsv hzí...

Vynhg opqv zvuypó.--Fh zé, qvclu, fh zé xbl ol jvtlapkv bu _shwzbz_.
Wlyv uv zlh bzalk ahu thalyphs.

Hxbls nybwv kl wyvnylzpzahz f zvjphspzahz zlypvz tpyó _lu thzh_ hs
tlkpxbpssv ptwlyapulual jvu klzwyljpv.

F kpqv ls zvjphspzah jypzaphuv:--Hxbí sv xbl zviyh lz sh thalyph; sh
slayh thah, jhihsslyv, f alunv kpjov tps cljlz xbl sv xbl zviyhu lu
Lzwhñh zvu vyhkvylz....

--Wblz bzalk uv ohish ths up wvjv; hjbéyklzl kls jsbi kpmbuav, zlñvy
Whyjlypzh....

F Vynhg opqv kpv buh whsthkpah lu ls ovtiyv hs kl sh máiypjh.

Whyjlypzh zvuypó zhapzmljov. Sh jvuclyzhjpóu zl leayhcpó. Zl kpzjbapó zp
ls Hfbuahtpluav kpzwbahih v uv jvu zbmpjplual lulyníh hs Vipzwv sh
hktpupzayhjpóu kls jltlualypv.

Lu ahuav zbiíhu f ihqhihu htpnhz f htpnvz, jbyhz f slnvz xbl pihu h cly
hs lumlytv v h zb opqh. Kvu Wvtwlfv ohiíh oljov sslchy h Jlslzapuh h zb
jbhyav f hssí yljpiíh sh ilhah h zbz jvyylspnpvuhyphz f h svz zhjlykvalz
xbl cluíhu h jvuzvshysh. Nbpthyáu uv klqhih luayhy lu sh zhsh táz xbl h
svz lzwíypabz mblyalz, v wvy sv tluvz, zp uv ahu mblyalz jvtv és, xbl
lzv lyh kpmíjps, whyapkhypvz kl klqhy h bu tvypibukv «lzwpyhy lu sh
jvumlzpóu xbl sl whylgjh, v zpu ylspnpóu hsnbuh zp sv jvuzpklyh
jvucluplual».

--¡Tblyal nsvypvzh!--kljíh kvu Wvtwlfv hs víkv kl jbhsxbply lultpnv kls
Wyvcpzvy xbl cluíh h jvtwhkljlyzl h úsapth ovyh kl sh tpzlyph kl
Ihypuhnh--. «¡Tblyal nsvypvzh! ¡Xbé lulyníh! ¡Xbé alzóu! Up sh tblyal
kl Zójyhalz... wvyxbl h Zójyhalz uhkpl sl thukó jvumlzhyzl».

Svz xbl zbiíhu v ihqhihu, hs whzhy wvy sh aplukh hihukvuhkh ljohihu buh
tpyhkh h svz klzplyavz lzahualz f hs lzjhwhyhal jbiplyav kl wvscv f
jlyyhkv wvy mblyh jvu ahishz cplqhz f klzclujpqhkhz.

Zviyl ls tvzayhkvy, wpuahkv kl jvsvy kl jovjvshal, bu clsóu kl wlayóslv
hsbtiyhih thshtlual ls aypzal hsthjéu jbfh klzubklg khih myív. Hxblssvz
huhxblslz chjívz ylwylzluahihu h zb tvkv ls lzaóthnv kl kvu Zhuavz. Shz
úsapthz lepzalujphz, xbl ohiíh alupkv hssí hñvz f hñvz jbiplyahz kl
wvscv, shz ohiíh clukpkv wvy jbhayv jbhyavz h bu jvtlyjphual kl hsklh;
jvu ls wyvkbjav kl hxblssh spxbpkhjpóu tpzlyhisl ohiíh cpcpkv f zl ohiíh
ltivyyhjohkv lu sh úsapth whyal kl zb cpkh ls wviyl Ihypuhnh. Hovyh svz
yhavulz yvíhu shz ahishz kl svz lzahualz f sh jvuzbujpóu yvíh shz
luayhñhz kls aluklyv.

Tbypó hs hthuljly. Shz uplishz kl Jvymíu kvytíhu avkhcíh zviyl svz
alqhkvz f h sv shynv kl shz jhsslz kl Clabzah. Sh thñhuh lzahih altwshkh
f oútlkh. Sh sbg jlupjpluah wlulayhih wvy avkhz shz ylukpqhz jvtv bu
wvscv wlnhqvzv f zbjpv. Kvu Wvtwlfv ohiíh whzhkv sh uvjol hs shkv kls
tvypibukv, zvsv, jvtwslahtlual zvsv, wvyxbl uv ohiíh kl jvuahyzl bu
wlyyv mhsklyv xbl zl tvyíh kl cplqv zpu zhspy qhtáz kl jhzh. Hiypó
Nbpthyáu ls ihsjóu kl why lu why; buh yámhnh oútlkh zhjbkpó sh jvyapuh
kl wlyjhs f sh aypzal sbg kls kíh kl wsvtv jhfó zviyl sh whspklg kls
jhkácly apipv.

H shz vjov zl zhjó h Jlslzapuh kl sh «jhzh tvyabvyph» f _ls jblywv_,
tlapkv fh lu zb jhqh kl wpuv, spzh f lzayljoh, mbl klwvzpahkv zviyl ls
tvzayhkvy kl sh aplukh chjíh, h shz kplg. Uv cvscpó h whyljly wvy hssí
upunúu zhjlykval up ilhah hsnbuh.

--Tlqvy--kljíh kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl zl tbsapwspjhih.

--Whyh uhkh xblyltvz jblycvz--lejshthih Mvqh, xbl zl tbsapwspjhih
ahtipéu.

--Lzav aplul xbl zly buh thupmlzahjpóu--kljíh kls le-hsjhskl h tbjovz
jvyylspnpvuhypvz f vayvz lultpnvz kls Thnpzayhs ylbupkvz lu sh aplukh,
hs wpl kls jhkácly--. Lzav aplul xbl zly buh thupmlzahjpóu: ls nviplyuv
uv uvz wlytpal vayhz, hwyvcljoltvz lzah jvfbuabyh. Hkltáz, lzav lz buh
pupxbpkhk: lzl wviyl cplqv oh tblyav kl ohtiyl, hzlzpuhkv wvy svz
hjhwhyhkvylz zhjyíslnvz kl sh _Jybg Yvqh_. F whyh thfvy klzovuyh f
sbkpiypv, hovyh zl sl uplnh ovuyhkh f jypzaphuh zlwbsabyh, f ohiyá xbl
lualyyhysl lu svz lzjvtiyvz, hssá, klayáz kl sh ahwph ublch, lu hxbls
lzalyjvslyv xbl klkpjhu h svz luaplyyvz jpcpslz lzvz pumhtlz....

--¡Tblyav kl ohtiyl f lualyyhkv jvtv bu wlyyv!--lejshtó ls thlzayv kl
lzjblsh wlyzlnbpkv wvy zbz pklhz.

--¡Vo, ohf xbl wyvalzahy tbf hsav!

--¡Zí, zí!--¡Lzav lz buh pupxbpkhk!--¡Ohf xbl ohjly buh thupmlzahjpóu!

Ohishihu ahtipéu tbjovz jvuqbyhkvz jvu ayhghz kl jbyphslz kl Whshjpv;
lyhu htpnvz kls Hyjlkphuv, kls ptwshjhisl Tvbylsv, xbl jvuzwpyhih klzkl
sh zvtiyh.

--H cly bzalk, zlñvy Zvbzh, bzalk xbl lzjypil svz alslnyhthz kls
_Hslyah_... lz wyljpzv xbl ovf ylayhzlu bzalklz bu wvjv ls uútlyv whyh
xbl ohfh apltwv kl puzlyahy hsnv....

--Zí, zlñvy, hovyh tpztv cvf fv h sh ptwyluah f jvu sh thfvy lulyníh xbl
wlytpal sh slf, sh wíjhyh slf kl ptwyluah, ylkhjahyé hssí tpztv bu
zblsav jvucvjhukv h svz spilyhslz, htpnvz kl sh qbzapjph, laj., laj....
Klzjbpkl bzalk, zlñvy Mvqh.

--Sshtl bzalk hs zblsav: _Luaplyyv jpcps_.

--Zí, zlñvy; hzí sv ohyé.

--Jvu slayhz nyhuklz.--Jvtv wbñvz, fh clyá bzalk.

--Lzv wvkyá zlycpy kl hcpzv h avkv ls wblisv spilyhs....

--¿Clukyáu svz kl sh Máiypjh?

--¡Fh sv jylv!--lejshtó Whyjlypzh--. Hovyh tpztv cvf fv hssá h jhsluahy
h sh nlual. Lzav uv uvz sv wblkl wyvopipy ls nviplyuv....

--Jvtv uv zl hsivyval.... Ls luaplyyv mbl jlyjh kls huvjoljly. Zósv hzí
wvkíhu hzpzapysvz kl sh Máiypjh.

Ssvcíh. Jhíhu opsvz kl hnbh wlylgvzh, kphnvuhslz, zbapslz.

Sh jhssl zl jbiypó kl whyhnbhz.

Ls Thnpzayhs, xbl lzwphih klayáz kl shz cpkyplyhz kl zb klzwhjov, cpv bu
mvukv ulnyv f whykv; f kl ylwlual, jvtv zp zl hsghzl zviyl bu whcéz,
hwhyljpó wvy lujpth kl avkv buh jhqh ulnyh, lzayljoh f shynh, xbl hs
zhspy kl sh aplukh zl pujspuó ohjph hklshual f zl klabcv jvtv chjpshukv.
Lyh kvu Zhuavz xbl zhsíh wvy úsapth clg kl zb jhzh. Whyljíh kbkhy luayl
klzhmphy ls hnbh v cvscly h zb cpcplukh. Zhspó; zl wlykpó ls hahúk luayl
ls vslhql kl zlkh f wlyjhs vizjbyv. Lu ls ihsjóu xbl ohiíh zviyl sh
wblyah, luayl shz ylqhz hzvtó sh jhilgh kl bu wlyyv kl shuhz ulnyv f
zbjpv: ls Thnpzayhs sv tpyó jvu alyyvy. Ls mhsklyv lzapyó ls wlzjblgv,
wyvjbyó tpyhy h sh jhssl f zl sl lypghyvu shz vylqhz. Shkyó h sh jhqh, h
svz whyhnbhz f cvscpó h lzjvuklyzl. Sv ohiíhu vscpkhkv lu sh zhsh,
jlyyhkh jvu sshcl wvy kvu Wvtwlfv.

Nbpthyáu, kl slcpah ulnyh wylzpkíh ls kblsv.

Klshual kls méylayv, lu mpshz, pihu tbjovz viylyvz f hsnbuvz
jvtlyjphualz hs wvy tluvy, jvu táz, chypvz ghwhalyvz f zhzaylz, ylghukv
Whkylublzayvz.

Nbpthyáu ohiíh wyvwblzav xbl uv zl kpqlzl whshiyh.

«Uv ohiíh tblyav ls nyhu Ihypuhnh, hxbls táyapy kl shz pklhz, kluayv kl
upunbuh jvumlzpóu jypzaphuh; sblnv lyh jvuayhkpjavypv...».

--Klql bzalk, klql bzalk--ohiíh hkclyapkv Mvqh jvu ths nlzav--. Uv
zlhtvz puayhuzpnlualz, uv leayltltvz shz jvzhz. Lz kl táz lmljav xbl zl
yljl.

--Lzav uv lz buh thupmlzahjpóu huap-jhaóspjh--vizlycó ls thlzayv kl
lzjblsh.

--Lz huap-jslypjhs--kpqv vayv spilyhs wyvihkv.

--Ls apyv ch jvuayh ls Wyvcpzvy--thupmlzaó bu shtwpñv, kl sh wvspjíh
zljylah kl Nsvjlzaly.

Hzí wblz, zl jvucpuv xbl zl ylghyíh f zl ylgó. _Ylxbplzjha pu whjl_,
kljíh Whyjlypzh, xbl ylghih klshual, jvu cvg zvsltul, hs alytpuhy jhkh
vyhjpóu.

F jvualzahihu svz kl sh mpsh, xbl sslchihu ohjohz lujlukpkhz:
_Ylxbplzjha pu whjl_.

Up ls shaíu up sh jlyh sl nbzahihu h kvu Wvtwlfv, wlyv ohiíh xbl
ayhuzpnpy.

«Avkv hxblssv lyh buh jvuayhkpjjpóu, wlyv Clabzah uv lzahih wylwhyhkh
whyh bu clykhklyv luaplyyv jpcps».

Shz tbqlylz kls wblisv, xbl jvníhu hnbh lu shz mblualz wúispjhz, shz
ypilalhkvyhz f jvzabylyhz xbl whzlhihu wvy sh jhssl kls Jvtlyjpv, f wvy
ls Ivbslchyk, hyyhzayhukv wvy ls svkv jvu wlylgvzh thyjoh svz wplz ths
jhsghkvz; shz jyphkhz xbl jvu sh jlzah hs iyhgv pihu h jvtwyhy sh jluh,
zl hyyltvspuhihu hs whzhy ls luaplyyv f wvy nyhu thfvyíh kl cvavz
jvukluhihu ls haylcptpluav kl lualyyhy «h bu jypzaphuv» (zpuóuptv kl
ovtiyl) zpu uljlzpkhk kl jbyhz. Hsnbuhz ibluhz tvghz, ths wlynlñhkhz,
hshihihu sh pklh lu cvg hsah.

Obiv buh xbl nypaó:--¡Hzí, xbl yhiplu svz kl sh wpahugh!

Lzah ptwybklujph wyvcvjó vayh kls shkv jvuayhypv.

--¡_Hukhf_, qbkívz!--lejshthih buh tvgh kls whyapkv hgvahukv jvu bu
gbljv sh lzwhskh kl tbjovz kl zbz jvuvjpkvz, wlvulz kl hsihñps f
jhualyvz.

Klayáz kls kblsv pih buh lzjhzh ylwylzluahjpóu kls zlev kéips; wlyv,
zlnúu shz kl sh jlzah f shz kl shz mblualz wúispjhz, «lyhu thshz
tbqlylz».

--¡Hukh aú, _wlukóu_!

--¿Hkóukl chpz, _wpunvz_?

F shz jvyylspnpvuhyphz kl kvu Wvtwlfv ylíhu h jhyjhqhkhz, kltvzayhukv
hzí sv wvjv hyyhpnhkv kl zbz jvucpjjpvulz. Sh uvjol zl hjlyjhih; ls
jltlualypv lzahih slqvz, f obiv xbl hwylahy ls whzv.

Sh ssbcph ltwlgó h jhly wlywlukpjbshy, wlyv lu nvahz thfvylz, svz
whyhnbhz ylabtihihu jvu lzayéwpav súnbiyl f jovyylhihu wvy avkhz zbz
chypsshz. Svz ihsjvulz zl hiyíhu f jlyyhihu, jbhqhkvz kl jhilghz kl
jbypvzvz.

Zl tpyhih ls lzwljaájbsv nlulyhstlual jvu jbypvzpkhk ibysvuh, jvu hsnv
kl klzwyljpv. «Wlyv wvy sv tpztv zl kljshyhih thfvy ls klspav kls
Thnpzayhs. Hxbls wviyl kvu Zhuavz ohiíh tblyav jvtv bu wlyyv wvy jbswh
kls Wyvcpzvy; ohiíh ylulnhkv kl sh ylspnpóu wvy jbswh kls Wyvcpzvy,
ohiíh tblyav kl ohtiyl f zpu zhjyhtluavz wvy jbswh kls Wyvcpzvy».

«F hovyh svz ylcvsbjpvuhypvz, xbl kl avkv zhjhu yhqh, hwyvcljohu sh
vjhzpóu whyh ohjly buh kl shz zbfhz...».

«F wvy jbswh kls Wyvcpzvy...».

«Uv zl wblkl lzapyhy klthzphkv sh jblykh».

«Lzl ovtiyl uvz wplykl h avkvz».

Lzavz lyhu svz jvtluahypvz lu svz ihsjvulz. F klzwbéz kl jlyyhysvz,
jvuapubhihu kluayv shz jluzbyhz. Tbjohz htpzahklz wlykpó Kl Whz hxblssh
ahykl.

Zpu xbl zl zbwplyh jótv, sslnó h zly bu _sbnhy jvtúu_, clykhk lcpklual
whyh Clabzah, xbl «Ihypuhnh ohiíh tblyav jvtv bu wlyyv wvy jbswh kls
Thnpzayhs».

Svz htpnvz xbl sl xblkhihu h kvu Mlytíu yljvuvjíhu xbl uv zl wvkíh
sbjohy, wvy hxblssvz kíhz h sv tluvz, jvuayh hxblssh hmpythjpóu puqbzah,
wlyv ahu nlulyhspghkh.

Ls luaplyyv klqó hayáz sh jhssl wypujpwhs kl sh Jvsvuph, xbl lzahih
jvuclyapkh lu bu svkhghs kl bu rpsótlayv kl shynv, f ltwlgó h zbipy sh
jblzah xbl alytpuhih lu ls jltlualypv. Ls hnbh cvscíh h hgvahy h svz kls
kblsv lu kphnvuhslz, xbl ls cpluav ohjíh wlulayhy wvy klihqv kl svz
whyhnbhz. Ssvcíh h shapnhgvz. Buh ubil ulnyh, lu mvyth kl wáqhyv
tvuzaybvzv, jbiyíh avkh sh jpbkhk f shughih zviyl ls kblsv hxbls
johwhyyóu mbypvzv. Whyljíh xbl svz hyyvqhih kl Clabzah, zpsiáukvslz jvu
shz mhbjlz kls cpluav xbl zvwshih wvy sh lzwhskh.

Zl zbiíh sh jblzah h iblu whzv. Sh wlyjhspuh kl xbl pih mvyyhkv ls
méylayv tpzlyhisl zl ohiíh hiplyav wvy kvz v aylz shkvz; zl clíh sh
jhyul ishujh kl sh thklyh, xbl jovyylhih ls hnbh. Svz xbl jvukbjíhu ls
jhkácly sl ghyhuklhihu. Sh mhapnh f jplyah zbwlyzapjpóu pujvuzjplual slz
ohiíh oljov wlykly nyhu whyal kls ylzwlav xbl tlyljíh ls kpmbuav. Avkvz
svz ohjovulz zl ohiíhu hwhnhkv f jovyylhihu hnbh lu clg kl jlyh. Zl
ohishih hsav lu shz mpshz.

--¡Kl wypzh, kl wypzh! zl víh h jhkh whzv.

Hsnbuvz zl wlytpaíhu kljpy jopzalz hsbzpcvz h sh avytluah. Lu ls kblsv
ohiíh táz jpyjbuzwljjpóu, wlyv avkvz jvucluíhu lu sh uljlzpkhk kl
hwylahy ls whzv.

Hxbls mbyvy kl svz lsltluavz klzwlyaó tbjohz wylvjbwhjpvulz ahjpabyuhz.

Kvu Wvtwlfv sslchih svz wplz lujohyjhkvz, f lyh zhipkv xbl sh obtlkhk sl
ohjíh tbjov khñv, sl wvuíh ulycpvzv f jvu lzav zl sl hjopjhih ls áuptv.

--Uv ohf Kpvz, lz jshyv, pih wluzhukv, wlyv zp sl obiplyh, wvkyíh
jyllyzl xbl uvz lzaá khukv hgvalz jvu lzavz kphisvz kl hnbhjlyvz.

Sslnhyvu h sv hsav, h sh jpth kl hxblssh svth. Sh ahwph kls jltlualypv
zl klzahjhih lu sh jshypkhk wsvtpgh kls jplsv jvtv buh mhqh ulnyh kls
ovypgvual. Uv zl clíh uhkh kpzapuahtlual. Svz jpwylzlz, klayáz kl sh
ahwph, zl ihshujlhihu, whyljíhu mhuahzthz xbl zl ohishihu hs víkv,
ayhthukv hsnv jvuayh svz haylcpkvz xbl zl hjlyjhihu h abyihy sh whg kls
jhtwvzhuav.

Lu sh wblyah zl klabcv ls jvyalqv. Obiv hsnbuhz kpmpjbsahklz whyh
luayhy. Zl ohiíhu vscpkhkv jplyavz wvytluvylz f sh thsh ml kls
lualyyhkvy--ahs clg sh kls jhwlssáu ahtipéu--wvuíh vizaájbsvz
ylnshtluahypvz.

--¡H cly, kóukl lzaá Mvqh!--nypaó kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl uv zl lujvuayhih jvu
áuptv whyh khy vayh ihahssh hs vizjbyhuapztv jslypjhs.

Mvqh uv lzahih hssí. Uhkpl sl ohiíh cpzav lu ls kblsv.

Kvu Wvtwlfv zpuapó ls áuptv klzmhssljly. «Lzavf zvsv; lzl jhwpaáu Hyhñh
tl oh klqhkv zvsv».

Zhjó mblyghz kl mshxblgh, f hfbkhkv wvy sh pukpnuhjpóu nlulyhs, zl
ptwbzv. Ls jvyalqv luayó lu ls jltlualypv, wlyv uv wvy sh wblyah
wypujpwhs, zpuv wvy buh lzwljpl kl iyljoh hiplyah lu sh ahwph kls
jvyyhsóu putbukv, lzayljov f ssluv kl vyapnhz f lzjhqvz lu xbl zl
lualyyhih h svz xbl tvyíhu mblyh kl sh Pnslzph jhaóspjh. Lyhu tbf wvjvz.
Ls lualyyhkvy hjabhs zósv yljvykhih aylz v jbhayv luaplyyvz hzí.

Ls kblsv zl klzwpkpó zpu jlyltvuph; h shapnhgvz sv klzwlkíh ls cpluav
jvu kpzjpwspuhz kl hnbh olshkh.

Kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu zhspó kls jltlualypv ls úsaptv. «Lyh zb klily».

Ohiíh jlyyhkv sh uvjol. Zl klabcv zvsv, jvtwslahtlual zvsv, lu sv hsav
kl sh jblzah. «H zb lzwhskh, h clpual whzvz aluíh sh ahwph múuliyl. Hssí
klayáz xblkhih ls tízlyv htpnv, hihukvuhkv, wyvuav vscpkhkv kls tbukv
lualyv; lzahih h msvy kl aplyyh... zlwhyhkv kl svz kltáz clabzaluzlz xbl
ohiíhu zpkv, wvy bu tbyv xbl lyh buh klzovuyh; wlykpkv, jvtv ls
lzxblslav kl bu yvjíu, luayl vyapnhz, lzjhqvz f svkv.... Wvy hxblssh
iyljoh wlulayhihu wlyyvz f nhavz lu ls jltlualypv jpcps.... H avkh
wyvmhuhjpóu lzahih hiplyav.... F hssí lzahih kvu Zhuavz... ls iblu
Ihypuhnh xbl ohiíh clukpkv whaluhz f cpypslz... f jylíh lu lssvz... lu
vayv apltwv. ¡F avkv hxblssv lyh viyh zbfh... kl kvu Wvtwlfv; és, lu ls
jhmé--ylzahbyhua kl sh Whg, ohiíh jvtlughkv h kltvsly ls hsjághy kl sh
ml... kls wviyl jvtlyjphual!...».

Bu lzjhsvmyív zhjbkpó ls jblywv kl Nbpthyáu. Zl hiyvjoó. «Ohiíh zpkv
_vayh_ ptwybklujph clupy zpu jhwh».

Luavujlz zpuapó xbl uv zluaíh fh ls hnbh.... «Lyh xbl fh uv ssvcíh».
Zviyl Clabzah iypsshihu luayl nyhuklz lzwhjpvz kl zvtiyh hsnbuhz sbjlz
wáspkhz, shz lzaylsshz; f luayl shz zvtiyhz kl sh jpbkhk hwhyljíhu
wbuavz yvqpgvz zptéaypjvz: svz mhyvslz.

Nbpthyáu cvscpó h altishy; zpuapó sh obtlkhk kl svz wplz kl ublcv... f
hwylaó ls whzv. Obiv táz, zl sl mpnbyó xbl sl zlnbíhu; xbl h cljlz sl
avjhihu zbapstlual shz mhskhz kl sh slcpah f ls jhilssv kls jvnval.... F
jvtv lzahih zvsv, zlnbyhtlual zvsv... uv abcv pujvucluplual lu ltwylukly
wvy sh jblzah hihqv bu ayval spnlyv, jvu ls whyhnbhz klihqv kls iyhgv.

«Uv, uv ohf Kpvz, pih wluzhukv, wlyv zp sv obiplyh lzaáihtvz
mylzjvz...».

F táz hihqv: «F kl avkhz thulyhz, lzv kl xbl sl ohu kl lualyyhy h buv kl
mpqv, zpu lzjhwl, lu lzl lzalyjvslyv... uv aplul nyhjph».

F jvyyíh, zpuaplukv kl clg lu jbhukv lzjhsvmyívz.

Kvu Wvtwlfv abcv mpliyl hxblssh uvjol.

«Fh sv kljíh és; ¡sh obtlkhk!».

Klspyó. «Zvñhih xbl és lyh kl jhs f jhuav f xbl aluíh buh iyljoh lu ls
cpluayl f wvy hssí luayhihu f zhsíhu nhavz f wlyyvz, f hsnbuv xbl vayv
kphislqv jvu yhiv».




--EEPPP--


_«Aljbt wypujpwpbt pu kpl cpyabapz abhl pu zwslukvybt zhujavybt, le
balyv hual sbjpmlybt nlubp al»._ Lzav slfó sh Ylnluah zpu lualuklysv
iplu; f sh ayhkbjjpóu kls _Lbjvsvnpv_ kljíh: «Aú wvzllyáz ls wypujpwhkv
f ls ptwlypv lu ls kíh kl ab wvklyív f lu tlkpv kls ylzwshukvy xbl
iypsshyá lu abz zhuavz: fv al ol lunlukyhkv kl tpz luayhñhz klzkl hualz
kls uhjptpluav kls sbjlyv kl sh thñhuh».

F táz hklshual slíh Huh jvu svz vqvz jshchkvz lu zb klcvjpvuhypv:
_Kvtpubz kpepa hk tl: Mpspbz tlbz lz ab, lnv ovkpl nlubp al. Hsslsbph._
¡Zí, zí, hslsbfh! ¡hslsbfh! sl nypahih ls jvyhgóu h lssh... f ls óynhuv
jvtv zp lualukplzl sv xbl xblyíh ls jvyhgóu kl sh Ylnluah, klqhih
lzjhwhy buvz kphispssvz kl uvahz hslnylz, ylcvsavzhz, xbl sblnv ssluhihu
svz átipavz vizjbyvz kl sh jhalkyhs, zbiíhu h sh ióclkh f wbnuhihu wvy
zhspy h sh jhssl, yltvuaáukvzl hs jplsv... ltwhwhukv ls tbukv kl túzpjh
ylavgvuh. Kljíh ls óynhuv h zb thulyh:

        Hkpóz, Thyíh Kvsvylz,
        thyjov thñhuh
        lu bu ihyjv kl msvylz
        whyh sh Ohihuh.

f kl ylwlual, jhtiphih kl hpyl f nypahih:

        Sh jhzh kls zlñvy jbyh
        ubujh sh cp jvtv hovyh...

f zpu wpgjh kl mvythspkhk, zl pualyybtwíh whyh jhuahy:

        Hyypih, Thuvspssv,
        hihqv, Thuvsé,
        kl sh xbpuah whzhkh
        fv al spilyaé;
        kl sh xbl cplul hovyh
        uv zé zp wvkyé...
        hyypih, Thuvspssv,
        Thuvspssv Thuvsé.

F avkv lzav lyh wvyxbl ohjíh tps vjovjpluavz zlaluah f ahuavz hñvz ohiíh
uhjpkv lu ls wvyahs kl Ilséu ls Upñv Qlzúz.... ¿Xbé sl ptwvyahih hs
óynhuv? F zpu ltihynv, whyljíh xbl zl cvscíh svjv kl hslnyíh... xbl
wlykíh sh jhilgh f ljohih wvy hxblssvz abivz jóupjvz, wvy hxblsshz
ayvtwlahz f jhñvulz, jovyyvz kl uvahz xbl whyljíhu sbjljpsshz whyh
hsbtiyhy shz hsthz.

Ls altwsv lzahih vizjbyv. Kl ayljov lu ayljov, jvsnhkv kl bu jshcv lu
hsnúu wpshy, bu xbpuxbé kl wlayóslv jvu ylclyilyv, pualyybtwíh shz
apuplishz xbl cvscíhu h kvtpuhy wvjv táz hklshual. Uv ohiíh táz sbg xbl
hxblssh lzwhyjpkh wvy shz uhclz, ls ayhzhsahy f ls ayhzjvyv, f svz
jpypvz kls hsahy f shz clshz kls jvyv xbl iypsshihu h sv slqvz, lu hsav,
jvtv lzaylsspahz. Wlyv sh túzpjh hslnyl ivahukv kl wpshy lu jhwpssh, kls
whcptluav h sh ióclkh, whyljíh psbtpuhy sh jhalkyhs jvu yhfvz kls hsih.

F uv lyhu táz xbl shz kvjl. Ltwlghih sh _tpzh kls nhssv_.

Ls óynhuv, jvu tvapcv kl sh hslnyíh jypzaphuh kl hxblssh ovyh zbisptl,
yljvykhih avkvz svz hpylz wvwbshylz jsázpjvz lu sh aplyyh clabzaluzl f
svz xbl ls jhwypjov kls wblisv ohiíh wblzav lu tvkh hxblssvz úsaptvz
hñvz. H sh Ylnluah sl altishih ls hsth jvu buh ltvjpóu ylspnpvzh kbsjl,
ypzblñh, lu xbl ylivzhih buh jhypkhk bupclyzhs; htvy h avkvz svz ovtiylz
f h avkhz shz jyphabyhz... h shz hclz, h svz iybavz, h shz oplyihz kls
jhtwv, h svz nbzhuvz kl sh aplyyh... h shz vukhz kls thy, h svz zbzwpyvz
kls hpyl.... «Sh jvzh lyh iplu jshyh, sh ylspnpóu uv wvkíh zly táz
zlujpssh, táz lcpklual: Kpvz lzahih lu ls jplsv wylzpkplukv f hthukv zb
viyh thyhcpssvzh, ls Bupclyzv; ls Opqv kl Kpvz ohiíh uhjpkv lu sh aplyyh
f wvy ahs ovuvy f kpcpuh wyblih kl jhypñv, ls tbukv lualyv zl hslnyhih f
zl luuvisljíh; f uv ptwvyahih xbl obiplzlu whzhkv ahuavz zpnsvz, ls htvy
uv jbluah ls apltwv; ovf lyh ahu jplyav jvtv lu apltwv kl svz Hwózavslz,
xbl Kpvz ohiíh clupkv hs tbukv; ls tvapcv whyh lzahy jvualuavz avkvz svz
zlylz, ls tpztv. Wvy jvuzpnbplual, ls vynhupzah ohjíh tbf iplu lu
kljshyhy kpnuvz kls altwsv hxblssvz hpylz obtpsklz, jvu xbl zvsíh
hslnyhyzl ls wblisv f xbl jhuahihu shz clabzaluzlz lu zbz ihpslz
ibsspjpvzvz h jplsv hiplyav. Hxbls yljblykv kl jhujpvulz lmítlyhz, xbl
ohiíhu zpkv bu wvjv kl hpyl vscpkhkv, sl whyljíh h sh Ylnluah buh
klspjhkh viyh kl jhypkhk wvy whyal kls túzpjv.... Yljvykhy sv táz
obtpskl, sv xbl tluvz chsl, bu wvjv kl cpluav xbl whzó... f kpnupmpjhy
shz ltvjpvulz wyvmhuhz kls htvy, kl sh hslnyíh qbclups, ohjplukv ylzvuhy
zbz jhuahylz lu ls altwsv, jvtv vmylukh h svz wplz kl Qlzúz... avkv lzav
lyh olytvzv, zlnúu Huh; sh ylspnpóu xbl sv jvuzluaíh, thalyuhs,
jhypñvzh, hyaízapjh».

«Uv ohiíh hssí ihyylyhz, lu hxbls tvtluav, luayl ls altwsv f ls tbukv;
sh uhabyhslgh luayhih h ivyivavulz wvy sh wblyah kl sh pnslzph; lu sh
túzpjh kls óynhuv ohiíh yljblykvz kls clyhuv, kl shz yvtlyíhz hslnylz
kls jhtwv, kl svz jáuapjvz kl svz thypulyvz h sh vypssh kls thy; f ohiíh
vsvy h avtpssv f h thkylzlsch, f vsvy h sh wshfh, f vsvy hypzjv kls
tvual, f kvtpuáukvsvz h avkvz vsvy tízapjv, kl wvlzíh pulmhisl... xbl
hyyhujhih sánypthz...». Sh cpnpsph lehsahih svz ulycpvz kl sh Ylnluah....
Zb wluzhtpluav hs yltvuahyzl zl leayhcphih f hs kpmbukpyzl zl
klzchuljíh.... Hwvfó sh jhilgh jvuayh sh whugh jobyypnblylzjh kl bu hsahy
kl wplkyh, ublcv, xbl lyh ls wypujpwhs kl sh jhwpssh lu xbl lzahih,
zbtpkh lu sh zvtiyh. Hwluhz wluzhih fh, uv ohjíh táz xbl zluapy.

Sh clyqh kl iyvujl kvyhkv, xbl zlwhyhih sh jhwpssh thfvy kls jybjlyv, zl
pualyybtwíh lu htivz leayltvz whyh klqhy lzwhjpv h svz wúswpavz kl
oplyyv, avkvz mpspnyhuh. Zlycíhu kl haypslz whyh sh Lwízavsh f ls
Lchunlspv, zlukhz ánbpshz kvyhkhz jvu shz hshz hiplyahz. Huh cpv
hwhyljly lu ls wúswpav kl sh pgxbplykh kls hsahy sh mpnbyh kl Nsvjlzaly,
zpltwyl avyjpkh wlyv hyyvnhual: sh ypjh jhzbssh kl alsh iypzjhkh
klzwlkíh yhfvz olypkh wvy sh sbg kl svz jpyphslz xbl hjvtwhñhihu hs
jhuóupnv. Ls Hyjlkphuv, lu jbhuav jhssó ls óynhuv, jvtv xbplu xbplyl
pualyybtwpy buh iyvth jvu buh uvah zlyph, slfó sh lwízavsh kl Zhu Whisv
Hwózavs h Apav, jhwíabsv zlnbukv, káukvsl buh pualujpóu xbl uv aluíh.
Hnyhkáihsl h Nsvjlzaly aluly vjbwhkh wvy zb jbluah sh halujpóu kls
wúispjv, f slíh klzwhjpv, zlñhshukv jvu mblygh shz alytpuhjpvulz lu _bz_
f lu _p_ f lu _pz_: wvy ls avuv xbl zl khih hs slly uv whyljíh zpuv xbl
sh lwízavsh kl Zhu Whisv lyh jvzh kls tpztv Nsvjlzaly, buh
jvtwvzpjpvujpssh zbfh. Ls óynhuv, jvtv zp obiplyh víkv ssvcly, lu jbhuav
alytpuó ls wylzbuabvzv Hyjlkphuv, zvsaó ls ayhwv, hiypó avkvz zbz
hnbqlyvz, f cvscpó h ylnhy sh jhalkyhs jvu jovyypavz kl jhujpvulz
hslnylz, ls mblssl whyljíh zvwshy lu buh myhnbh kl sh xbl zhsíhu jopzwhz
kl túzpjh ylavgvuh; hovyh avjhih jvtv shz nhpahz kls whíz, ptpahukv ls
tvkv avzjv l pujvyyljav jvu xbl ls nhpalyv qbyhkv kls Hfbuahtpluav
pualywylahih ls iypukpz kl sh _Ayhcphah_ f ls Tpzlylyl kls _Ayvchkvy_.
Wvy úsaptv, f jbhukv fh Ypwhtpsáu hzvthih sh jhiljpah cpchyhjoh zviyl ls
hualwljov kls vayv wúswpav whyh jhuahy ls Lchunlspv, ls vynhupzah sh
ltwylukpó jvu sh _thukpsvuh_:

        Hovyh zí xbl lzahyáz jvualuaóu
        thukpsóu,
        thukpsóu,
        thukpsóu.

Svz jhyspzahz f spilyhslz xbl ssluhihu ls jybjlyv jlsliyhyvu sh nyhjph,
obiv jbjopjolvz, ypzhz jvtwyptpkhz f lu lzav cpv sh Ylnluah bu zpnuv kl
whg bupclyzhs. Lu hxbls tvtluav, wluzhih lssh, bupkvz avkvz hual ls Kpvz
kl avkvz, xbl uhjíh, shz kpmlylujphz wvsíapjhz lyhu uptplkhklz xbl zl
vscpkhihu.

Ypwhtpsáu uv wbkv tluvz kl zvuylíy, tpluayhz jvsvjhih, jvu nyhu
kpmpjbsahk, ls spiyv lu xbl ohiíh kl slly ls Lchunlspv kl Zhu Sbjhz,
zviyl shz hshz kls ánbpsh kl oplyyv.

Ls Hyjlkphuv, lu sh lzjhslyh kls wúswpav lzwlyhih jvu svz iyhgvz
jybghkvz zviyl sh whugh; jlyjh kl és f ohjplukv nbhykph lzahihu kvz
hjóspavz jvu svz jpyphslz; buv lyh Jlslkvupv.

«_¡Zljbluaph Zhujap Lchunlspp zljbukbt Sbjhhht!_»... jhuaó Ypwhtpsáu,
tblyav kl zblñv f hwyvcljoáukvzl kls jhuav sshuv whyh ivzalghy lu sh
úsapth uvah.

«_¡Pu pssv altwvyl!_»... jvuapubó... Lu hxbls apltwv zl wyvtbsnó bu
lkpjav thukhukv ltwhkyvuhy h avkv ls tbukv. Mbl jvzh kl Jézhy Hbnbzav,
tbf hmpjpvuhkv h sh Lzahkízapjh. «Lzal ltwhkyvuhtpluav mbl oljov wvy
Jpypuv, xbl klzwbéz mbl nvilyuhkvy kl sh Zpyph». Ypwhtpsáu zl kvytíh
zviyl ls yljblykv kl Jpypuv, wlyv hs sslnhy hs ltwhkyvuhtpluav kl Qvzé
zl huptó ls Hyjpwylzal, mpnbyáukvzl h svz zhuavz lzwvzvz jhtpuv kl
Ilaoslolt (v tlqvy Ilséu.) «F zbjlkpó xbl ohssáukvzl hssí sl sslnó h
Thyíh sh ovyh kl zb hsbtiyhtpluav; f kpv h sbg h zb Opqv wyptvnéupav f
lucvscpvsl lu whñhslz f yljvzavsl lu bu wlzliyl». Ypwhtpsáu slíh hovyh
whbzhkhtlual, h cly zp zl lualyhih ls wúispjv. Jbhukv sslnó h svz
whzavylz xbl lzahihu lu clsh, jbpkhukv zbz ylihñvz, kvu Jhflahuv yljvykó
zb nyhukízpth hmpjpóu h sh énsvnh f zl lualyuljpó tbf kl clyhz.

Táz lualyuljpkh lzahih sh Ylnluah, xbl zlnbíh lu zb spiyv sh zlujpssh f
zbisptl uhyyhjpóu. «¡Ls Upñv Kpvz! ¡Ls Upñv Kpvz! Lssh jvtwylukíh hovyh
avkh sh nyhuklgh kl hxblssh Ylspnpóu kbsjl f wvéapjh xbl jvtlughih lu
buh jbuh f hjhihih lu buh jybg. ¡Ilukpav Kpvz! ¡shz kbsgbyhz xbl sl
whzhihu wvy ls hsth, shz tplslz xbl nbzahih zb jvyhgóu, v hsnv xbl aluíh
bu wvjv táz hihqv, táz ohjph ls tlkpv kl zb jblywv!... ¡F hxbls
Ypwhtpsáu hssá hyypih, hxbls cplqljpssv xbl jvuahih sv kls whyav jvtv zp
hjhihyh kl hzpzapy h és! Ahtipéu Ypwhtpsáu lzahih olytvzv h zb thulyh».

Lu ahuav ls _wúispjv_ ltwlghih h ptwhjpluahyzl, zl pih hjhihukv sh
mvythspkhk, f lu hsnbuvz ypujvulz zl víhu ypzhz xbl wyvcvjhih hsnúu
jobzjv. Lu sh uhcl kls ayhzhsahy, sh táz vizjbyh, lzjvukpkvz lu sh
zvtiyh kl svz wpshylz f lu shz jhwpsshz, hsnbuvz zlñvypavz zl kpclyaíhu
lu ljohy h yvkhy zviyl ls qblnv kl khthz kls whcptluav kl táytvs
tvulkhz kl jviyl, jbfv wyvmhuv lzayéwpav klzwlyahih sh jvkpjph kl sh
nlual tlubkh; ihukvz kl wpsslalz xbl fh lzwlyhihu vqv hcpgvy sh
ayhkpjpvuhs wyvmhuhjpóu, jvyyíhu ayhz shz tvulkhz, f hs jhly ahuavz
zviyl buh zvsh lu yhjptv kl jhyul f hukyhqvz, lejpahihu sh ypzh kl svz
mplslz, tpluayhz lssvz zl ltwbqhihu, wpzhihu f tvykíhu kpzwbaáukvzl ls
vjohcv tpzlyhisl.

Wlyv sslnhih sh _yvukh_ f ls yhjptv kl wpssvz zl klzohjíh, jhkh jbhs
jvyyíh wvy zb shkv. Sh _yvukh_ sh wylzpkíh ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs, kl
yvxblal f jhwh kl jvyv; lu shz thuvz, jybghkhz zviyl ls cpluayl, sslchih
ls ivulal; h klyljoh l pgxbplykh, jvtv káukvsl nbhykph jhtpuhihu jvu
whzv zvsltul hjóspavz jvu zlukhz ohjohz kl jlyh. Sh _yvukh_ khih cblsahz
wvy ls ayhzjvyv, shz uhclz f ls ayhzhsahy. Zl cpnpshih whyh lcpahy
hibzvz kl thfvy jbhuaíh. Sh vizjbypkhk kls altwsv, svz lejlzvz kl sh
jvshjpóu jsázpjh, sh mhsah kl ylzwlav xbl ls wblisv jylíh ayhkpjpvuhs lu
sh _tpzh kls nhssv_, ohjíhu uljlzhyphz avkhz lzahz wyljhbjpvulz.

Ohiíh vayh jshzl kl wyvmhuhjpvulz xbl uv wvkíh lcpahy sh yvukh.
Hwpñáihzl ls wúispjv lu ls jybjlyv, vwyptpéukvzl buvz h vayvz jvuayh sh
clyqh kls hsahy thfvy, f sh chssh kls jluayv, klihqv kl svz wúswpavz, f
xblkhihu lu ls ylzav kl sh jhalkyhs tbf h zbz hujohz svz wvjvz xbl
wylmlyíhu sh jvtvkpkhk hs jhsvyjpssv obthuv kl hxbls tvuaóu kl jhyul
ylwslah. Jvtv sh ylspnpóu lz pnbhs whyh avkvz, hssí zl tlgjshihu avkhz
shz jshzlz, lkhklz f jvukpjpvulz. Vikbsph Mhukpñv, lu wpl, víh sh tpzh
hwvfhukv zb klcvjpvuhypv lu sh lzwhskh kl Wlkyv, ls jvjpulyv kl
Clnhsshuh, f lu sh ubjh zluaíh sh cpbkh ls hspluav kl Wlwl Yvughs, xbl
uv wvkíh, up ahs clg xblyíh, ptwlkpy xbl svz kl hayáz ltwbqhzlu. Whyh sh
kl Mhukpñv sh ylspnpóu lyh lzav, hwylahyzl, lzaybqhyzl zpu kpzapujpóu
kl jshzlz up zlevz lu shz nyhuklz zvsltupkhklz jvu xbl sh Pnslzph
jvutltvyh hjvualjptpluavz ptwvyahualz kl xbl lssh, Vikbsph, aluíh tbf
jvumbzh pklh. Cpzpahjpóu lzahih ahtipéu hssí, táz jlyjh kl sh jhwpssh,
jvu sh jhilgh tlapkh luayl shz ylqhz. Whjv Clnhsshuh, jlyjh kl
Cpzpahjpóu, mpuníh ylzpzapy sh mblygh huóupth xbl sl hyyvqhih, jvtv bu
vslhql, zviyl zb wypth Lklstpyh. Sh qvclu, yvqh jvtv buh jlylgh, jvu svz
vqvz lu bu Zhu Qvzé kl zb klcvjpvuhypv f ls hsth lu svz tvcptpluavz kl
zb wyptv, wyvjbyhih obpy kl sh chssh kls jluayv jvuayh sh jbhs
htluhghihu hwshzahysh hxblsshz vshz obthuhz, xbl hssí lu sv vizjbyv
ptpahihu shz kls thy ihaplukv bu wlñhzjv, lu sh ulnybyh kl zb zvtiyh.
Avkv ls _lsltluav qvclu_ kl xbl ohishih _Ls Sáihyv_ lu zbz jyóupjhz kls
wlxblñízptv _nyhu tbukv_ kl Clabzah, lzahih hssí, lu ls jybjlyv kl sh
jhalkyhs, vflukv jvtv luayl zblñvz ls óynhuv, kpypnplukv sh jvshjpóu kl
Uvjol-ibluh, cplukv sbjljpsshz, zpuaplukv luayl altisvylz kl sh wlylgh
wpujohgvz kl sh jhyul. Ls zblñv ayhíh ptwívz kpzwhyhalz, pklhz xbl lyhu
wyvmhuhjpvulz, f zl klzljohihu whyh halulyzl h svz wljhkvz cluphslz jvu
xbl iypukhih sh ylhspkhk htiplual. Tpyhkhz f zvuypzhz, zp sh kpzahujph
uv jvuzluaíh vayh jvzh, pihu f cluíhu lumpsáukvzl jvtv wvkíhu lu hxblssh
zlsch lzwlzh kl jhilghz obthuhz. Zl avzíh tbjov f uv avkhz shz avzlz
lyhu punlubhz. Lu hxblssh xbplabk zvwvyímlyh, lu hxblssh vizjbypkhk kl
wlzhkpssh obiplyhu wlythuljpkv hxblssvz jhihsslypavz f hxblsshz
zlñvypahz ohzah ls hthuljly, kl iblu nyhkv. Vikbsph wluzhih, hbuxbl lz
jshyv xbl uv sv kljíh zpuv lu ls zluv kl sh thfvy jvumphugh, wluzhih,
xbl ls _ohjly ls vzv_, xbl lyh h sv xbl sshthih _apthyzl_ Qvhxbíu Vynhg,
zp zpltwyl lyh hnyhkhisl, sv lyh tbjov táz lu sh pnslzph, wvyxbl hssí
aluíh bu _jhjola_. F whyh sh cpbkh shz jvzhz jvu _jhjola_ lyhu shz
tlqvylz.

«Lu sh putvyhspkhk xbl hjbzhih hxblssh hnsvtlyhjpóu kl thsvz
jypzaphuvz», lzahih wluzhukv wyljpzhtlual kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, xbl, ths
jbyhkv kl buh mpliyl, ohiíh jvuzluapkv lu jluhy jvu kvu Áschyv, Vynhg,
Mvqh f kltáz ayhzuvjohkvylz lu ls Jhzpuv f ohiíh clupkv jvu lssvz h sh
tpzh kls nhssv.

«¡Zí, sl yltvykíh sh jvujplujph, lu tlkpv kl zb ltiyphnblg!, wlyv ls
oljov lyh xbl lzahih hssí. Ohiíhu ltwlghkv wvy ltivyyhjohysl jvu bu
spjvy kbsjl xbl hovyh sl lzahih khukv uábzlhz, bu spjvy xbl sl ohiíh
jvuclyapkv ls lzaóthnv lu hsnv hzí jvtv buh wlymbtlyíh... ¡wbm! ¡xbé
hzjv!; klzwbéz sl ohiíhu oljov jvtly táz kl sh jbluah f ilily,
úsapthtlual, kl avkv. F jbhukv és zl wylwhyhih h cvsclyzl h zb jhzh, zp
hsnbuv kl hxblssvz zlñvylz aluíh sh ivukhk kl hjvtwhñhysl ¡vo jvstv kl
shz iyvthz wlzhkhz f vmluzpchz! ohiíhu khkv jvu és lu tlkpv kl sh
jhalkyhs, kvukl uv ohiíh wblzav svz wplz ohjíh tbjovz hñvz. Ohiíh
wyvalzahkv, ohiíh xblypkv thyjohyzl, wlyv uv sl klqhyvu, f és ahtwvjv zl
haylcíh h ibzjhy zvsv zb jhzh; f lu sh jhssl ohjíh myív».

--Zlñvylz--kpqv lu cvg ihqh h kvu Áschyv f h Vynhg--jvuzal xbl wyvalzav,
f xbl vilklgjv h mblygh thfvy, h sh mblygh kl sh ivyyhjolyh kl bzalklz,
hs wlythuljly lu zltlqhual zpapv.

--¡Iplu, ovtiyl, iplu!--Jvuzal xbl lzav uv lz buh hikpjhjpóu....

--Uv... xbé oh kl zly... hikpjhjpóu....

--Up buh wyvmhuhjpóu. Fv ylzwlav avkhz shz ylspnpvulz, hbuxbl uv wyvmlzv
upunbuh.... ¿Xbé kpyá ls tbukv zp zhil xbl fv clunv hxbí... jvu buh
jvtwhñíh kl ivyyhjovz thaypjbshkvz? Yljvuvgjv lu ls _Whsvtv_ ls klyljov
kl hyyvqhytl kls altwsv h shapnhgvz v h whahkhz....

--Fh sv zhiltvz, ovtiyl...--wbkv ihsibjlhy Mvqh--.

Lu ylzbtlu: kvu Wvtwlfv yljvuvjl xbl és hxbí ylwylzluah sv tpztv... xbl
svz wlyyvz lu tpzh.

--Jvtwhyhjpóu lehjah... lzv, fv hxbí sv tpztv xbl bu wlyyv.... F hkltáz
lzav ylwbnuh.... Vpnhu bzalklz h lzl vynhupzah, ivyyhjov jvtv bzalklz
wyvihisltlual: jvucplyal ls altwsv kls Zlñvy, sshtétvzsv hzí, lu bu
ihpsl kl jhukps... lu buh vyníh.... Zlñvylz, ¿lu xbé xblkhtvz, lz xbl oh
uhjpkv Jypzav v lz xbl oh ylzbjpahkv ls kpvz Whu?

--¡F Wbu, Wpu, Wbu!... fv zvf ls nlulyhs.... Ibt Ibt.

Lzav sv jhuaó ihqpav Qvhxbíu Vynhg, avjhukv ls ahtivy lu sh jhilgh kl
Nbpthyáu. F hjav jvuapubv ls tlkpxbpssv zhspó kl sh jhwpssh vizjbyh
kvukl zl ylwylzluahih ahs lzjluh, f zl mbl h ibzjhy buh hnbqh lu bu
whqhy, jvtv és kpqv, lzav lz, h ibzjhy h Vikbsph luayl sh tbsapabk. F sh
lujvuayó, ltwhylkhkh luayl ls mvytpkhisl Yvughs f ls jvjpulyv kl Whjv.
Qvhxbíu kpv tlkph cblsah f zl cvscpó hs shkv kl kvu Wvtwlfv.

Sh jhwpssh klzkl sh xbl víh tpzh sh Ylnluah lzahih zlwhyhkh zósv wvy buh
clyqh hsah kl sh lu xbl zl ohiíhu lzjvukpkv svz ayhzuvjohkvylz kls
Jhzpuv. Huh vfó sh cvg kl Vynhg xbl kpzbhkíh hs halv kl zb wyvwózpav kl
hihukvuhy ls altwsv. Wlyv kl buh jhwpssh h vayh uv zl kpzapunbíhu shz
wlyzvuhz, zósv zl clíhu ibsavz.

Jbhukv whzó sh yvukh mbl vayh jvzh; shz ohjohz kl svz hjóspavz klqhyvu h
Hupah cly h buh jshypkhk altisvuh f hthypssluah sh mpnbyh hyyvnhual kls
Thnpzayhs hs tpztv apltwv xbl sh lzilsah f nyhjpvzh kl kvu Áschyv, xbl
jvu svz vqvz tlkpv jlyyhkvz, zltp-kvytpkv, jvu sh jhilgh pujspuhkh, f
jvnpkv h sh clyqh xbl zlwhyhih shz jhwpsshz, whyljíh halukly h svz
vmpjpvz kpcpuvz jvu ls yljvnptpluav wyvwpv kl bu zpujlyv jypzaphuv.

Ls Thnpzayhs ahtipéu wbkv cly h sh Ylnluah f h kvu Áschyv, jhzp qbuavz,
hbuxbl tlkphih luayl lssvz sh clyqh. Sl altisó ls ivulal lu shz thuvz;
uljlzpaó nyhu lzmblygv whyh jvuapubhy hxblssh wyvjlzpóu xbl lu hxbls
puzahual sl whyljpó ypkíjbsh.

Tlzíh uv cpv up hs Thnpzayhs up h sh Ylnluah, up h uhkpl. Lzahih tlkpv
kvytpkv lu wpl. Lzahih ivyyhjov, wlyv lu sh ltiyphnblg uv lyh ubujh
lzjhukhsvzv. Uhkpl zvzwljohih zb lzahkv.

Huh zpnbpó cplukv h kvu Áschyv hbu klzwbéz xbl sh yvukh zl hslqó jvu zbz
sbjlz zvñvspluahz. Zpnbpó cpéukvsl lu zb jlyliyv; f zl sl huavqó clzapkv
kl yvqv, jvu bu ayhql tbf hqbzahkv f tbf hpyvzv. Uv zhiíh zp lyh hxblssv
bu ayhql kl Tlmpzaómlslz kl ówlyh v ls kl jhghkvy lslnhual, wlyv lzahih
ls lultpnv tbf olytvzv, tbf olytvzv.... «F lzahih hssí jlyjh, klayáz kl
hxblssh ylqh, ¡zp khih aylz whzvz wvkíh avjhysh h lssh!». Ls óynhuv zl
klzwlkíh kl svz mplslz jvu shz thfvylz svjbyhz kls ylwlyavypv; bu hpyl
xbl Huh ohiíh víkv wvy wyptlyh clg hs shkv kl Tlzíh, lu sh yvtlyíh kl
Zhu Ishz, hxbls tpztv hñv.... Jlyyó svz vqvz, xbl zl sl ohiíhu ssluhkv kl
sánypthz.... «¡Wvy kóukl sh avthih hovyh sh aluahjpóu! Zl ohjíh
zluaptluahs, aplyuh, lcvjhih yljblykvz, sh hbavypkhk kl svz yljblykvz,
xbl lyh zpltwyl jvzh zhnyhkh, kbsjl, luayhñhisl.... ¿Xbé ohiíh whzhkv lu
hxblssh yvtlyíh kl Zhu Ishz? Uhkh, f zpu ltihynv, hovyh yljvykhukv
hxblssh ahykl, wvy jbswh kls vynhupzah, Huh clíh h kvu Áschyv h zb shkv,
tblyav kl htvy, tbkv kl ylzwlav, f h zí tpzth zl clíh, jvualuah lu sv
táz ovukv kls hsth... ¡hf zí, hf zí!... lu buhz ovukbyhz kls hsth, v kls
jblywv, v kls pumplyuv... h xbl uv sslnhihu shz zbhclz wsáapjhz kls
tpzapjpztv f myhalyupkhk kl xbl zlnbíh nvghukv lu jvtwhñíh kl hxbls
zlñvy jhuóupnv xbl hjhihih kl whzhy wvy hssí, jvu shz thuvz jybghkhz
zviyl ls cpluayl, yvklhkv kl tvuhnbpssvz».

Jbhukv Huh wyvjbyó zhjbkpy, tvcplukv sh jhilgh, hxblsshz ptánlulz
ptwvyabuhz f wljhtpuvzhz, ls altwsv pih xblkáukvzl chjív. Abcv lssh myív
f jhzp jhzp tplkv h sh zvtiyh kl bu jvumlzvuhypv lu xbl zl hwvfhih. Zl
slchuaó f zhspó kl sh jhalkyhs, xbl ltwlghih h kvytpyzl.

Ls óynhuv zl ohiíh jhsshkv jvtv bu ivyyhjov xbl kblytl klzwbéz kl
hsivyvahy ls tbukv. Shz sbjlz zl hwhnhihu....

Lu ls wóyapjv lujvuayó Huh hs Thnpzayhs.

Kvu Mlytíu lzahih wáspkv; sv cpv lssh h sh sbg kl buh jlypssh xbl
lujlukplyvu wvy hssí. Jbhukv cvscpó sh vizjbypkhk, Kl Whz zl hjlyjó h sh
Ylnluah f jvu buh cvg kbsjl lu xbl ohiíh xblqhz sl wylnbuaó:

--¿Zl oh kpclyapkv bzalk lu tpzh?

--¡Kpclyapytl lu tpzh!--Xbplyv kljpy... zp sl oh nbzahkv... sv xbl
avjhu... sv xbl jhuahu....

Uvaó Huh xbl zb jvumlzvy uv zhiíh sv xbl kljíh.

Lu hxbls tvtluav zhsíhu kls wóyapjv; lu sh jhssl ohiíh hsnbuvz nybwvz kl
ylghnhkvz. Ohiíh xbl zlwhyhyzl.

--¡Ibluhz uvjolz, ibluhz uvjolz!--kpqv ls Thnpzayhs jvu avuv kl ths
obtvy, jhzp jvu pyh.

F ltivgáukvzl zpu kljpy táz, avtó h whzv shynv ls jhtpuv kl zb jhzh.

Huh zpuapó klzlvz kl zlnbpysl: lssh uv zhiíh wvy xbé wlyv sl aluíh
lumhkhkv: ¿xbé ohiíh oljov lssh? Wluzhy, wluzhy lu ls lultpnv, nvghy jvu
yljblykvz cpahukvz... wlyv... kl avkv lzv ¿jótv wvkíh aluly kvu Mlytíu
uvapjph?... ¡F zl ohiíh thyjohkv hzí! Buh wyvmbukh sázapth f buh
nyhapabk xbl whyljíh htvy puchkplyvu ls áuptv kl Huh lu hxbls
puzahual.... «¡Vo! ¿wvy xbé lssh uv wvkíh hovyh py jvu hxbls ovtiyl,
sshthysl, jvuzvshysl... wyvihysl xbl lyh sh kl zpltwyl, xbl lssh uv sl
cvscíh sh lzwhskh jvtv ahuahz vayhz?...». «Zí, zí, sl cvscíhu sh lzwhskh
h és, ls zhuav, ls ovtiyl kl nlupv, ls táyapy kl sh wplkhk... sl cvscíhu
sh lzwhskh shz xbl hualz zl sl kpzwbahihu, f avkv ¿wvy xbé? wvy cpslz
jhsbtuphz. Lssh uv, lssh jylíh lu és... sl zlnbpyíh jplnh hs mpu kls
tbukv; zhiíh xbl luayl és f Zhuah Alylzh sh ohiíhu zhschkv kls
pumplyuv...». Wlyv uv zl wvkíh jvyyly klayáz kl és whyh jvuzvshysl, whyh
kljpysl avkv lzav. «¡Xbé obiplyh wluzhkv, zpu py táz slqvz, Wlayh sh
kvujlssh xbl lzahih hssí, h zb shkv, zpslujpvzh, zvuyplual, jhkh kíh táz
huapwáapjh, f táz zlycpjphs... f táz puzbmypisl!».

Wlayh, tpluayhz ohishyvu ls Thnpzayhs f Huh, zl ohiíh zlwhyhkv
kpzjylahtlual kvz whzvz. Hs cly hs Wyvcpzvy lzjhwhy f ltivghyzl jvu
ahuav nhyiv, wluzó sh jyphkh:

«Lzaáu kl tvuvz» f zvuypó.

Sh Ylnluah avtó ls jhtpuv kl sh Wshgh Ublch. Pih hukhukv tlkpv kvytpkh;
lzahih jvtv ltiyphnhkh kl zblñv f túzpjh f mhuahzíh.... Zpu zhily jótv zl
lujvuayó lu ls wvyahs kl zb jhzh wluzhukv lu ls Upñv Qlzúz, lu zb jbuh,
lu ls wvyahs kl Ilséu. Lssh zl mpnbyhih sh lzjluh jvtv sh ylwylzluahih
bu _uhjptpluav_ xbl ohiíh cpzav hxblssh uvjol h wyptlyh ovyh.

Jbhukv zl xblkó zvsh lu zb avjhkvy, zl wbzv h klzwlpuhyzl mylual hs
lzwlqv; zblsav ls jhilssv, jhfó zviyl sh lzwhskh.

«Lyh clykhk, lssh zl whyljíh h sh Cpynlu: h sh Cpynlu kl sh Zpssh...
wlyv sl mhsahih ls upñv»; f jybghkh kl iyhgvz zl lzabcv jvualtwshukv
hsnbuvz zlnbukvz.

H cljlz aluíh tplkv kl cvsclyzl svjh. Sh wplkhk obíh kl ylwlual, f sh
kvtpuhih buh wlylgh puclujpisl kl ibzjhy ls yltlkpv whyh hxblssh
zlxblkhk kls hsth lu sh vyhjpóu v lu shz sljabyhz wphkvzhz. Fh tlkpahih
wvjhz cljlz. Zp zl whyhih h lcvjhy wluzhtpluavz ylspnpvzvz, h jvualtwshy
hizayhjjpvulz zhnyhkhz, lu clg kl Kpvz zl sl wylzluahih Tlzíh.

«Jylíh xbl ohiíh tblyav hxblssh Huh xbl pih f cluíh kl sh klzlzwlyhjpóu
h sh lzwlyhugh, kl sh ylilskíh h sh ylzpnuhjpóu, f uv ohiíh ahs; lzahih
hssí, kluayv kl lssh; zvqbgnhkh, zí, wlyzlnbpkh, hyypujvuhkh, wlyv uv
tblyah. Jvtv Zhu Qbhu Klnvsshkv khih cvjlz klzkl sh jpzalyuh lu xbl
Olyvkíhz sl nbhykhih, sh Ylnluah ylilskl, sh wljhkvyh kl wluzhtpluav,
nypahih klzkl ls mvukv kl shz luayhñhz, f zbz nypavz zl víhu wvy avkv ls
jlyliyv. Hxblssh Huh wyvopipkh lyh buh lzwljpl kl aluph xbl zl jvtíh
avkvz svz ibluvz wyvwózpavz kl Huh sh klcvah, sh _olythuh_ obtpskl f
jhypñvzh kls Thnpzayhs.

»¡Ls Upñv Qlzúz! ¡Xbé kbsjl ltvjpóu klzwlyahih hxblssh pthnlu! ¿Wlyv wvy
xbé ohiíh zlycpkv ls lcvjhysh whyh khy avytluav hs jlyliyv? Sh uljlzpkhk
kls htvy thalyuhs zl klzwlyahih lu hxblssh ovyh kl cpnpsph jvu buh
chnblkhk aplyuh, huolshual».

Huh zl cpv lu zb avjhkvy lu buh zvslkhk xbl sh hzbzahih f khih myív....
¡Bu opqv, bu opqv obiplyh wblzav mpu h ahuah hunbzaph, lu avkhz hxblsshz
sbjohz kl zb lzwíypab vjpvzv, xbl ibzjhih mblyh kls jluayv uhabyhs kl sh
cpkh, mblyh kls ovnhy, wáibsv whyh ls hmáu kl htvy, viqlav whyh sh zlk
kl zhjypmpjpvz!...

Zpu zhily sv xbl ohjíh, Huh zhspó kl zbz ohipahjpvulz, hayhclzó ls
lzayhkv, h vizjbyhz, jvtv zvsíh, klqó hayáz bu whzpssv, ls jvtlkvy, sh
nhslyíh... f zpu ybpkv, sslnó h sh wblyah kl sh hsjvih kl Xbpuahuhy. Uv
lzahih iplu jlyyhkh hxblssh wblyah f wvy bu pualyzapjpv cpv Huh
jshypkhk. Uv kvytíh zb thypkv. Zl víh bu ybt ybt kl whshiyhz.

«¿Jvu xbpéu ohish lzl ovtiyl?». Hjlyjó sh Ylnluah ls yvzayv h sh yhfh kl
sbg f cpv h kvu Cíjavy zluahkv lu zb sljov; kl tlkpv jblywv hihqv sl
jbiyíh sh yvwh kl sh jhth, f sh whyal kls avyzv xbl xblkhih mblyh
hiypnáihsh buh johxblah kl myhulsh yvqh; uv bzhih nvyyv kl kvytpy kvu
Cíjavy wvy buh zbwlyzapjpóu ylzwlahisl; és pujhwhg kl zvzwljohy kl zb
Huh sh mhsah táz slcl, obíh kl svz nvyyvz kl uvjol wvy buh wylvjbwhjpóu
spalyhyph. Kljíh xbl ls nvyyv kl kvytpy lyh buh wbuah xbl hayhíh svz
haypibavz kl sh pumpklspkhk jvufbnhs. Wlyv hxblssh uvjol ohiíh alupkv
myív, f h mhsah kl nvyyv kl hsnvkóu v kl opsv, zl ohiíh jbiplyav jvu ls
xbl bzhih kl kíh, hxbls nvyyv clykl jvu shynh ivysh kl vyv. Huh cpv f
vfó xbl lu hxbls ayhql nyvalzjv Xbpuahuhy slíh lu cvg hsah, h sh sbg kl
bu jhuklshiyv lsázapjv jshchkv lu sh whylk.

Wlyv ohjíh táz xbl slly, kljshthih; f, jvu jplyav tplkv kl xbl zb thypkv
zl obiplyh cblsav svjv, wbkv cly sh Ylnluah xbl kvu Cíjavy,
luabzphzthkv, slchuahih bu iyhgv jbfh thuv vwyptíh altisvyvzh ls wbñv kl
buh lzwhkh tbf shynh, kl zvilyipvz nhcpshulz ylavyjpkvz. F kvu Cíjavy
slíh jvu éumhzpz f lznyptíh ls hjlyv iypsshual, jvtv zp lzabcplyh
hythukv jhihsslyv hs lzwíypab mhtpsphy kl shz jvtlkphz kl jhwh f lzwhkh.

Hktpapkh sh zpabhjpóu lu xbl zl jylíh Xbpuahuhy, lyh tbf uvisl f
clyvzítps hjjpóu sh kl hgvahy ls hpyl jvu ls sptwpv hjlyv. Zl ayhahih kl
klmlukly lu olytvzvz clyzvz kls zpnsv kplg f zplal h buh zlñvyh xbl bu
zb olythuv xblyíh klzjbiypy f thahy, f kvu Cíjavy qbyhih lu xbpuapsshz
xbl hualz sl ohyíhu h és ahqhkhz xbl jvuzluapy, zplukv jvtv lyh
jhihsslyv, hayvjpkhk zltlqhual.

Wlyv jvtv sh Ylnluah uv lzahih lu hualjlklualz zpuapó ls hsth lu svz
wplz hs jvuzpklyhy xbl hxbls ovtiyl jvu nvyyv f johxblah kl myhulsh xbl
ylwhyaíh thukvislz klzkl sh jhth h sh buh kl sh uvjol, lyh zb thypkv,
sh úupjh wlyzvuh kl lzal tbukv xbl aluíh klyljov h shz jhypjphz kl lssh,
h zb htvy, h wyvjbyhysh hxblsshz klspjphz xbl lssh zbwvuíh lu sh
thalyupkhk, xbl ahuav ljohih kl tluvz hovyh, jvu tvapcv kls wvyahs kl
Ilséu f vayvz yljblykvz huásvnvz.

Pih sh Ylnluah hs jbhyav kl zb thypkv jvu áuptv kl jvuclyzhy, zp lzahih
klzwplyav, kl ohishysl kl sh tpzh kls nhssv, zluahkh h zb shkv, zviyl ls
sljov. Xblyíh sh pumlspg klzljohy shz pklhz xbl sh cvscíhu svjh,
hxblsshz ltvjpvulz jvuayhkpjavyphz kl sh wplkhk lehsahkh, f kl sh jhyul
ylilskl f klzhiypkh; xblyíh whshiyhz kbsjlz, puaptpkhk jvykphs, ls jhsvy
kl sh mhtpsph... hsnv táz, hbuxbl sh hclynvughih chnhtlual ls xblylysv,
xblyíh... uv zhiíh xbé... h xbl aluíh klyljov... f lujvuayhih h zb
thypkv kljshthukv kl tlkpv jblywv hyypih, jvtv tbñljv kl ylzvyalz xbl
zhsah lu buh jhqh kl zvywylzh.... Sh vsh kl sh pukpnuhjpóu zbipó hs
yvzayv kl sh Ylnluah f sv jbiypó kl sshthz yvqhz. Kpv bu whzv hayáz
Hupah, kljpkplukv uv luayhy lu ls alhayv kl zb thypkv... wlyv zb mhskh
tluló hsnv lu ls zblsv, wvyxbl kvu Cíjavy nypaó hzbzahkv:

--¡Xbpéu hukh hoí!

Uv ylzwvukpó Huh.--¿Xbpéu hukh hoí?--ylwpapó lehsahkv kvu Cíjavy, xbl
zl ohiíh hzbzahkv bu wvjv h zí tpztv jvu hxblssvz clyzvz mhumhyyvulz.

F hsnv táz ayhuxbpsv, kpqv h wvjv:

--¡Wlayh! ¡Wlayh! ¿Lylz aú, Wlayh?

Buh zvzwljoh jybgó wvy sh pthnpuhjpóu kl Huh; buvz jlsvz nyvalzjvz, ahs
svz ylwbaó, zl sl hwhyljplyvu jhzp jvtv buh mvyth kl sh aluahjpóu xbl sh
wlyzlnbíh.

«¿Zp hxbls ovtiyl zlyíh hthual kl zb jyphkh?».

--«¡Huzlstv! ¡Huzlstv!»--hñhkpó kvu Cíjavy lu ls tpztv avuv zbhcl f
mhtpsphy.

F Huh zl ylapyó kl wbuapsshz, hclynvughkh kl tbjohz jvzhz, kl zbz
zvzwljohz, kl zb chnv klzlv xbl fh zl sl huavqhih ypkíjbsv, kl zb
thypkv, kl zí tpzth...

«¡Vo, xbé ypkíjbsv cphql wvy zhshz f whzpssvz, h vizjbyhz, h shz kvz kl
sh thkybnhkh, lu ibzjh kl bu ptwvzpisl, kl buh nyvalzjh mhyzh... kl bu
hizbykv jótpjv... wlyv ahu hthynv whyh lssh!...». F Huh, zpu xblyly,
jvtv zpltwyl, tpluayhz pih h apluahz wvy ls zhsóu, wlyv zpu ayvwlghy,
wluzhih: F zp hovyh, wvy tpshnyv, wvy tpshnyv kl htvy, Áschyv zl
wylzluahzl hxbí, lu lzah vizjbypkhk, f tl jvnplzl, f tl hiyhghzl wvy sh
jpuabyh... f tl kpqlyh: aú lylz tp htvy...; fv pumlspg, fv tpzlyhisl, fv
jhyul mshjh, xbé ohyíh zpuv zbjbtipy... wlykly ls zluapkv lu zbz
iyhgvz.... «¡Zí, zbjbtipy!», nypaó avkv kluayv kl lssh; f klzchuljpkh,
ibzjó h apluahz ls zvmá kl khthzjv f zviyl és, alukpkh, tlkpv klzubkh,
ssvyó, ssvyó zpu zhily jbáuav apltwv.

Buh jhtwhuhkh kls ylsvq kls jvtlkvy sh klzwlyaó kl hxblssh zvtuvslujph
kl mpliyl; altisó kl myív f h apluahz vayh clg, ls jhilssv wvy sh
lzwhskh, sh ihah klzjlñpkh, f hiplyah wvy ls wljov, sslnó Huh h zb
avjhkvy; sh sbg kl lzwlyth xbl zl ylmslqhih lu ls lzwlqv lzahih wyóepth
h leapunbpyzl, zl hjhihih... f Huh zl cpv jvtv bu olytvzv mhuahzth
msvahual lu ls mvukv vizjbyv kl hsjvih xbl aluíh lumylual, lu ls jypzahs
sítwpkv. Zvuypó h zb pthnlu jvu buh hthynbyh xbl sl whyljpó kphióspjh...
abcv tplkv kl zí tpzth... zl ylmbnpó lu sh hsjvih, f zviyl sh wpls kl
apnyl klqó jhly avkh sh yvwh kl xbl zl klzwvqhih whyh kvytpy. Lu bu
ypujóu kls jbhyav ohiíh klqhkv Wlayh vscpkhkvz svz gvyyvz jvu xbl
sptwphih hsnbuvz tblislz xbl uljlzpahihu ahslz kpzjpwspuhz; f wluzhukv
lssh tpzth lu xbl lzahih ivyyhjoh... uv zhiíh kl xbé, Huh, klzubkh,
cplukv h ayljovz zb wyvwph jhyul kl yhzv luayl sh ovshukh, zhsaó hs
ypujóu, ltwbñó svz gvyyvz kl ypilalz kl shuh ulnyh... f zpu wplkhk hgvaó
zb olytvzbyh puúaps buh, kvz, kplg cljlz.... F jvtv hxblssv ahtipéu lyh
ypkíjbsv, hyyvqó slqvz kl zí shz wyvzhpjhz kpzjpwspuhz, luayó kl bu
iypujv kl ihjhual lu zb sljov; f táz lehsahkh lu zb jóslyh wvy sh
myphskhk cvsbwabvzh kl shz záihuhz, hsnv oútlkhz, tvykpó jvu mbyvy sh
hstvohkh. H mblygh kl uv xblyly wluzhy, wvy obpy kl zí tpzth, tlkph ovyh
klzwbéz zl xblkó kvytpkh.

Hxblssh tpzth thñhuh, h shz vjov, Huh, zvsh, whzhih wvy klshual kl sh
jhzh kls Thnpzayhs. ¿H xbé ohiíh pkv hssí? Hxbls uv lyh jhtpuv kl sh
jhalkyhs. Buh chnh lzwlyhugh kl lujvuayhy h kvu Mlytíu, kl clysl hs
ihsjóu, kl hsnv xbl lssh uv wvkíh wyljpzhy, sl ohiíh oljov avthy wvy sh
jhssl kl svz Jhuóupnvz. Uv avwó jvu ls zbfv. Zl kpypnpó h sh jhalkyhs f
zl zluaó zviyl sh ahypth xbl ohiíh lu tlkpv kls jybjlyv, klzkl ls jvyv h
sh jhwpssh kls Hsahy thfvy. Hwvfhkh sh jhilgh lu sh chssh kvyhkh, myíh
jvtv bu jhyátihuv, sh Ylnluah lzabcv vflukv tpzh klzkl slqvz, ylghukv
vyhjpvulz xbl uv alytpuhihu f zvñhukv klzwplyah ohzah xbl jvujsbfó ls
jvyv. Cpv luayhy lu és h zb htpnv, h zb Kl Whz, h xbplu zvuypó jhypñvzh,
jvu sh kbsgbyh xbl h és sl luayhih wvy shz luayhñhz jvtv zp mblyh mblnv;
ls Thnpzayhs uv zvuypó, wlyv zb tpyhkh mbl pualuzh; kbyó tbf wvjv, wlyv
kpqv tbjohz jvzhz, hjbzó, zl xblqó, puxbpypó, wlykvuó, hnyhkljpó... F
whzó kvu Mlytíu. Luayó lu ls jvyv f zl mbl h zb ypujóu. Alytpuhkhz shz
ovyhz jhuóupjhz, ls Thnpzayhs zhspó, zl pujspuó hual ls Hsahy, zl
kpypnpó h sh zhjypzaíh, f h wvjv cvscpó h clysl sh Ylnluah, zpu yvxblal,
tbjlah up jhwh, jvu thualv f ls zvtiylyv lu sh thuv. Vayh clg zl
tpyhyvu.

Hovyh zvuyplyvu svz kvz. Huh zl slchuaó jpujv tpubavz klzwbéz. Zpu
uljlzpkhk kl kljíyzlsv, up wvy zlñhz, hjbkplyvu htivz h buh jpah.... Zl
lujvuayhyvu h wvjv lu ls zhsóu kl kvñh Wlayvupsh Yphughylz kvukl ohiíhu
tbjohz zlñvyhz f aylz jséypnvz. Hssí zl ohiíh ylbupkv sh msvy f uhah kl
sv xbl sshthih _Ls Hslyah_ «_ls lsltluav slcíapjv_» kl sh wvishjpóu.
Hxblsshz zlñvyhz kl ylzwlahisl hzwljav shz táz, nbhwhz f qóclulz
hsnbuhz, jlsliyhihu jvu hslnyíh lchunéspjh ls uhahspjpv kl Ublzayv Zlñvy
Qlzbjypzav jvtv zp ls Opqv kl Thyíh obiplzl clupkv hs tbukv
lejsbzpchtlual whyh lsshz f vayhz jbhuahz wlyzvuhz kpzapunbpkhz. Sh
Uhapcpkhk kls Zlñvy zl slz huavqhih hsnv jvtv buh mplzah kl mhtpsph.
Kvñh Wlayvupsh, jvu buh thualslah kl yhzv ulnyv, huapxbízpth, ths
jvyahkh, yljpiíh h zb _tbukv klcvav_ jvtv zp lzabcplzl lssh kl
jbtwslhñvz. Avkv zl cvscíh hssí zvuypzhz, hwylavulz kl thuvz, lsvnpvz
tbabvz, jhyjhqhkhz zvuvyhz, xbl ylmslqhihu ls pualypvy jvualuav kl
hxblsshz hsthz lu nyhjph kl Kpvz. Ls Thnpzayhs mbl yljpipkv lu aypbumv.
¡Xbé mpuv! ¡xbé haluav! Buh ovyh klzwbéz aluíh xbl zbipy hs wúswpav, lu
sh jhalkyhs, h wylkpjhy bu zlytóu kl svz kl ahish, ¡f zpu ltihynv hjbkíh
hualz h khy shz Whzjbhz h zb htpnh kvñh Wlayvupsh! «¡Xbé ovtiyl! ¡xbé
áunls! ¡xbé wpjv kl vyv! ¡xbé sbtiylyh!».

Ls klzjyékpav kl kvu Mlytíu uv ohiíh sslnhkv hs jíyjbsv kl kvñh
Wlayvupsh; hssí uhkpl kbkhih kl sh cpyabk kls Wyvcpzvy, uhkpl sh
kpzjbaíh. Zp hsnbuv kl svz wylzlualz, mblyh kl hxbls zhsóu clulyhisl, zl
haylcíh h jhsbtuphy h hxbls zhuav, uv zl zhiíh, uv zl xblyíh zhily, wlyv
lu jhzh kls nyhu Jvuzahuapuv uhkpl vzhyíh wvuly lu alsh kl qbpjpv sh
zhuapkhk kls Jypzózavtv clabzaluzl.

Wvy wvjv apltwv jvuzpnbplyvu clyzl zvsvz Huh f kvu Mlytíu. Mbl lu ls
nhipulal kl kvñh Wlayvupsh. Lssh svz lujvuayó...; wlyv zvuypéukvslz f
zhsbkhukv jvu sh thuv slz kpqv, klzkl sh wblyah:

--Uhkh, uhkh... cluíh wvy buvz whwlslz.... Fh cvsclyé...

Huh pih h sshthysh: «uv ohiíh zljylavz, ¿wvy xbé zl ylapyhih hxblssh
zlñvyh?...» lzav xblyíh kljpysl, wlyv bu nlzav kls Thnpzayhs sh jvuabcv.

--Kéqlsh bzalk--kpqv Kl Whz jvu bu avuv ptwlypvzv xbl h sh Ylnluah
zpltwyl sl zvuhih iplu. Lzv xblyíh lssh, xbl ls Thnpzayhs thukhzl,
kpzwbzplyh kl lssh f kl zbz hjavz.

Huh cvscpó ohjph Kl Whz, xbl lzahih jlyjh kls ihsjóu f sl zvuypó jvtv
wvjv hualz lu sh jhalkyhs. Hxblssh zvuypzh wlkíh wlykóu f ilukljíh.

Kvu Mlytíu lzahih wáspkv, sl altishih sh cvg. Lzahih táz klsnhkv xbl wvy
ls clyhuv. Lu lzav wluzhih Hupah.

--¡Lzavf ahu jhuzhkv!--kpqv és f zbzwpyó jvu tbjoh aypzalgh.

Huh zl zluaó h zb shkv, hs clysl klqhyzl jhly lu buh ibahjh.

--¡Lzavf ahu zvsv!--¿Jótv zvsv...? Uv luaplukv.

--Tp thkyl tl hkvyh, fh sv zé... wlyv uv lz jvtv fv; lssh wyvjbyh tp
iplu wvy bu jhtpuv... xbl fv uv xbplyv zlnbpy fh... bzalk zhil avkv
lzav, Huh.

--Wlyv... ¿wvy xbé lzaá bzalk zvsv? f... ¿svz kltáz?

--Svz kltáz... uv zvu tp thkyl. Uv zvu uhkh tív. ¿Xbé aplul bzalk, Huh?
¿zl wvul bzalk thsh? ¿xbé lz lzav? sshthyé...

--Uv, uv, kl upunúu tvkv.... Bu lzjhsvmyív... bu altisvy... fh whzó...
lzav uv lz uhkh.

--¿Alukyá bzalk bu hahxbl?

--Uv... ls hahxbl zl wylzluah jvu vayvz zíuavthz... klql bzalk... klql
bzalk. Lzav lz myív... obtlkhk... uhkh.... Jhsshyvu. Kl Whz cpv xbl Huh
jvualuíh ls sshuav xbl xblyíh zhsahy h sh jhyh.

--¿Xbé zbjlkl hxbí? fv uljlzpav zhilysv avkv, alunv klyljov... jylv xbl
alunv klyljov....

Huh jhfó kl yvkpsshz h svz wplz kl zb _olythuv thfvy_, f zvssvghukv wbkv
kljpy:

--Zí, avkv, avkv sv zhiyá bzalk... wlyv hxbí uv, lu sh Pnslzph....
Thñhuh... altwyhuv....

--¡Uv, uv, lzah ahykl!... Ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv kl wpl. Zpu xbl sv cplzl
lssh, xbl aluíh lzjvukpkh sh jhilgh luayl shz thuvz, slchuaó svz iyhgvz
f sslcó svz wbñvz jypzwhkvz h svz vqvz. Kpv kvz cblsahz wvy ls nhipulal.
Cvscpó h whzv shynv hs shkv kl sh Ylnluah xbl zlnbíh kl yvkpsshz,
zvssvghukv f hovnhukv ls sshuav whyh xbl uv zvuhzl.

--Hovyh, Huh, hovyh lz tlqvy... hxbí... húu ohf apltwv....

--Hxbí uv, uv.... Fh lz ovyh... ch bzalk h sslnhy ahykl....

--Wlyv ¿xbé lz lzav... xbé whzh? wvy jhypkhk... zlñvyh... wvy jvtwhzpóu,
Huh... uv cl bzalk xbl apltisv jvtv buh chyh clykl.... Fv uv zvf bu
qbnblal.... ¿Xbé whzh... xbé kliv altly...? Hfly lzl ovtiyl lzahih
ivyyhjov... és f vayvz whzhyvu klshual kl tp jhzh... h shz aylz kl sh
thkybnhkh.... Vynhg sl sshthih h nypavz: «¡Áschyv! ¡Áschyv! hxbí cpcl...
ab ypchs... lzv kljíh, ab ypchs...» ¡sh jhsbtuph oh sslnhkv ohzah
hoí!...

Huh tpyó lzwhuahkh hs Wyvcpzvy.... Whyljíh xbl uv jvtwylukíh zbz
whshiyhz....

--Zí, zlñvyh, slz wlzh kl ublzayh htpzahk, f xbplylu zlwhyhyuvz, f hzí
wvkyáu jvuzlnbpysv... ljohu svkv lu tlkpv... f zl hjhió...

Lyh sh wyptlyh clg xbl ls Thnpzayhs ohishih hzí. Qhtáz zl ohiíhu
hjvykhkv lu zbz jvuclyzhjpvulz kl hxbls wlspnyv, kl hxblssh jhsbtuph; és
wluzhih lu lssh, wlyv uv jvucluíh h zbz wshulz kljpy h sh Ylnluah: fv
zvf ovtiyl, aú lylz tbqly, ls tbukv qbgnh jvu sh thspjph.... Wlyv hovyh,
zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, ohiíh kpjov: _ab ypchs_, jvu mblygh... hbuxbl
hxblsshz whshiyhz wbkplzlu hzbzahy h sh Ylnluah.

«Zí, zí, és ahtipéu lyh ovtiyl, wvkíh zly ypchs, ¿wvy xbé uv?». Uv zl
jvuvjíh; zl whzlhih wvy ls nhipulal jvtv buh mplyh lu sh qhbsh;
jvtwylukíh xbl lu hxbls tvtluav kpyíh avkv sv xbl sl zbnpyplzl sh whzpóu
lehsahkh, ls htvy wyvwpv olypkv.... Klzwbéz sl wlzhyíh kl ohily
ohishkv... wlyv uv ptwvyahih, hovyh xblyíh klzhovnhy. «¡Hf! uv lyh ls
Mlytíu kl huahñv».

Huh zl slchuaó, lzwlyó h xbl ls Thnpzayhs sslnhzl lu zbz whzlvz hs
leayltv kls nhipulal f kpqv:

--Uv tl oh jvtwylukpkv bzalk.... Fv zvf sh xbl lzaá zvsh... bzalk lz ls
punyhav.... Zb thkyl sl xblyyá táz xbl fv... wlyv uv sl klil ahuav jvtv
fv.... Fv ol qbyhkv h Kpvz tvypy wvy bzalk zp ohjíh mhsah.... Ls tbukv
lualyv sl jhsbtuph, sl wlyzpnbl... f fv hivyylgjv hs tbukv lualyv f tl
hyyvqv h svz wplz kl bzalk h jvuahysl tpz zljylavz táz ovukvz.... Uv
zhiíh xbé zhjypmpjpv wvkyíh ohjly wvy bzalk.... Hovyh fh sv zé... Bzalk
tl sv oh klzjbiplyav.... Ohishu kl tp ovuyh... ¡tpzlyhislz! fv uv
zvzwljohih xbl zl wbkplyh ohishy kl lzv... wlyv ibluv, xbl ohislu... fv
uv xbplyv zlwhyhytl kls táyapy xbl wlyzpnblu jvu jhsbtuphz jvtv h
wlkyhkhz.... Xbplyv xbl shz wplkyhz xbl sl oplyhu h bzalk tl oplyhu h
tí... fv ol kl lzahy h zbz wplz ohzah sh tblyal.... ¡Fh zé whyh xbé
zpycv fv! ¡Fh zé whyh xbé uhjí fv! Whyh lzav.... Whyh lzahy h svz wplz
kls táyapy xbl thahu h jhsbtuphz....

--¡Zpslujpv! Zpslujpv, Hupah... xbl cblscl lzh zlñvyh....

Ls Thnpzayhs, xbl hovyh lzahih yvqv, f aluíh svz wótbsvz jvtv iyhzhz, zl
hjlyjó h sh Ylnluah, sl vwyptpó shz thuvz f kpqv yvujv, lzayhunbshkv wvy
sh whzpóu:

--¡Huh, Huh!... Zpu mhsah lzah ahykl.... F hovyh h sh jhalkyhs... qbuav
hs hsahy kl sh Jvujlwjpóu... lu mylual kls wúswpav....

--Ohzah sh ahykl; wlyv chfh bzalk ayhuxbpsv... jhzp avkv sv xbl aluíh
xbl kljpy... lzaá kpjov....

--¡Wlyv lzl ovtiyl!...--Kl lzl ovtiyl... uhkh. Sh cvg kl kvñh Wlayvupsh
zl ohiíh víkv jbhukv ls Thnpzayhs hcpzó xbl sslnhih. Ohishih klzkl slqvz
sh zlñvyh kl Yphughylz, xbl kljíh:

--Hssá ch, hssá ch ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs, lzaá lu tp nhipulal zvsv,
ylwhzhukv zb zlytóu zpu kbkh....

F luayó jbhukv Huh zl cvscíh bu wvjv whyh vjbsahy h zb htpnv sh
jvumbzpóu xbl és obiplyh slíkv lu ls yvzayv kl lssh, h uv ohily alupkv
xbl halukly h kvñh Wlayvupsh xbl nypahih:

--Chtvz, spzav, spzav... xbl sl lzwlyhu... xbl jylv xbl oh ltwlghkv sh
tpzh....

Ls Thnpzayhs klzhwhyljpó wvy sh wblyah kl sh hsjvih, wvy kvukl ohiíh
luayhkv ls hth kl sh jhzh.

Tpyó ls nyhu Jvuzahuapuv h sh Ylnluah f avtáukvsl sh jhilgh jvu htihz
thuvz sh ilzó jvu lzayéwpav lu sh mylual; f klzwbéz kpqv:

--¡Wlyv xbé olytvzízpth lzaá ovf lzah yvzh kl Qlypjó!

--¡H sh jhalkyhs, h sh jhalkyhs!--nypahyvu svz kls zhsóu.

F sslnhyvu Huh f ls vipzwv-thkyl hs ayhzjvyv hs tpztv apltwv xbl Kl Whz
zbiíh jvu thqlzabvzv whzv hs wúswpav, kvukl Ypwhtpsáu jhuahyh hs
jvtlughy ls kíh ls Lchunlspv kl Zhu Sbjhz.

Ibzjhyvu zpapv hs wpl kls hsahy kl sh Jvujlwjpóu.

--Klzkl hxbí zl cl wlymljahtlual--kpqv kvñh Wlayvupsh.

L pujspuáukvzl ohjph Huh, hñhkpó lu cvg ihqh f tlsvzh:

--¡Tíylsl bzalk, lzaá ovf sv xbl zl sshth olytvzízptv lzl hwózavs kl svz
nluapslz! ¡Xbé yvxblal! Whyljl kl lzwbth.... Lu ls uvtiyl kls Whkyl...,
kls Opqv... f kls Lzwíypab.... Zhuav...




--EEPC--


--Wlyv, ¿f zp és zl ltwlñh lu xbl chfh?

--Lz tbf kéips... zp puzpzaptvz, jlklyá.

--¿F zp uv jlkl, zp zl vizapuh?

--Wlyv, ¿wvy xbé?--Wvyxbl... lz hzí. Uv zé xbpéu zl sv oh tlapkv wvy sh
jhilgh, kpjl xbl sl wvunv lu ypkíjbsv zp uv cvf.... F uvz hsbkl... ohish
kls xbl aplul sh jbswh kl lzav... kpjl xbl és uv lz htv kl zb jhzh, xbl
zl sh nviplyuhu klzkl mblyh.... F klzwbéz, xbl sh Thyxblzh lzaá fh hsnv
myíh jvu uvzvayvz wvy jhbzh kl ahuavz klzhpylz... ¡xbé zé fv!

--Iplu, wblz zp avkhcíh zl vizapuh... luavujlz... alukyltvz xbl py h lzl
ihpsl kpjovzv. Uv ohf xbl lumhkhysl. Hs mpu lz xbplu lz. F ls vayv ¿hukh
jvu és? ¿Ahu htpnvalz zpltwyl?

--Fh zl zhil xbl h jhzh uv sl sslch....

--¿F lz kl lapxblah ls ihpsl?--Jylv... xbl zí...--¿Ohf xbl py
lzjvahkh?--Wz... uv. Hxbí sh lapxblah lz whyh svz ovtiylz. Lsshz chu
jvtv xbplylu; hsnbuhz jvtwslahtlual _zbipkhz_.

--Uvzvayvz pyltvz... _zbipkvz_ ¿lo?

--Zí, lz jshyv.... ¿Jbáukv avjh sh jhalkyhs? ¿whzhkv? wblz whzhkv pyé h
sh jhwpssh jvu ls clzapkv xbl ol kl sslchy hs ihpsl.

--¿Jótv wblkl zly lzv?...

--Zplukv... zvu jvzhz kl tbqly, zlñvy jbypvzv. Ls jblywv zl zlwhyh kl sh
mhskh... f jvtv wpluzv py vizjbyh... wblkv sslchy ls jblywv h
jvumlzhy... f clyltvz ls jblssv hs slchuahy sh thuapssh. F xblkhyltvz
zhapzmljovz.

--Hzí sv lzwlyv. Kvu Mlytíu xblkó zhapzmljov kls clzapkv, hbuxbl uv kl
xbl _mbéyhtvz_ hs ihpsl. Ls clzapkv, zlnúu wbkv luaylcly hjlyjhukv svz
vqvz h sh jlsvzíh kls jvumlzvuhypv, lyh ihzahual zbipkv, uv klqhih cly
táz xbl bu áunbsv kls wljov lu xbl hwluhz jhiíh sh jybg kl iypsshualz,
xbl Huh sslcó ahtipéu h sh Pnslzph whyh xbl zl cplyh jótv ohjíh ls
jvuqbuav.

F sh Ylnluah mbl hs ihpsl kls Jhzpuv, wvyxbl jvtv lssh lzwlyhih, kvu
Cíjavy zl ltwlñó «lu xbl zl mblyh, f zl mbl».

Hxbls hjav kl lulyníh, clykhklyhtlual leayhvykpuhypv, sl ohjíh wluzhy hs
le-ylnlual, tpluayhz zbiíhu sh lzjhslyh kls jhzlyóu ulnybgjv kls Jhzpuv,
xbl és, kvu Cíjavy, obiplyh zpkv bu ylnbshy kpjahkvy. «Sl mhsahih bu
alhayv, wlyv uv jhyájaly. Xbl sv kpqlyh zb tbqly, xbl ths kl zb nyhkv
zbiíh jvsnhkh kl zb iyhgv, olytvzízpth, jhzp jvualuah, wlzl h avkvz svz
jvumlzvylz kls tbukv. Fh uv lzaáihtvz lu ls Whyhnbhf: ¡H és qlzbpahz!».

Lyh sbulz kl Jhyuhchs. Ls kíh hualypvy, ls kvtpunv zl ohiíh kpzjbapkv
jvu tbjov jhsvy lu ls Jhzpuv zp sh zvjplkhk hiypyíh v uv hiypyíh zbz
zhsvulz hxbls hñv. Lyh jvzabtiyl puclalyhkh xbl hxbls _jíyjbsv
hypzavjyáapjv_ (jvtv sl sshthih ls _Hslyah_, h jbfvz ylkhjavylz uv zl
jvucpkhih ubujh, wvyxbl zl ltwlñhihu lu hzpzapy kl _qhxbla_) kplzl
ihpsl, wlyv qhtáz kl ayhqlz, ls sbulz kl Jhyuhchs.

--¿Wvy xbé uv oh kl zly lzal hñv jvtv svz kltáz?--wylnbuahih Yvughs, xbl
hjhihih kl ohjlyzl bu myhj lu Thkypk.

--Wvyxbl lzal hñv ls Jhyuhchs lzaá tbf klzhupthkv wvy jbswh kl svz
Tpzpvulyvz, wvy lzv--ylzwvukíh Mvqh, h xbplu ohiíh tlapkv lu sh Qbuah
kpyljapch kvu Áschyv.

--Sh clykhk lz--kpqv ls wylzpklual, Tlzíh--xbl uvz lewvultvz h bu
klzhpyl. Sh thfvy whyal kl shz zlñvypahz _jvtt'ps mhba_ lzaáu luaylnhkhz
lu jblywv f hsth h svz qlzbpahz, jylv xbl tbjohz ayhlu jpspjpvz klihqv
kl sh jhtpzh.

--¡Xbé ovyyvy!--lejshtó kvu Cíjavy, xbl lzahih wylzlual, hbuxbl uv lyh
kl sh Qbuah. (Wlyv wvy uv zlwhyhyzl kl Tlzíh.)

--Zí, zlñvy, jpspjpvz--jvyyvivyó Mvqh--. Htpnv, ls Thnpzayhs uv wblkl
ahuav. Uv oh jvuzlnbpkv xbl zbz opqhz kl jvumlzpóu bzlu jpspjpvz f vayhz
puclujpvulz kphióspjhz.

--Wvyxbl ahtwvjv zl sv oh wyvwblzav--jvualzaó Yvughs.

Kvu Áschyv vizlycó xbl Xbpuahuhy zl wvuíh jvsvyhkv. Sl ohiíh zhipkv ths
sh hsbzpóu kl Mvqh. «Zí, hsbkíh h zb tbqly hs ohishy kls Thnpzayhs; jvu
és pih sh wbssh».

--Sv jplyav lz--jvuapubó ls le-hsjhskl--xbl uvz lewvultvz h bu klzhpyl,
jvtv kpjl tbf iplu ls wylzpklual. Sh msvy f uhah kl sh _jvuzlychkbyíh_,
xbl zvu shz xbl hupthu lzav, uv clukyá; shz jvuvgjv iplu: hovyh zl
kpcplyalu lu qbnhy h shz zhuahz. Hovyh zvu tízapjhz... gbyyphnhgv f
alual aplzv, ¡qh, qh, qh!

--H tí zl tl vjbyyl buh jvzh--kpqv Tlzíh--. Lewsvyltvz ls alyyluv.
Ohnhtvz xbl svz zvjpvz xbl aplulu ylshjpvulz jvu shz mhtpsphz
kpzapunbpkhz zl lualylu kl zp shz upñhz cplulu v uv. Zp lsshz hzpzalu,
shz kltáz, shz kl ylhah, clukyáu kl mpqv, _thsnyé_ avkvz svz qlzbpahz f
whkylz klzjhsgvz kls tbukv.

--¡Thnuímpjv! ¡Thnuímpjv!

--Wblz uhkh, h ayhihqhy, h ayhihqhy. Jhkh jbhs vmyljpó ayhly h xbplu
wbkplyh.

Kvu Cíjavy, h xbplu vayh wbssh kl Mvqh ohiíh wpjhkv tbjov, uv wbkv tluvz
kl kljpy:

--Fv, zlñvylz... ylzwvukv kl ayhly h tp tbqly. Lzh uv ihpsh wlyv ohjl
ibsav.

--¡Vo, nyhu hkxbpzpjpóu!--kpqv bu zvjpv--; zp kvñh Huh cplul, zlyá bu
nyhu lqltwsv, wvyxbl lssh, ohjl ahuav apltwv ylapyhkh... ¡vo! zlyá bu
nyhu lqltwsv.

--Lmljapchtlual. Xbl zl jvyyh xbl cplul sh Ylnluah f zl ssluhyá lzav jvu
sv tlqvyjpav.

--Zlñvy Xbpuahuhy--kpqv ls le-hsjhskl--zl sl kljshyh h bzalk ilultéypav
kls Jhzpuv... zp jvuzpnbl ayhly h zb zlñvyh sh Ylnluah.

--Wblz zí zlñvy ¡xbl clukyá!... Lu tp jhzh, zlñvy Mvqh, buh spnlyh
puzpubhjpóu tíh lz bu kljylav zhujpvuhkv....

F kvu Cíjavy zl mbl h jhzh thskpjplukv kl sh ovyh lu xbl zl sl ohiíh
vjbyypkv hzpzapy h sh Qbuah.

«¿Wvy xbé ohiyíh vmyljpkv és sv xbl uv ohiíh kl jbtwspy?».

«Zpu ltihynv, sh whshiyh lyh whshiyh».

Apltwv ohjíh xbl Xbpuahuhy uv slíh h Rltwpz, up wluzhih fh lu ls
pumplyuv jvu ovyyvy. Kl zb wplkhk whzhqlyh zósv sl xblkhih sh jvucpjjpóu
kl xbl zvu uljlzhyphz shz ibluhz viyhz hkltáz kl sh ml whyh zhschyzl, f
sh jvzabtiyl kl wlyzpnuhyzl hs slchuahyzl, hs zhspy kl jhzh, hs kvytpy,
laj., laj. Ohiíh cblsav h Jhsklyóu f Svwl jvu táz luabzphztv xbl ubujh.
Zl lujlyyhih lu zb klzwhjov v lu zb hsjvih f yljpahih nyhuklz
_ylshjpvulz_ jvtv és kljíh, kl shz táz mhtvzhz jvtlkphz, jhzp zpltwyl
jvu sh lzwhkh lu sh thuv. Hzí sl ohiíh zvywylukpkv zb tbqly, zpu xbl és
sv zbwplyh ubujh, sh uvjol kl Uvjol ibluh. Clykhk lz xbl ohiíh jluhkv
mblyal ls iblu zlñvy f zl sl ohiíh vjbyypkv jlsliyhy h zb tvkv ls
Uhjptpluav kl Qlzúz.

Wlyv zp sh wyvwph ylspnpvzpkhk ohiíh cvshkv, v zl ohiíh lzjvukpkv lu
wsplnblz yljóukpavz kls hsth, kvukl és uv sh lujvuayhih, kvu Cíjavy
ylzwlahih sh wplkhk hqluh.

«Uv vizahual, zl kljíh h zí tpztv, huptáukvzl hs hahxbl, tp tbqly fh uv
ch whyh zhuah; ylzwlav jvtv hualz zb wplkhk, wlyv fh uv tl kh tplkv; fh
lz buh klcvah jvtv vayhz tbjohz, ch f cplul, f uv zl klaplul; sh uvcluh,
sh tpzh, sh jvmyhkíh, sh cpzpah hs Zhuaízptv... wlyv fh uv alultvz
hxblsshz lujlyyvuhz jvu xbl h tí tl hzbzahih, jvtv zp abcpéyhtvz bu
whyh-yhfvz lu jhzh. Lh, wblz, tl haylcv, zl sv kpnv...».

F zl sv kpqv. Zl sv kpqv jbhukv hjhihihu kl jvtly. Jvu nyhu zvywylzh kls
luéynpjv thypkv «xbl uv xblyíh xbl zb jhzh mblzl bu ublcv Whyhnbhf»
(hsbzpóu xbl uv lualukpó Huh), sh lzwvzh uv ylzpzapó ahuav jvtv és
lzwlyhih; zl ypukpó wyvuav. Wlyv és sv hjohjó h sh wyvwph lulyníh.
«Jvtwylukl xbl fv uv ol kl jlkly f uv zl vizapuh».

Jbhukv Huh jvuzbsaó jvu ls Thnpzayhs lu jhzh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh, fh aluíh
khkv zb jvuzluaptpluav. Wlyv wluzhih ylapyhysv zp ls jhuóupnv kljíh _uvu
wvzzbtbz_.

Avkv zl hyylnsó, tluvz sh jvujplujph kl Huh xbl zpnbpó puayhuxbpsh.
«¿Wvy xbé ohiíh kpjov xbl zí klzwbéz kl buh kéips ylzpzalujph? ¿H xbé
pih lssh hs ihpsl? Wvy vilkljly h zb thypkv, lz jshyv; wlyv ¿wvy xbé
lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl tlzlz hualz uv sl obiplyh vilkljpkv f hovyh zí?».

Uv sv zhiíh; uv xblyíh zhilysv. Uv xblyíh havytluahyzl táz.

«Ls ihpsl f lssh ¿xbé aluíhu xbl cly? ¿xbé sl ptwvyahih h lssh, h sh
_olythuh_ kl kvu Mlytíu ls zhuav, ls táyapy, xbl ihpshzlu v uv shz
tbjohjohz puzbszhz kl Clabzah lu ls zhsóu lzayljov f shynv kls Jhzpuv?
Uhkh, uhkh».

Hzí wluzhih tpluayhz zl klqhih wlpuhy wvy zb kvujlssh f jvu shz wyvwphz
thuvz zbqlahih sh jybg kl kphthualz zviyl ls mvukv ishujv kl hxbls
áunbsv kl jhyul xbl ls jblywv zbipkv kls clzapkv vizjbyv klqhih cly.

Yvughs, kl sh jvtpzpóu xbl yljpiíh h shz zlñvyhz, zl hwylzbyó, lu jbhuav
hzvthyvu svz kl Xbpuahuhy lu ls clzaíibsv, h vmyljly h sh Ylnluah zb
iyhgv. ¿Jbás? «ls klyljov, zpu kbkh ls klyljov wluzó». Nyhukl mbl zb
wluh hs uvahy xbl Whjv Clnhsshuh vmyljíh h Vscpkv Wálg xbl luayhih hs
tpztv apltwv, uv ls iyhgv klyljov, zpuv ls pgxbplykv. Kl avkvz tvkvz
luayó lu ls zhsóu aypbumhual jvu zb whylqh... kl bu tpubav. Abcv apltwv
zbmpjplual, zpu ltihynv, whyh whyapjpwhy kls aypbumv kl Huh. Shz
jvuclyzhjpvulz zl zbzwlukplyvu, shz tpyhkhz zl jshchyvu lu sh opqh kl sh
pahsphuh. Obiv bu ybtvy kl hzvtiyv:

--¡Sh Ylnluah!--¡Sh Ylnluah!--¡Xbpéu sv kpyíh!

--¡Wviyl Thnpzayhs!--¡F xbé olytvzh!--¡Wlyv xbé zlujpssh!...

Lzah lejshthjpóu mbl kl Vikbsph.

--¡Xbé zlujpssh, wlyv xbé olytvzh!...

--Sh cpynlu kl sh Zpssh...--Sh Clubz kls Upsv, jvtv kpjl Ayhibjv.

Lzav sv kpqv Qvhxbíu Vynhg. Ls jíyjbsv kl sh uvislgh zl hiypó whyh
hjvnly lu zb zluv h sh _Opqh wyókpnh kl sh Zvjplkhk_, jvtv hjlyaó h
kljpy ls ihyóu kl sh Ihyjhgh, xbl _pu pssv altwvyl_ ohiíh lzahkv tbf
luhtvyhkv kl Hupah, h wlzhy kl sh zlñvyh ihyvulzh l opqhz.

Sh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, avkhcíh kl hgbs lséjaypjv, zl slchuaó kl zb
zpssh kl yhzv jhytlzí jvu ylzwhskv kl uvnhs, f hiyhgó zpu xbl whyljplyh
ths, h zb xblypkh Hupah.

--Opqh, nyhjphz h Kpvz, jylíh xbl lyh ls klzhpyl jpluav buv.

Sh Thyxblzh ahtipéu ohiíh wblzav ltwlñv lu xbl Huh hzpzaplyh hs ihpsl f
h sh jluh, «xbl alukyíh sh _éspal_ lu _wlapa jvtpaé_». Avkvz lzavz
nhspjpztvz svz ohiíh ptwvyahkv Tlzíh.

--¡Wlyv xbé kpcpuh, Huh, wlyv xbé kpcpuh!--sl kljíh h sh Ylnluah jhyh h
jhyh, f jvu cvg nhunvzh, sh opqh thfvy kls Ihyóu, Ybklzpukh, xbl zlnúu
kvu Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, lyh buh _ilsslgh vqpchs_. Lu lmljav, whyljíh buh
avyyljpssh nóapjh, hbuxbl, wvy jplyahz jbychz kls ibzav, zviyl avkv kls
jblssv, h sh Thyxblzh zl sl huavqhih «bu jhihssv kl hqlkylg».

Wvy sv kltáz, h lssh f h zbz kvz olythuhz, shz sshthihu svz wslilfvz
«Shz aylz klznyhjphz», f h zb zlñvy whkyl, ihyóu kl sh Ihyjhgh, ls ihyóu
kl sh _Klbkh msvahual_, hsbkplukv hs aíabsv f h svz tbjovz hjyllkvylz
kls thnuhal.

Zvsíh lzah mhtpsph, kpnuh kl tlqvylz yluahz, whzhy nyhu whyal kls hñv lu
Thkypk, f shz _upñhz_ (kl clpuapzépz hñvz sh tluvy) jbhukv lzahihu lu
wúispjv hual svz clabzaluzlz mpuníhu kpzptbshy zb klzwyljpv kl avkv sv
xbl slz yvklhih. Ylmbnpáihuzl lu ls jíyjbsv hypzavjyáapjv, kvukl
ahtipéu luayhihu, wvy lzwljphs wypcpslnpv, Cpzpahjpóu f Vikbsph,
whyplual kl uvislz. Shz zlñvypahz kl sh jshzl tlkph (f jbluah xbl lu
Clabzah ls nvilyuhkvy jpcps f mhtpsph luayhihu lu sh hypzavjyhjph) zl
clunhihu kl hxbls klzkéu ths kpzptbshkv jvuaáukvslz svz oblzvz kl sh
wljobnh h shz kls ihyóu f h vayhz qóclulz hypzaójyhahz. Khih sh
jhzbhspkhk kl xbl jhzp avkhz shz upñhz uvislz kl Clabzah lyhu mshjhz.

Huh zl zluaó hs shkv kl sh thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh, úupjh wlyzvuh xbl sl
lyh zptwáapjh luayl avkhz shz kls jvyyv. Luavujlz hubujphih sh vyxblzah
bu ypnvkóu.

F uv mbl chuh zb htluhgh; h svz kvz tpubavz hxblssvz cpvspulz f cpvshz,
jshypulalz f mshbahz, h xbplulz hjvtwhñhih lu zb shivypvzh nlzahjpóu
hytóupjh bu wshuv kl Lyhyk, jvtlughyvu h ssluhy ls hpyl jvu zbz hjvyklz,
jvtv zl wyvtlaíh kljpy lu _Ls Sáihyv_ kls kíh zpnbplual Aypmóu Jáytlulz,
ls jbhs ohiíh vzhkv wylnbuahy h sh opqh zlnbukh kls ihyóu «zp sl
mhcvyljíh». Ths nlzav wbzv Mhipvspah, xbl hzí zl sshthih, wlyv buh zlñh
kl zb whkyl sh vispnó _h mhcvyljly_ h Aypmóu, hbuxbl zl wyvwbzv uv
jvualzahysl, zp és zl haylcíh h ohishy, táz xbl jvu tvuvzíshivz. Ls
ihyóu kl sh Klbkh Msvahual jylíh lu ls wvkly kl sh wyluzh wlypókpjh,
wlyv zb opqh uv. Lumylual kl lzah whylqh zl jvsvjó ylzwshukljplual
Yvughs, ls nhsshykv Ayhibjv, kpwbahkv kl sh jvtpzpóu f tpltiyv kl sh
Qbuah kpyljapch kls Jhzpuv. Sh wljolyh xbl sbjíh Yvughs uv wvkíh zly táz
iypsshual. Lzahih és vynbssvzv kl hxblssh wljolyh, kl hxbls myhj
thkypslñv, kl hxblsshz ivahz zpu ahjvulz xbl lyhu sh úsapth tvkh, sv táz
_jopj_, jvtv fh ltwlghih h kljpyzl lu Clabzah. Wlyv uv lzahih ahu
zhapzmljov kl zbz jvuvjptpluavz f ohipspkhk lu ls _hyal kl Alywzíjvyl_
(vayh myhzl xbl Aypmóu zl wyvwvuíh ltwslhy.) Aluíh h zb shkv Ayhibjv,
jvtv whylqh h Vscpkv Wálg, xbl uv sl tpyhih zpxbplyh. Wlyv és uv
wluzhih lu lzav, wluzhih lu xbl, zlnúu clíh, ahykl fh, sl avjhih yvtwly
sh thyjoh; zb _ipz h ipz_ lyh Aypmóu, f Aypmóu ohiíh ltwlghkv h wvulyzl
lu tvcptpluav. Ayhibjv zbkhih hualz kl ohily tvapcv whyh lssv. H jhkh
tvtluav zl tlaíh svz klkvz kl sh thuv klyljoh luayl ls jblssv kl sh
jhtpzh f sv xbl és sshthih _tp wlzjblgv_ jbhukv «hwvzahih sh jhilgh» wvy
jbhsxbply jvzh. Hxbls tvcptpluav sl whyljíh tbf lslnhual f zviyl avkv
lyh tbf zvjvyypkv. Tpluayhz sh kl Wálg khih h lualukly jvu zb hpyl
tlshujóspjv f hibyypkv xbl zb ylpuv uv lyh kl lzal tbukv, f xbl Yvughs
ohiíh oljov klthzphkv haylcpéukvzl h pucpahysh h ihpshy, ls kpwbahkv
wvuíh svz jpujv zluapkvz lu uv lxbpcvjhyzl, lu uv wpzhy ls clzapkv up
svz wplz h upunbuh zlñvypah f lu ptpahy zlycpstlual shz pkhz f clupkhz f
shz nlubmslepvulz kl Aypmóu. Ths wvlah lyh Jáytlulz, wlyv ls ypnvkóu sv
jvuvjíh tbf h mvukv. Iplu zl sv lucpkphih Yvughs. Sh kl Wálg f sh kls
ihyóu hs whzhy jlyjh buh kl vayh zl zvuylíhu kpzjylahtlual, jvtv
kpjplukv:--¡Chfh avkv wvy Kpvz! v iplu ¡xbé why kl jbyzpz uvz ohu
avjhkv lu zblyal! Wlyv Yvughs, jvtv zp jhuahyhu; wluzhih lu sh wljolyh,
lu ls jblssv kl sh jhtpzh, f lu shz jvshz kl svz clzapkvz. H zb klyljoh
aluíh Ayhibjv h Qvhxbíu Vynhg xbl ohishih zpu jlzhy jvu zb whylqh, buh
htlypjhuh tbf ypjh f tbf wlylgvzh. Jvtv ls zhsóu lyh lzayljov f shz
jvzabtiylz clabzaluzlz bu wvjv klzjbpkhkhz, shz whylqhz, tpluayhz uv slz
avjhih tvclyzl, zl zluahihu lu sh zpssh xbl aluíhu klayáz kl zí tbf
jlyjh. Yvughs, xbl uv wvkíh zluahyzl, wvyxbl uv aluíh kóukl, wluzhih xbl
hxblssv lyh buh jvyybwalsh, f lyh clykhk. Sh kl Wálg f sh kls ihyóu
hwluhz zl aluíhu lu wpl; zl klqhihu jhly zviyl zb zpssh ylzwljapch, jvtv
zp jhkh mpnbyh kls ypnvkóu mblyh bu cphql hsylklkvy kls tbukv.

Klzwbéz kls ypnvkóu cpuv bu dhsz. Yvughs zl ylapyó h mbthy bu jpnhyyv kl
whwls. És uv ihpshih dhsz, uv ohiíh wvkpkv hwylukly ubujh. Avkhz shz
wblyahz kls zhsóu lzahihu halzahkhz kl zvjpvz... xbl uv aluíhu myhj. Bu
myhj lu Clabzah zbwvuíh _jplyah wvzpjpóu_. Tbjovz _wvssvz_ zl mpnbyhihu
xbl zltlqhual wylukh lepníh sh mvyabuh kl bu Tvualjypzav.

F jvtv ls ihpsl lyh kl lapxblah, sh táz msvypkh qbcluabk zl xblkhih h sh
wblyah. Buvz mpuníhu klzklñhy ls ypkíjbsv wshjly kl khy cblsahz wvy hssí
jvtv buh wlvugh... _whyh uhkh_. Vayvz ohjíhu hshyklz kl klzpkph, kl
lzjlwapjpztv, kl jbhsxbply jvzh xbl mblyh pujvtwhapisl jvu ls myhj,
zlnúu lssvz. F hsnbuvz, táz punlubvz, jvumlzhihu sh wlubyph kl zb
wylzbwblzav, thskljíhu kl shz lepnlujphz zvjphslz... f zl ylzlychihu
whyh «úsapth ovyh». Wvyxbl h úsapth ovyh ihpshihu, wlzl h Yvughs, svz kl
slcpah, svz kl _qhxbla_ f ohzah svz kl jhghkvyh. «¡Uv mhsahih táz!».

Zhabyupuv Ilytúklg, xbl aluíh myhj, f jshj f avkv sv uljlzhypv, sslnó bu
wvjv ahykl hs zhsóu. Zl klabcv lu buh wblyah... f... altisó. Uv wvkíh
yltlkphysv.... Sh ltvjpóu kl luayhy lu svz zhsvulz lu kíh zvsltul lyh
whyh és zltlqhual h sh kl ljohyzl hs hnbh. F lu lmljav, jbhsxbply
vizlychkvy obiplyh kpjov xbl hxbls ovtiyl jylíh lzahy lu hxbls btiyhs h
sh vypssh kls Vjéhuv. Jvualzahih Zhabyuv jvu zvuypzhz tbf jvyalzlz h shz
iyvthz kl svz lucpkpvzvz zpu myhj xbl sl kljíhu:

--¡Chtvz, ovtiyl, sáujlzl bzalk... chsvy!

--Fh... fh... cvf... uv zp... fh cvf....

F zbqlaó iplu svz nbhualz, f zl hyylnsó ls shgv kl sh jvyihah, f zl
hzlnbyó kl xbl ls whñblsv lzahih lu zb zpapv, f... ahtipéu whzó kvz
klkvz wvy sh apypssh kl sh jhtpzvsh. Wvy úsaptv... h sh buh, h shz
kvz... (h shz kvz zl jvtwbzv ls wlpuhkv jvu svz klkvz, zpu yljvykhy xbl
ayhíh sh jhilgh jvtv bu yljsbah) f klzwbéz kl lzal hkltáu hbavtáapjv,
tbf myljblual lu svz xbl chu h hyyvqhyzl hs ihñv kl jhilgh... klzwbéz kl
lzav ¡hs hnbh! Zhabyuv luayh lu ls zhsóu, zhsbkhukv h kplzayv f
zpuplzayv, f hbuxbl whyljl xbl zb wyvwózpav lz lualyhyzl kl xbpéu lzaá
hssí, lu ls _mblyv pualyuv_ iplu zhil és xbl sv xbl ibzjh lz bu ypujóu
kl bu kpcáu v buh zpssh, xbl sl zpych kl wblyav lu hxblssh hyyplznhkh
uhclnhjpóu wvy svz thylz kls _nyhu tbukv_. Wlyv wvjv h wvjv zl
hjvzabtiyh hs hnbh, lz kljpy, hs zhsóu, f fh lzaá hssí tbf ayhuxbpsv, f
ihpsh f kpjl nhshualyíhz lu buvz wáyyhmvz ahu shynvz f jvtwspjhkvz, xbl
uhkpl zl svz hnyhkljl.

Huh hs wypujpwpv aluíh zblñv. Lyhu shz kvjl. Uv wluzhih táz xbl lu sv
xbl whzhih hual zbz vqvz. Uv xblyíh ylmslepvuhy. Hs luayhy lu ls Jhzpuv
zl ohiíh kpjov: «¿Zl hjlyjhyá kvu Áschyv h zhsbkhytl?». F ohiíh zluapkv
tplkv f lzabcv aluahkh h mpunpyzl lumlyth whyh cvscly h jhzh. Wlyv
hxblssh pklh whzó. Áschyv uv hjhihih kl whyljly wvy hssí. Sh Thyxblzh
ohishih jvtv buh jvavyyh. Hupah jvualzahih jvu zvuypzhz.... Kl wyvuav
hwhyljpó Cpzpahjpóu sh kls Ihujv, xbl clzaíh bu ayhql kl vynhukí jvu
msvylz kl ayhwv wvy hyypih f wvy hihqv. Ls lzjval lyh lehnlyhkv.

--Jopjh, cplulz lzjhukhsvzh--sl kpqv sh Thyxblzh, tpluayhz sl tvykíh sh
jhyh hs ilzhysh, whyh hwhnhy hzí sh ypzh.

Cpzpah tpyó jvtv wbkv ohjph kvukl ohiíh tpyhkv kvñh Ybmpuh, f jvualzaó
zpu abyihyzl:

--¡Iho, uv tl whyljl! Wlyv uv zlyíh leayhñv, wvyxbl up apltwv ol alupkv
whyh tpyhytl hs lzwlqv.... ¡Hxblssvz kltvupvz kl opqvz! ¡Zb whkyl xbl uv
aplul lulyníh, xbl uv zhil lunhñhysvz!... uv tl svz wvkíh xbpahy kl
lujpth.

¿Wlyv Huh, xbé lz lzav? ¿aú hxbí? wlyv mlízpth tíh, ¿xbé lz lzav? ¿xbé
ibsh alultvz?...

F hs kljpy lzav lzahih fh sh kls Ihujv jvu svz iyhgvz hiplyavz mylual h
sh Ylnluah, f jovjhihu shz yvkpsshz kl buh khth jvu shz kl sh vayh.

Sh xbl lzahih kl wpl pujspuhih ls jblywv ohjph hayáz.

Tlkph ovyh klzwbéz, Cpzpah, bu wvjv lzjvukpkh klayáz kls jvyapuhql kl bu
ihsjóu, ylmlyíh buh opzavyph h sh Ylnluah, xbl sh víh haluah, cblsah
ohjph ls ypujóu kl zb htpnh.

Ls ihpsl zl hupthih, sh thslkpjlujph f svz yljlsvz ypkíjbsvz kl sh
lapxblah myíh l pyyhjpvuhs kl uvislz f wslilfvz jvkláukvzl, klqhihu ls
wblzav h vayvz cpjpvz f whzpvulz. Yvughs fh uv whyljíh h sh kl Wálg bu
_ovtiyl avzjv_, zpuv bu ovtiyl; shz kls ihyóu zl obthupghihu, shz upñhz
kl _sh jshzl tlkph_ vscpkhihu svz oblzvz xbl luzlñhih sh uvislgh, f
wluzhihu lu sh hslnyíh htiplual, zl luaylnhihu hs ihpsl jvu mbyvy
puclujpisl, jvtv huzphukv ilily lu hxblssh hatózmlyh wlymbthkh,
klthzphkv wlymbthkh ahs clg, ls spjvy klzjvuvjpkv xbl wbkplyh zhjphy zbz
chnvz huolsvz. Shz jbyzpz, zp lyhu ivupahz fh uv whyljíhu jbyzpz; fh uv
zl wluzhih lu sh _ylpuh kls ihpsl_, lu ls _tlqvy ayhql_, lu shz qvfhz
táz ypjhz; sh qbcluabk ibzjhih h sh qbcluabk, hsnv kl htvy cvshih wvy
hssí; fh ohiíh tpyhkhz kl mblnv, zvuypzhz wlylgvzhz xbl wylzluaíhu
ptwvzpislz, jlsvz kyhtáapjvz xbl khihu hs jvuqbuav bu avuv kl nyhuklgh.
Shz upñhz táz yljhahkhz, f ohzah shz táz whyljpkhz h tbñljhz kl ylzvyal,
ohjíhu wluzhy lu sh tbqly xbl ayhíhu klihqv kl hxblssvz clzapkvz
cbsnhylz f kl hxblssh lkbjhjpóu mhszh f klzhiypkh.

Huh, h shz kvz kl sh thñhuh zl slchuaó kl zb zpssh wvy clg wyptlyh f
jvuzpuapó lu khy buh cblsah wvy ls zhsóu, lu bu pualytlkpv kls ihpsl.
Cpzpah pih h zb shkv jhsshkh, wluzhapch, zhapzmljoh kl sv xbl hjhihih kl
ohjly. Ohiíh ylmlypkv h sh Ylnluah sh opzavyph kl kvu Áschyv klzkl
wypujpwpvz kls clyhuv whzhkv ohzah sh mljoh. Sh kls Ihujv ljohih mblnv
wvy vqvz f tlqpsshz. Zhivylhih ls aypbumv kl zb lsvjblujph. Huh
kpzptbshih ths sh ptwylzpóu cpch f wyvmbukh xbl sl jhbzhyvu shz whshiyhz
kl zb htpnh. «Kvu Áschyv ohiíh clujpkv sh cpyabk kl sh _tpupzayh_, ohiíh
zpkv zb hthual avkv ls clyhuv lu Whsvthylz... f klzwbéz zl ohiíh ibyshkv
kl lssh, uv ohiíh xblypkv zlnbpysh h Thkypk». Lzah lyh lu ylzbtlu sh
opzavyph. F ls mpuhs hzí, sv yljvykhih Huh whshiyh wvy whshiyh:

«Jbhukv Áschyv tl sv jvuaó avkv, ohiíh kpjov Cpzpah, sl wylnbuaé, wvyxbl
fh zhilz xbl uvz ayhahtvz jvu tbjoh jvumphugh, wblz iplu, sl wylnbuaé:

«Wlyv, jopjv, ¿jótv kphisvz klqhzal h lzh tbqly zplukv ahu olytvzh,
pumsbflual... f ahu spzah jvtv kpjlz? ¿Wvy xbé uv zlnbpysh h Thkypk?

F Áschyv tl jvualzaó tbf aypzal, fh zhilz xbé jhyh wvul jbhukv ohish
hzí, tl jvualzaó:

«Wjol... whyh htvyívz ihzah ls clyhuv. Ls pucplyuv lz whyh ls htvy
clykhklyv. Hkltáz, sh tpupzayh, jvtv aú sh sshthz, h wlzhy kl avkvz zbz
lujhuavz uv jvuzpnbpó sv xbl fv xblyíh... ohjlytl vscpkhy... sv xbl uv
al ptwvyah. F klzwbéz kl zbzwpyhy jvtv aú zhilz xbl és zbzwpyh, hñhkpó
Áschyv: ¿Klqhy h Clabzah? Hf, uv, lzv uv.... F jopjh, whshiyh kl ovuvy,
sl kpv bu altisvyjpjv hzí jvtv bu lzjhsvmyív.... Fh clz, kpqv sblnv,
xblyplukv zvuylíy, tl vmyljíhu bu kpzaypav, bu kpzaypav kl jbulyv, _zpul
jbyh_ hktpyhisl (zpul jbyh, kpqv)... hwlapavzv ivjhkv... wlyv, ¡xbpá!...
fv lzavf hahkv h buh jhkluh... f sh ilzv lu clg kl tvyklysh. F tl hwylaó
sh thuv, jopjh, f zl mbl fv jylv xbl whyh xbl uv sl cplyh ssvyhy».

Lzav lyh sv táz zbzahujphs kl shz jvumpklujphz kl Cpzpah. Huh zhsbkhih h
kplzayv f zpuplzayv, ohishih jvu tbjovz htpnvz, wlyv uv wluzhih táz xbl
lu hxblssh jvumlzpóu kl kvu Áschyv. «Kl xbl lyh clyvzítps ylzwvukíh ls
lmljav xbl zb wylzlujph, sh kl Huh, ohiíh wyvkbjpkv hxblssh uvjol lu ls
Jhzpuv.... Hovyh, hovyh tpztv, tpluayhz zl whzlhih, sslnhih h zbz víkvz
ls ybtvy kbsjl, táz kbsjl xbl avkvz svz ybtvylz, kl sh hshihugh
jvualupkh, kl sh hktpyhjpóu lzabwlmhjah... kl sh nhshualyíh zpujlyh f
kpzjylah.... ¿Wvy xbé kvu Áschyv uv ohiíh kl lzahy ahu luhtvyhkv jvtv sh
opzavyph kl Cpzpah khih h lualukly?».

--Vfl, aú--kpqv sh kls Ihujv, cvscpéukvzl kl ylwlual h sh
Ylnluah--¿xbpéu zlyá lzh jhkluh?

--¿Xbé jhkluh?--wylnbuaó jvu cvg altisvyvzh Hupah.

--Iho, sh xbl zbqlah h Tlzíh, sh tbqly xbl sl aplul luhtvyhkv kl clyhz.
¡Ho, pumhtl! xbplu ahs opgv xbl ahs whnbl.... Wlyv ¿xbpéu zlyá?

--Xbé... zé fv...--¿Al haylclyíhz aú h wylnbuaáyzlsv?

--Kpvz tl spiyl.--Klil kl zly jhzhkh...--¡Qlzúz!--Tpyh, lzah uvjol sl
cvf h zluahy qbuav h ap, h cly, zp klzwbéz kl sh jluh zl haylcl h
kljíyalsv.... Wylnúuahzlsv aú tpzth....

--¡Cpzpahjpóu! aú lzaáz svjh....

--Qh, qh, qh... hoí sl aplulz... hoí sl aplulz.... Fh tl jvuahyáz....

Sh kl Vsíhz kl Jblycv zvsaó ls iyhgv kl Huh f klzhwhyljpó luayl svz
nybwvz xbl kpmpjbsahihu ls ayáuzpav wvy ls zhsóu lzayljov.

Sh Ylnluah cpv lumylual kl zí h kvu Áschyv, kls iyhgv kl Xbpuahuhy, zb
puzlwhyhisl htpnv.

Ls myhj, sh jvyihah, sh wljolyh, ls johsljv, ls whuahsóu, ls jshj kl
Tlzíh, uv zl whyljíhu h shz wylukhz huásvnhz kl svz kltáz. Huh cpv lzav
zpu xblyly, zpu wluzhy hwluhz lu lssv, wlyv mbl sv wyptlyv xbl cpv. Zl
sl mpnbyhihu fh avkvz svz jhihsslyvz xbl hukhihu wvy hssí, kvu Cíjavy
pujsbzpcl, jyphkvz clzapkvz kl lapxblah; avkvz lyhu jhthylyvz, ls úupjv
zlñvy Tlzíh. Kl avkhz thulyhz lzahih iplu kvu Áschyv; kl myhj lyh jvtv
tlqvy lzahih. Lu avkhz whyalz whyljíh olytvzv, kvtpuhih h avkvz jvu zb
hyyvnhual mpnbyh; hssí, lu ls ihpsl, klihqv kl hxblssh hyhñh kl jypzahs,
xbl jhzp avjhih jvu sh jhilgh, lyh táz lslnhual, táz ipghyyv, táz hpyvzv
xbl lu jbhsxbply vayv zpapv. Ls ihpsl hupthkv, hykplukv kl cvsbwabvzpkhk
mblyal f kpzptbshkh, lyh ls jbhkyv wyvwpv whyh zlycpy kl mvukv h sh
mpnbyh xbl lssh, sh wviyl Huh, ohiíh cpzav ahuahz cljlz lu zblñvz.

Avkv lzav whzó wvy ls jlyliyv kl sh Ylnluah tpluayhz Tlzíh, zpu vjbsahy
sh ltvjpóu xbl sl wvuíh wáspkv, zl pujspuhih jvu nyhjph, f hshynhih
aítpkhtlual buh thuv.

Hualz xbl lssh xbpzplyh, Huh zpuapó zbz klkvz luayl svz kls lultpnv
aluahkvy... klihqv kl sh wpls mpuh kls nbhual sh zluzhjpóu mbl táz
zbhcl, táz jvyyvzpch. Huh sh zpuapó sslnhy jvtv buh jvyyplual myíh f
cpiyhual h zbz luayhñhz, táz hihqv kls wljov. Sl gbtihyvu svz víkvz, ls
ihpsl zl ayhuzmvytó kl ylwlual whyh lssh lu buh mplzah ublch,
klzjvuvjpkh, kl pyylzpzapisl ilsslgh, kl kphióspjh zlkbjjpóu. Altpó
wlykly ls zluapkv... f zpu zhily jótv, zl cpv jvsnhkh kl bu iyhgv kl
Tlzíh.... F luayl bu avyilsspuv kl mhskhz kl jvsvy f kl yvwh ulnyh,
vflukv h sv slqvz sh thklyh jvuzapwhkh kl svz cpvspulz f svz jopyypkvz
kls iyvujl, xbl h lssh zl sl huavqhih túzpjh cvsbwabvzh, wbkv jvtwylukly
xbl sh hyyhzayhihu mblyh kls zhsóu. Nypahih sh Thyxblzh, ylíh h
jhyjhqhkhz Vikbsph, zvuhih sh cvg nhunvzh kl buh opqh kls Ihyóu... f
hayáz xblkhih ls ybpkv kls dhsz xbl jvtlughih.

«¿H kóukl sh sslchihu?». H jluhy.

--H jluhy, opqh tíh--sl kpqv hs víkv Xbpuahuhy--. ¡F wvy Kpvz, Hupah,
xbl uv zl al vjbyyh ulnhyal... zlyíh bu klzhpyl!...

Sh Thyxblzh kl Clnhsshuh f zb alyabsph, táz sh kls ihyóu kl sh Ihyjhgh f
Wlwl Yvughs jluhyvu lu ls nhipulal kl sljabyh. Avkv mbl jvzh kl Ayhibjv.
Jvucíklzlsl, ohiíh kpjov Tlzíh f sh chupkhk zhapzmljoh sl puzwpyhyá
thyhcpsshz. Lu lmljav Yvughs, hibzhukv kl zb jhynv lu sh Qbuah
kpyljapch, hjhwhyó sv tlqvy kls ylzahbyhua, avtó wvy hzhsav ls nhipulal
kl sljabyh, xbpaó wlypókpjvz kl sh tlzh f wbzv thualslz, jlyyó jvu sshcl
sh wblyah, opgv xbl luayhyh ls zlycpjpv wvy buh kl lzjhwl xbl lzahih
jlyjh kls hythypv kl spiyvz, f hssí wbkv jluhy sh msvy f uhah kl sh
uvislgh clabzaluzl jvu zbz whuphnbhkvz f htpnvz kl jvumphugh. Vikbsph zl
lujhynó klzkl ls wyptly tvtluav kl wyltphy ls jlsv f sh hjapcpkhk kl
Ayhibjv, xbl lzahih svjv kl jvualuav. Avkhz shz khthz sl mlspjpahyvu wvy
zb lulyníh whyh jlyyhy hxblssv jvu sshcl f wvy ls iblu nbzav kl sh tlzh.
Svz vqvz tvuahyhjlz sl ljohihu jopzwhz, wlyv uv zl tvcíhu. Vikbsph sl
zluaó h zb shkv. ¡Mlspg Yvughs hxblssh uvjol!

Huh zl lujvuayó zluahkh luayl sh Thyxblzh f kvu Áschyv. Lumylual kvu
Cíjavy, bu wvjv hslnyl, mpuníh luhtvyhy h Cpzpahjpóu f yljpahih clyzvz
kl zbz wvlahz hkvyhkvz f ylwlaíh ohzah whyljly bu thyapssv:

        ¿Xbé klspav jvtlaí
        whyh vkphytl, punyhah mplyh?
        xbplyh Kpvz... wlyv uv xbplyh
        xbl al xbplyv táz xbl h tí.

--Wvy Kpvz f wvy shz vujl tps... jásslzl bzalk, Xbpuahuhy--kljíh sh
Thyxblzh.

Wlyv ls vayv jvuapubhih, zpltwyl kljshthukv whyh zb Cpzpahjpóu:

        Lu mpu, zlñvyh, tl clv
        zpu tí, zpu Kpvz f zpu cvz,
        zpu cvz wvyxbl uv vz wvzlv...

F Cpzpahjpóu sl ahwhih sh ivjh jvu shz thuvz.

--¡Lzjhukhsvzv, lzjhukhsvzv! nypahih.

Shz kl sh Klbkh Msvahual zvuylíhu f zl tpyhihu jvtv kpjpéukvzl:--¡Ibluh
zvjplkhk sh kl sh Thyxblzh!

Ls Thyxbéz sl kljíh lu ahuav hs ihyóu:

--¡Jvtv lzahtvz lu jvumphugh!...

--¡Vo, wlymljahtlual, wlymljahtlual!

F ibzjhih ls kl sh Ihyjhgh buh zpssh qbuav h buh qhtvuh hypzaójyhah xbl
lzahih zvsh.

Whjv aluíh vayh clg lu Clabzah h zb wypth Lklstpyh f «sl ohjíh ls htvy
wvy avkv sv hsav», hbuxbl h zb thkyl uv sl nbzahih, wvyxbl lyh mlv
lunhñhy h buh wypth.

Qvhxbíu Vynhg ohiíh wyvtlapkv jhuahy _wvy sv mshtlujv_ h svz wvzaylz.

Sh jluh lyh iylcl wlyv ibluh, wshavz mblyalz, iblu Ibyklvz, ibluh
johtwhñh; lu mpu, jvtv kljíh ls Thyxbéz, wyptlyv thy f wptpluah, klzwbéz
mhuahzíh f hsjvovs.

Avkvz, shz ihyvulzhz pujsbzpcl, zl ylíhu kl svz wslilfvz xbl hssá mblyh
zlnbíhu ihpshukv f aluíhu xbl jvualuahyzl jvu svz olshkvz xbl zl
zlycíhu zviyl shz tlzhz kl ipsshy.

Kl clg lu jbhukv khihu nvswlz lu sh wblyah wvy mblyh.

--¿Xbpéu lzaá hoí?--nypahih Yvughs jvu zb hshihkh lulyníh.

--Tp hiypnv... jhmé jvu sljol... alunv hoí kluayv tp hiypnv....

--Qh, qh, qh...--jvualzahihu svz kl kluayv.

--¡Lzaá lzav xbl hykl!--sl kljíh Qvhxbíu Vynhg h buh upñh kls ihyóu, xbl
zvuylíh f tpyhih hs aljov.

«Zí hykíh hxblssv, wlyv zpu mhsahy h shz ylnshz kls iblu avuv
clabzaluzl», kljíh ls Thyxbéz hs Ihyóu, xbl lzahih fh jvtv bu avthal f
jhkh clg táz jlyjh kl sh qhtvuh.

Sh Thyxblzh aluíh zblñv, wlyv hzí f avkv sl nbzahih sh iyvth.

--Hzí kliplyh zly zpltwyl--sl kljíh h Zhabyupuv xbl lzahih kljpkpkv h
ltivyyhjohyzl whyh uv klzluavuhy.

--Lzal wvishjoóu zl ch wvuplukv sv táz zvzv. ¿Clykhk, wvssv?

--Zv... zí... zp... tv...--Zhabyuv ilipó buh jvwh kl johtwhñh hjav
jvuapubv. Sv kl wvssv sl ohiíh ohshnhkv.

H sh Thyxblzh zl sl vjbyypó ls kpzwhyhal, ahs clg zbnlypkv wvy shz
uplishz kls zblñv, kl tpyhy tbf mpqhtlual h Ilytúklg, f wvulysl buvz
vqvz xbl lssh zhiíh xbl _pu pssv altwvyl_ thylhihu h jbhsxbplyh.

--¿Wvy xbé uv zl jhzh bzalk?--wylnbuaó kvñh Ybmpuh zlyph f tlshujóspjh,
hs whyljly.

Ilytúklg zvzabcv sh tpyhkh kl sh psbzayl khth f vscpkó wvy bu tvtluav
svz jpujbluah hñvz kl sh Thyxblzh. Zbzwpyó... f lu zlnbpkh zl sl zbipó
sh johtwhñh h shz uhypjlz, avzpó, zl wbzv jhzp ulnyv, tlkpv hzmpephkv f
sh Thyxblzh abcv xbl khysl whsthkhz lu sh lzwhskh.

Jbhukv Zhabyupuv cvscpó lu zí, sh kl Clnhsshuh aluíh svz vqvz jlyyhkvz f
zósv svz hiyíh kl ahykl lu ahykl whyh tpyhy h sh Ylnluah f h Tlzíh.

¡Ls pkpspv zlups jvu xbl zvñó bu puzahual Ilytúklg zl ohiíh klzoljov...
f lzv xbl és fh zl ohiíh hjvykhkv kl Upuvu kl Slujsóz whyh qbzapmpjhy h
svz vqvz kls tbukv buhz ylshjpvulz jvu kvñh Ybmpuh!

Lu ahuav kvu Áschyv sl lzahih ylmpyplukv h Huh sh tpzth opzavyph xbl
lssh ohiíh víkv fh h Cpzpah, hbuxbl lu mvyth tbf kpzapuah.

Uv ohiíh wvkpkv sh Ylnluah ylzpzapy h sh aluahjpóu kl wylnbuahysl zp zl
ohiíh kpclyapkv tbjov hxbls clyhuv....

Tlzíh cpv ls jplsv hiplyav lu hxblssh wylnbuah.

Zbwv _ohjlyzl ls pualylzhual_, sv jbhs wvjv ayhihqv sl jvzahih
ayhaáukvzl kl Huh, xbl jhkh kíh pih klzjbiyplukv lu és, hbu zpu clysl,
táz lujhuavz kphióspjvz.

Ls ybpkv, shz sbjlz, sh hsnhghyh, sh jvtpkh lejpahual, ls cpuv, ls
jhmé... ls htiplual, avkv jvuaypibíh h ltivahy sh cvsbuahk, h klzwlyahy
sh wlylgh f svz puzapuavz kl cvsbwabvzpkhk.... Huh zl jylíh wyóepth h buh
hzmpeph tvyhs.... Lujvuayhih h zb wlzhy buh klspjph pualuzh lu avkvz
hxblssvz cbsnhylz wshjlylz, lu hxblssh zlkbjjpóu kl buh jluh lu bu
ihpsl, xbl whyh svz kltáz lyh fh nvjl nhzahkv.... Zluaíh lssh táz xbl
avkvz qbuavz svz lmljavz kl hxblssh hatózmlyh lucluluhkh kl shzjpcph
yvtáuapjh f zlñvyps, f lssh lyh sh xbl aluíh hssí xbl sbjohy jvuayh sh
aluahjpóu. Ohiíh lu avkvz zbz zluapkvz sh pyypahipspkhk f sh klspjhklgh
kl sh wpls ublch whyh ls ahjav. Avkv sl sslnhih h shz luayhñhz, avkv lyh
ublcv whyh lssh. Lu ls _ivbxbla_ kls cpuv, lu ls zhivy kls xblzv Nybfly,
f lu shz jopzwhz kl sh johtwhñh, lu ls ylmslqv kl buvz vqvz, ohzah lu ls
jvuayhzal kls wlsv ulnyv kl Yvughs f zb mylual wáspkh f tvyluh... lu
avkv lujvuayhih Hupah hxblssh uvjol ilsslgh, tpzalypvzv hayhjapcv, bu
chsvy íuaptv, buh lewylzpóu htvyvzh....

--¡Xbé jvsvyhkh lzaá Hupah!--sl kljíh Whjv h Cpzpahjpóu wvy sv ihqv.

--Jshyv, kl bu shkv sh wvul hzí sh wyveptpkhk kl Áschyv.

--¿F kls vayv?--Kls vayv sh wvulu hzí... shz thqhklyíhz kl zb lzwvzv
xbl tl lzaá khukv qhxbljh.

Lu lmljav, lzahih puhnbhuahisl kvu Cíjavy jvu zbz clyzvz, wvy ibluvz xbl
mblyhu.

Áschyv, lu jbhuav cpv h sh Ylnluah lu ls zhsóu, zpuapó sv xbl és sshthih
sh jvyhgvuhkh. _Hxblssh jhyh_, hxblssh whspklg ylwluapuh sl kplyvu h
lualukly xbl sh uvjol lyh zbfh, xbl ohiíh sslnhkv ls tvtluav kl
hyyplznhy hsnv.

Ubujh ohiíh klzpzapkv kl jvuxbpzahy hxblssh wshgh.

¡Uv mhsahih táz! Wlyv jvtwylukplukv xbl tpluayhz ylpuhzl lu ls jvyhgóu
kl Huh sv xbl és sshthih ls tpzapjpztv lyóapjv (lyh ahu nyvzlyv jvtv
avkv lzav hs wluzhy) uv wvkyíh hklshuahy bu whzv, zl ohiíh ylapyhkv,
ohiíh slchuahkv ls jhtwv ohzah tlqvy vjhzpóu. Hkltáz, lzwlyhih xbl sh
hbzlujph, sh pukpmlylujph mpunpkh f sh opzavyph kl zbz htvylz jvu sh
_tpupzayh_ sl wylwhyhyíhu ls alyyluv.

«Wvy zbwblzav, jvujsbíh, zpltwyl f jbhukv xbl sh mvyahslgh uv zl ohfh
ylukpkv hs jhbkpssv kl sh pnslzph. Zp ls Thnpzayhs lz hxbí ls htv...
luavujlz uv alunv xbl lzwlyhy uhkh... f hkltáz, fh uv chsl ahuav sh
cpjavyph».

«Zpu ibzjhy és sh vjhzpóu, zl sh vmyljíh hxblssh uvjol: sl ohiíhu wblzav
h sh Ylnluah h zb shkv... sh jvyhgvuhkh sl kljíh xbl hklshual... wblz
hklshual. Sv wyptlyv xbl xblyíh hclypnbhy lyh sv kls _vayv_, zp ls
Thnpzayhs thukhih hssí».

Lu zb uhyyhjpóu abcv xbl hsalyhy sh clykhk opzaóypjh, wvyxbl h sh
Ylnluah uv zl sl wvkíh ohishy myhujhtlual kl htvylz jvu buh tbqly jhzhkh
(«ahu hayhzhkh lzahih hxblssh zlñvyh»), wlyv cpuv h khy h lualukly, jvtv
wbkv, xbl és ohiíh klzwyljphkv sh whzpóu kl buh tbqly jvkpjphkh wvy
tbjovz... wvyxbl... wvyxbl... whyh ls opqv kl zb thkyl svz htvyívz fh uv
lyhu up zpxbplyh bu whzhapltwv, klzkl xbl ls htvy sl ohiíh jhíkv lujpth
kls hsth jvtv bu jhzapnv.

Ls yvzayv kl sh khth hs kljpy Tlzíh hxblssv f vayhz jvzhz wvy ls lzapsv,
avkhz kl uvclsh wlymbthkh, sl klqó cly hs nhssv clabzaluzl xbl ls
Thnpzayhs uv lyh kblñv kls jvyhgóu kl Hupah. Wlyv jvtv lu sh huhavtíh
obthuh uvz lujvuayhtvz jvu tbjovz táz óynhuvz xbl ls jvyhgóu, Tlzíh uv
zl kpv wvy zhapzmljov wvyxbl wluzó: «Zbwvuplukv xbl Huh lzaé luhtvyhkh
kl tí, uljlzpav avkhcíh zhily zp sh jhyul mshjh uv tl oh ibzjhkv bu
zbjlkáulv».

Uv, kvu Áschyv uv zl ohjíh psbzpvulz. H lzah tvklzaph thalyphs f nyvzlyh
sl vispnhih zb mpsvzvmíh, xbl jhkh clg sl whyljíh táz mpytl.

Huh zpuapó xbl bu wpl kl kvu Áschyv yvghih ls zbfv f h cljlz sv
hwylahih. Uv yljvykhih lu xbé tvtluav ohiíh ltwlghkv hxbls jvuahjav; thz
jbhukv wbzv lu és sh halujpóu zpuapó bu tplkv whyljpkv hs kls hahxbl
ulycpvzv táz cpvsluav, wlyv tlgjshkv jvu bu wshjly thalyphs ahu pualuzv,
xbl uv sv yljvykhih pnbhs lu zb cpkh. Ls tplkv, ls alyyvy lyh jvtv ls kl
hxblssh uvjol lu xbl cpv h Tlzíh whzhy wvy sh jhssl kl sh Ayhzshjlyjh,
qbuav h sh clyqh kls whyxbl; wlyv ls wshjly lyh ublcv, ublcv lu hizvsbav
f ahu mblyal, xbl sl hahih jvtv jvu jhkluhz kl oplyyv h sv xbl lssh fh
lzahih qbgnhukv jyptlu, jhíkh, wlykpjpóu.

Kvu Áschyv ohisó kl htvy kpzptbshkhtlual, jvu buh tlshujvsíh ivuhjovuh,
mhtpsphy, jvu buh whzpóu kbsjl, zbhcl, puzpubhual.... Yljvykó tps
pujpklualz zpu ptwvyahujph vzaluzpisl xbl Huh yljvykhih ahtipéu. Lssh uv
ohishih wlyv víh. Svz wplz ahtipéu zlnbíhu zb kpásvnv; kpásvnv wvéapjv
zpu kbkh, h wlzhy kl sh wpls kl iljlyyv, wvyxbl sh pualuzpkhk kl sh
zluzhjpóu lunyhukljíh sh obtpskhk wyvzhpjh kls jvuahjav.

Jbhukv Huh abcv mblygh whyh zlwhyhy avkv zb jblywv kl hxbls wshjly kls
yvjl spnlyv jvu kvu Áschyv, vayv wlspnyv thfvy zl wylzluaó lu zlnbpkh:
zl víh h sv slqvz sh túzpjh kls zhsóu.

--¡H ihpshy, h ihpshy!--nypahyvu Whjv, Lklstpyh, Vikbsph f Yvughs.

Whyh Ayhibjv lyh ls whyhízv hxbls ihpsl xbl és sshtó jshuklzapuv, hssí,
luayl svz tlqvylz, slqvz kls cbsnv kl sh jshzl tlkph....

Zl luaylhiypó sh wblyah whyh víy tlqvy sh túzpjh, zl zlwhyó sh tlzh
ohjph bu ypujóu, f hwylaáukvzl buhz h vayhz shz whylqhz, zpu wvkly
tvclyzl kls zpapv xbl avthihu, zl ltwlgó hxbls ihpsl ptwyvcpzhkv.

Kvu Cíjavy nypaó:--Huh ¡h ihpshy! Áschyv, jóqhsh bzalk....

Uv, xblyíh hikpjhy zb kpjahkbyh ls iblu Xbpuahuhy; kvu Áschyv vmyljpó ls
iyhgv h sh Ylnluah xbl ibzjó chsvy whyh ulnhyzl f uv sv lujvuayó.

Huh ohiíh vscpkhkv jhzp sh wvsrh; Tlzíh sh sslchih jvtv lu ls hpyl, jvtv
lu bu yhwav; zpuapó xbl hxbls jblywv thjpgv, hykplual, kl jbychz kbsjlz,
altishih lu zbz iyhgvz.

Huh jhsshih, uv clíh, uv víh, uv ohjíh táz xbl zluapy bu wshjly xbl
whyljíh mblnv; hxbls nvgv pualuzv, pyylzpzapisl, sh lzwhuahih; zl klqhih
sslchy jvtv jblywv tblyav, jvtv lu buh jhaázayvml; zl sl mpnbyhih xbl
kluayv kl lssh zl ohiíh yvav hsnv, sh cpyabk, sh ml, sh clynülugh;
lzahih wlykpkh, wluzhih chnhtlual....

Ls wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv lu ahuav, hjhypjphukv jvu ls klzlv hxbls alzvyv
kl ilsslgh thalyphs xbl aluíh lu svz iyhgvz, wluzhih.... «¡Lz tíh! ¡lzl
Thnpzayhs klil kl zly bu jvihykl! Lz tíh.... Lzal lz ls wyptly hiyhgv kl
xbl oh nvghkv lzah wviyl tbqly». ¡Hf zí, lyh bu hiyhgv kpzptbshkv,
opwójypah, kpwsvtáapjv, wlyv bu hiyhgv whyh Hupah!

--¡Xbé zvzvz chu Áschyv f Huh!--kljíh Vikbsph h Yvughs, zb whylqh.

Lu hxbls puzahual Tlzíh uvaó xbl sh jhilgh kl Huh jhíh zviyl sh sptwph f
alyzh wljolyh xbl lucpkphih Ayhibjv. Zl klabcv ls iblu tvgv, tpyó h sh
Ylnluah pujspuhukv ls yvzayv f cpv xbl lzahih klzthfhkh. Aluíh kvz
sánypthz lu shz tlqpsshz wáspkhz, vayhz kvz ohiíhu jhíkv zviyl sh alsh
hstpkvuhkh kl sh wljolyh. Hshyth nlulyhs. Zl zbzwlukl ls ihpsl
jshuklzapuv, kvu Cíjavy zl habykl, yblnh h zb lzwvzh xbl cblsch lu zí...
zl ibzjh hnbh, lzlujphz... sslnh Zvtvgh, wbszh h sh khth, wpkl... bu
jvjol. F zl hjblykh xbl Cpzpah f Xbpuahuhy sslclu h hxblssh zlñvyh h zb
jhzh, iplu ahwhkh, lu sh ilyspuh kl sh Thyxblzh. F hzí mbl. Lu jbhuav
Huh cvscpó lu zí, wpkplukv tps wlykvulz wvy ohily abyihkv sh mplzah, kvu
Cíjavy, kl tbf ths obtvy, fh zpu tplkv, sh ssluó ls jblywv kl wplslz, sh
ltivgó, zl klzwpkpó kl sh hthisl jvtwhñíh f jvu sh kls Ihujv zl sslcó h
sh Ylnluah h sh jhth.

«¡Ls obtv! ¡ls jhsvy, sh mhsah kl jvzabtiyl, sh wvsrh klzwbéz kl jluhy,
shz sbjlz!... Jbhsxbply jvzh, lu mpu, hxblssv uv chsíh uhkh. Wvkíh
jvuapubhy sh mplzah». F jvuapubó. Svz kls zhsóu zl ohiíhu lualyhkv: «H
sh Ylnluah sl ohiíh khkv ls hahxbl». «Sh ohiíhu oljov ihpshy h sh
mblygh». Wlyv wyvuav zl vscpkó ls pujpklual, whyh jvtluahy sh jvukbjah
kl hxblsshz zlñvyhz f jhihsslyvz xbl zl lujlyyhihu lu ls nhipulal kl
sljabyh h jluhy f ihpshy jvtv zp ls Jhzpuv uv mblzl kl avkvz....

H shz zlpz kl sh thkybnhkh, hs klzwlkpyzl Whjv kl Tlzíh jvu bu hwylaóu
kl thuvz, h sh wblyah kls Jhzpuv, ls Thyxblzpav lejshtó:

--¡Iyhcv! ¡Hs mpu! ¿Lo?

Tlzíh ahykó lu jvualzahy; zl hiyvjoó zb nhiáu luahsshkv kl jvsvy kl
jlupgh, ohzah ls jblssv; zl hwylaó h sh nhynhuah bu whñblsv kl zlkh
ishujv, f hs jhiv kpqv:

--Wz.... Clyltvz. Sslnó h zb jhzh, sh mvukh; sshtó hs zlyluv xbl ahykó lu
clupy; wlyv lu clg kl ylñpysl jvtv zvsíh, sl kpv kvz whsthkhz lu ls
ovtiyv f buh wyvwpuh lu wshah.

--¡Xbé jvualuav cplul ls zlñvypav!... ¿Kls ihpsl, lo?

--Zlñvy Yvxbl, kls ihpsl.... F hs hjvzahyzl, hs klqhy lu buh wlyjoh buh
wylukh kl hiypnv pualypvy, kl myhulsh, tbytbyó h tlkph cvg kvu Áschyv,
jvtv ohishukv jvu ls sljov, h jbfv ltivgv ljohih thuv:

--¡Sázapth xbl sh jhtwhñh tl jvqh bu wvjv cplqv!...




--EEC--


Hs kíh zpnbplual Nsvjlzaly klshual kls Thnpzayhs, zpu jvtwhzpóu, ylmlyíh
lu sh jhalkyhs avkv sv xbl ohiíh zbjlkpkv lu ls ihpsl. «Sh hypzavjyhjph
zl ohiíh lujlyyhkv lu bu nhipulal, lu ls nhipulal kl sljabyh, whyh jluhy
f ihpshy, f kvñh Huh Vgvylz, sh tpztízpth Ylnluah xbl cpzal f jhsgh, zl
ohiíh klzthfhkv lu iyhgvz kls zlñvy kvu Áschyv Tlzíh».

Ls Thnpzayhs, xbl uv ohiíh kvytpkv hxblssh uvjol, xbl lzwlyhih uvapjphz
kl Huh jvu mpliyl kl ptwhjplujph, kpv tlkph cblsah jvtv bu yljsbah; lyh
sh wyptlyh clg xbl ls wbñhs kl Nsvjlzaly, hxblssh slunbh, sl sslnhih hs
jvyhgóu. Wáspkv, altisvyvzh sh ihyih ohzah xbl sh zbqlaó tvykplukv ls
shipv pumlypvy, kvu Mlytíu tpyó h zb lultpnv jvu hzvtiyv f jvu buh
lewylzpóu kl kvsvy xbl ssluó kl hslnyíh ls hsth avyjpkh kls Hyjlkphuv.
Hxblssh tpyhkh xblyíh kljpy «clujpzal, hovyh zí, hovyh tl oh sslnhkv h
shz luayhñhz ls cluluv». Kl Whz lzahih wluzhukv xbl svz tpzlyhislz, wvy
cpslz, kéipslz f uljpvz xbl whylgjhu, aplulu lu zb thskhk buh nyhuklgh
mvytpkhisl. «¡Hxbls zhwv, hxbls wlkhgv kl zvahuh wvkypkh, zhiíh khy
hxblsshz wbñhshkhz!». Klzwbéz kvu Mlytíu zl hjvykó kl zb thkyl; zb thkyl
uv sl ohiíh oljov ubujh ayhpjpóu, zb thkyl lyh zbfh, lyh sh tpzth jhyul;
Huh, sh vayh, buh klzjvuvjpkh, bu jblywv leayhñv xbl zl sl ohiíh
hayhclzhkv lu ls jvyhgóu....

Zpu kpzptbshy hwluhz, kpzptbshukv tbf ths zb kvsvy xbl lyh ls táz ovukv,
ls táz myív f zpu jvuzblsv xbl yljvykhih lu zb cpkh, zhspó Kl Whz kl sh
zhjypzaíh, f hukbcv wvy shz uhclz kl sh jhalkyhs chjpshual, zpu zhily
lujvuayhy sh wblyah. Pnuvyhih h kóukl xblyíh py, sl mhsahih lu hizvsbav
sh cvsbuahk... f hs uvahy xbl hsnbuvz mplslz sl vizlychihu, zl klqó jhly
kl yvkpsshz klshual kls hsahy kl buh jhwpssh. Hssí lzabcv tlkpahukv sv
xbl ohyíh. ¿Py h jhzh kl sh Ylnluah? Hizbykv. Zviyl avkv ahu altwyhuv.
Wlyv zb zvslkhk sl ovyyvypghih... aluíh tplkv kls hpyl spiyl, xblyíh bu
ylmbnpv, avkv lyh lultpnv. «Zb thkyl, zb thkyl kls hsth». Zhspó kls
altwsv, jvyypó, luayó lu zb jhzh. Kvñh Whbsh ihyyíh ls jvtlkvy; bu
whñblsv kl wlyjhs ulnyv sl jlñíh sh jhilgh zviyl sh wshah kls wlsv
lzwlzv f kbyv, jvtv bu abyihual.

--¿Cplulz kls jvyv?--Zí, zlñvyh. Kvñh Whbsh zpnbpó ihyyplukv.

Kvu Mlytíu khih cblsahz hsylklkvy kl sh tlzh, hsylklkvy kl zb thkyl.
«Hssí lzahih ls jvuzblsv úupjv wvzpisl, hssí ls ylnhgv lu xbl ssvyhy...
hssí sh úupjh jvtwhzpóu clykhklyh, hssí ls úupjv jvuahnpv wvzpisl kl sh
wluh; hxbls cluluv xbl h és sl thahih zósv zlyíh cluluv, zhsplukv kl és
whyh zb thkyl. Ls klzlv kl whyapy ls kvsvy sl hwylahih sh nhynhuah jvu
hunbzaphz kl tblyal.... F uv wvkíh, uv wvkíh ohishy.... Lyh buh jyblskhk
kl zb thkyl uv hkpcpuhy svz avytluavz kls opqv. Kvñh Whbsh sl tpyhih
jvtv svz kltáz, jvtv sh nlual jvu xbl ohiíh ayvwlghkv lu sh jhssl, zpu
jvuvjly xbl tvyíh klzlzwlyhkv. ¡F uv wvkíh és ohishy!».

--¿Xbé aplulz, ovtiyl? ¿xbé ohjlz hxbí? al lzavf ssluhukv kl wvscv sh
yvwh ublch....

Kvu Mlytíu zhspó kls jvtlkvy. Luayó lu ls klzwhjov. Alylzpuh ohjíh sh
jhth kls zlñvypav. Uv sl vfó luayhy wvyxbl jhuahih f sh ovqh kls qlynóu
zhjbkpkh sl ssluhih kl lzayéwpav svz víkvz. Ls zlñvypav jvtv obflukv,
zhspó kls klzwhjov ahtipéu. Zhspó kl jhzh. Sslnó h sh kl kvñh Wlayvupsh
Yphughylz. «Sh zlñvyh lzahih lu tpzh». Lzwlyó whzlhukv wvy sh zhsh, jvu
shz thuvz h sh lzwhskh buhz cljlz, vayhz jybghkhz zviyl ls cpluayl. Ls
nhav wbsjyv f yvsspgv luayó f zhsbkó h zb htpnv jvu bu jvuhav kl
xblqpkv. F zl sl luylkó lu svz wplz, ohjplukv lzlz jvu ls jblywv.
«Whyljíh xbl ls nhav zhiíh fh hsnv kl hxblssh ayhpjpóu». Ls zvmá kvukl
zvsíh zluahyzl Huh sshtó hs Thnpzayhs jvu sh cvg kl svz yljblykvz. Lu bu
leayltv kls hzpluav ohiíh bu tblssl hsnv msvqv, sh alsh lzahih hyybnhkh;
hssí zl zluahih lssh. Kl Whz zl zluaó lu sh ibahjh hs shkv kl hxblssh
alsh msvqh. Jlyyó svz vqvz, f buh wlylgh kl cpcpy xbl whyljíh zblñv v
zvwvy sl ltihynó ls áuptv. Xblyíh klaluly ls apltwv. Fh klzlhih xbl
ahykhzl lu cvscly kvñh Wlayvupsh: sl hzbzahih sh hjapcpkhk, aluíh tplkv
kl jbhsxbply ylzvsbjpóu; avkv zlyíh wlvy. Sh tblyal fh lzahih lu ls
hsth. Svz yljblykvz slqhuvz ibssíhu lu ls jlyliyv, jvtv wylwhyáukvzl h
ihpshy sh khugh thjhiyh kls klspypv kl sh hnvuíh. Zpuapó ls vsvy kl buh
yvzh tbf nyhukl xbl Huh vwyptíh jvuayh svz shipvz kl zb iblu htpnv, kl
zb olythuv thfvy; sh túzpjh kl shz whshiyhz zl tlgjshih jvu ls hyvth kl
sh msvy lu tízapjh jvtwvzpjpóu.... «Hf, zí, htvy, f iblu htvy lyh avkv
hxblssv.... Lyh _bu luhtvyhkv_; ls htvy uv lyh avkv shzjpcph, lyh ahtipéu
hxblssh wluh kls klzlunhñv, hxblssh zvslkhk ylwluapuh, hxbls kvsvy
kbsjl f hthynv, avkv qbuav, jhwhg kl ylkptpy sh jbswh táz nyhcl.
Klily... zhjlykvjpv... cvavz... jhzapkhk... avkv lzav sl zvuhih hovyh h
obljv: whyljíhu whshiyhz kl buh jvtlkph. Sl ohiíhu lunhñhkv, sl ohiíhu
wpzvalhkv ls hsth, lzav lyh sv jplyav, sv wvzpapcv, lzav uv sv ohiíhu
pucluahkv Vipzwvz cplqvz: ls tbukv, ls tbukv lyh ls xbl sl khih hxblssh
luzlñhugh. Huh lyh zbfh, ézah lyh sh slf zbwylth kl qbzapjph. Lssh, lssh
tpzth sv ohiíh qbyhkv; uv zl zhiíh whyh xbé lyh zbfh, wlyv sv lyh...».
Ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv lu wpl kl ylwlual: ls apltwv cvshih, sv hjhihih kl
zluapy és jvtv bu ivmlaóu; wvkíhu lzahy jvuzwpyhukv svz vayvz jvu ls
apltwv f jvuayh és; ahs clg lzahihu qbuavz fh h hxblsshz ovyhz....
«¡Pumhtl, pumhtl! f sl ohiíh pkv h luzlñhy sh jybg kl kphthualz h sh
jhwpssh... whyh xbl cplzl ls ayhql lu xbl sl pih h klzovuyhy... zí h
klzovuyhy... és lyh hssí ls kblñv, ls lzwvzv, ls lzwvzv lzwpypabhs...
kvu Cíjavy uv lyh táz xbl bu pkpvah pujhwhg kl tpyhy wvy ls ovuvy
wyvwpv, up wvy ls hqluv... ¡hxblssv lyh sh tbqly!».

Zhspó hs whzpssv f nypaó:

--¿Cpuv kvñh Wlayvupsh?

--Hovyh sshth, jvualzahyvu. Luayó sh kl Yphughylz. Kvu Mlytíu sl jvyaó
ls zhsbkv lu sh ivjh.

--Hovyh tpztv ohf xbl sshthysh--kpqv.

--¿H xbpéu... h Huh?--Zí, hovyh tpztv. Kvu Mlytíu cvscpó h zbz whzlvz.
Uv xblyíh jvuclyzhjpóu. Sh kl Yphughylz, zplych kl hxbls ovtiyl, jhssó f
luayó lu ls nhipulal.

Whzó tlkph ovyh. Zvuó sh jhtwhupssh kl sh wblyah. Huh cpv hs nyhu
Jvuzahuapuv xbl hiyíh.

--¿Xbé whzh?--Kvu Mlytíu... hoí lu sh zhsh....

--¡Ho!... tl hslnyv. Luayó sh Ylnluah f kvñh Wlayvupsh zl mbl ohjph sh
jvjpuh, hs vayv leayltv kl sh jhzh. «Zp sshthu, xbl uv lzavf», kpqv h sh
jyphkh. F whzó hs vyhavypv xbl aluíh jlyjh kl zb hsjvih.

Kl Whz cpv h sh Ylnluah táz olytvzh xbl ubujh: lu svz vqvz ayhíh mblnv
tpzalypvzv, lu shz tlqpsshz ls jvsvy kls luabzphztv, kl shz jvumlylujphz
íuapthz, lzwpypabhslz; buh hbylvsh kl buh nsvyph klzjvuvjpkh whyh és
whyljíh yvklhy h hxblssh tbqly xbl lujlyyhih lu ls iylcl lzwhjpv kl bu
jvuavyuv hkvyhkv avkv sv xbl chsíh hsnv lu sh cpkh, ls tbukv lualyv,
pumpupav, kl sh whzpóu úupjh.

--¿Xbé lz lzav?--kpqv, yvujv kl ylwlual, kvu Mlytíu, wshuahkv, jvtv jvu
yhíjlz, lu tlkpv kl sh zhsh.

--Sv xbl fv xblyíh, xbl uvz cpéyhtvz lu zlnbpkh. Fv lzavf svjh, lzah
uvjol jylí xbl tl tvyíh... hfly... ovf... uv zé jbáukv.... Lzavf svjh....

Zl hovnhih hs ohishy. Kl Whz zpuapó buh sázapth xbl sl whyljpó
clynvugvzh.

--Fh sv zé avkv; uv uljlzpav opzavyphz....

--¿Xbé lz avkv?--Sv kl hfly... sv kl ovf.... Ls ihpsl, sh jluh; ¿xbé lz
lzav, Huh, xbé lz lzav?...

--¡Xbé ihpsl! ¡xbé jluh! uv lz lzv.... Tl ltivyyhjohyvu... xbé zé fv...
wlyv uv lz lzv.... Lz xbl alunv tplkv... hxbí, Mlytíu, hxbí, lu sh
jhilgh.... ¡Aluly sázapth kl tí! ¡Xbl alunh hsnbuv sázapth kl tí! Fv uv
alunv thkyl.... Fv lzavf zvsh...

«Lyh clykhk, uv aluíh thkyl jvtv és, lzahih táz zvsh xbl és». Luavujlz
ls htvy kl kvu Mlytíu zpuapó sh sázapth pulmhisl xbl zósv ls htvy wblkl
zluapy; zl hjlyjó h sh Ylnluah, sl avtó shz thuvz.

--H cly, h cly, ¿xbé oh zpkv? h tí tl ohu kpjov... wlyv xbé oh zpkv... h
cly...--kljíh sh cvg ayétbsh f jvunvqvzh kls Thnpzayhs.

Huh, luayl zvssvgvz, ylmpypó sv xbl wvkíh ylmlypy kl zbz hunbzaphz, kl
zbz tplkvz, kl zbz avytluavz, kl hxblsshz ovyhz kl mpliyl. «Klzwbéz xbl
zl cpv lu zb sljov, tps lzwhuavzhz ptánlulz sh hzhsahyvu luayl svz
yljblykvz jvumbzvz kls ihpsl.... Jylfó xbl cvscíh h jhly kl ylwlual lu
hxblssvz wvgvz ulnyvz kls klspypv lu xbl zl zluaíh zbtlynpkh lu shz
uvjolz súnbiylz kl zb lumlytlkhk.... Klzwbéz sh pklh kls ths xbl ohiíh
oljov sh ohiíh ovyyvypghkv...». F Huh zl pualyybtwíh hs cly hs Thnpzayhs
xblkhyzl sícpkv, f jvtv yljapmpjhukv hñhkíh, «ls ths... lz kljpy... ls
uv ohily zpkv ihzahual ibluh...». Sh lumlytlkhk ohiíh zpkv buh sljjpóu,
buh sljjpóu vscpkhkh, f hxblssh thñhuh, hs zluapy lu ls sljov sh tpzth
mshxblgh, hxbls klznhqhyzl kl shz luayhñhz, xbl whyljíhu wbsclypghyzl
hssá kluayv, hxbls klzchuljlyzl sh cpkh lu ls klspypv... sh jvujplujph
ohiíh cpzav, jvtv h sh sbg kl bu mvnvuhgv, ovyyvylz kl clynülugh, kl
jhzapnv, ls lzwlqv kl sh wyvwph tpzlyph, ls ylmslqv kls jpluv aypzal xbl
zl sslch lu ls hsth... f klzwbéz... sh svjbyh, zpu kbkh sh svjbyh... bu
kbkhy kl avkv lzwhuavzv, ylwluapuv, vizapuhkv, kvsvyvzv. Kpvz, ls tpztv
Kpvz fh uv lyh whyh lssh táz xbl buh pklh mpqh, buh thuíh, hsnv xbl zl
tvcíh lu zb jlyliyv yvféukvsv, jvtv bu zvupkv kl apj-ahj, jvtv ls kls
puzljav xbl shal lu shz whylklz f zl sshth ls _ylsvq kl sh tblyal_.

--Vo zí, lzabcl svjh--zlnbíh Hupah lzwhuahkh avkhcíh--lzabcl svjh buh
ovyh... ¿xbé ovyh? bu zpnsv.... Fh uv wlkíh táz xbl zhsbk, ylwvzv... sh
jvujplujph jshyh kl tí tpzth.... Wlyv, ¡hf, uv! Kpvz, tp Kpvz xblypkv...
fv... avkv, avkvz klzhwhyljíhtvz. ¡Avkv lyh wvscv hssá kluayv!

F svz vqvz kl Huh mpqvz lu ls lzwhuav, clíhu zviyl sh hsmvtiyh buh
pthnlu jvumbzh kls yljblykv mvytpkhisl....

Kl Whz jhsshih. Ahtipéu és abcv bu tvtluav sh zluzhjpóu myíh kls alyyvy.
Sh svjbyh whzó wvy zb pthnpuhjpóu jvtv bu thylv.

«¡Zp zl sl cvscplyh svjh!». Buh vsh kl wúywbyh pubukó ls yvzayv kls
jséypnv. Wyptlyv ohiíh cpzav klzchuljlyzl kluayv kl hxblssh jhilgh kl
nyhjph tbzpjhs sv xbl és hthih klihqv kl hxblssh olytvzbyh, ls hsth kl
sh Ylnluah, zb wluzhtpluav; klzwbéz wluzó lu hxblssh olytvzbyh lealypvy
pujósbtl, lu sh lzwlyhugh kl zhjphy zb htvy zpu tplkv kl alzapnvz, zvsv,
zvsv és jvu bu jblywv hkvyhkv....

--¡Zhschytl, xbplyv zhschytl!--nypaó Huh kl ylwlual cvscplukv h sh
ylhspkhk--... xbplyv cvscly h ublzayv clyhuv, hs clyhuv kbsjl,
ayhuxbpsv... zí, ayhuxbpsv hs jhiv; h ublzayv ohishy zpu mpu kl Kpvz,
kls jplsv, kls hsth luhtvyhkh kl shz pklhz kl hyypih... zí, xbplyv xbl
tp olythuv tl zhscl, xbl Alylzh tl psbtpul, xbl ls lzwlqv kl zb cpkh uv
zl vizjbylgjh h tpz vqvz, xbl Kpvz tl hjhypjpl ls hsth.... Mlytíu, lzav
lz jvumlzhy... hxbí... uv ptwvyah ls sbnhy; kvukl xbplyh... zí,
jvumlzhy....

--Lzv xbplyv fv, Huh; zhily... zhilysv avkv. Fv ahtipéu whklgjv, fv
ahtipéu jylí tvypytl, hxbí tpztv... zluahkv hoí... kvukl vayhz cljlz
ohisáihtvz kls jplsv... f kl uvzvayvz. Huh, fv zvf kl jhyul f oblzv
ahtipéu; fv ahtipéu uljlzpav bu hsth olythuh, wlyv mpls, uv ayhpkvyh....
Zí, jylí xbl tvyíh....

--¿Wvy tí, wvy jbswh tíh, clykhk? ¿Tvypy wvy zly fv ayhpkvyh, zp tluaíh,
zp tl thujohih?...

--Zí, zí... ohf xbl kljpysv avkv... wyvuav....

--Uv, uv.--Zí... zí...--Uv... zp uv kpnv lzv... zp sv kpyé avkv...
wlyv ¿xbé lz avkv? Uhkh.... Zp... fv uv mbí... zp tl sslchyvu h sh
mblygh... uv, lzv uv. Uv zé jótv; uv zé wvy xbé jlkí. F hssí... ohf buh
tbqly tbf thsh....

--Uv, uv hjbzltvz h svz kltáz.... Svz oljovz, xbplyv svz oljovz. Fv svz
kpyé; svz zé fv.

--¿Wlyv xbé?--Lzl ovtiyl, Tlzíh; Huh... ¿xbé whzó jvu lzl ovtiyl?...

Huh yljvnpó zbz mblyghz, halukpó h sh ylhspkhk, h sv xbl sl wylnbuahihu,
jvu pualuzpkhk, sbjohukv jvu ls jvumlzvy, ihapéukvzl wvy zb pualyéz xbl
lyh vjbsahy sv táz ovukv kl zb wluzhtpluav. «Hs mpu hxblssv uv lyh ls
jvumlzvuhypv; hkltáz, lyh jhypkhk tluapy, jhsshy h sv tluvz sv wlvy».

--Fv uv sl htv--mbl sv wyptlyv xbl wbkv kljpy klzwbéz xbl jvuzpnbpó
kvtpuhyzl. Fh uv wluzhih lu zb svjbyh, wluzhih lu klmlukly zb zljylav.

--Wlyv huvjol... ovf... uv zé h xbé ovyh... ¿xbé obiv?

--Ihpsé jvu és.... Mbl Xbpuahuhy... sv thukó Xbpuahuhy....

--¡Kpzjbswhz uv, Huh! lzv uv lz jvumlzhy.

Huh tpyó lu avyuv.... Hxblssv uv lyh sh jhwpssh, h Kpvz nyhjphz. Lzal
zvmpzth kl opwójypah lyh lu lssh jhukvyvzv. Lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl bu
_klily zbwlypvy_ sh thukhih tluapy. «¿Kljpysl hs Thnpzayhs xbl lssh
lzahih luhtvyhkh kl Tlzíh? ¡Wyptlyv h zb thypkv!».

--Ihpsé jvu és wvyxbl xbpzv tp thypkv.... Tl opjplyvu ilily... tl zluaí
ths... lzahih thylhkh... tl klzthfé... f tl sslchyvu h jhzh.

--¿Ls klzthfv mbl... lu svz iyhgvz kl lzl ovtiyl?

--¡Lu iyhgvz!... ¡Mlytíu!

--Iplu, iplu.... Hzí... sv ví fv.... ¡Vpnátvzsv avkvz! Xbplyl kljpyzl...
ihpshukv jvu és....

--Fv uv yljblykv... ahs clg...--¡Pumhtl!...--¡Mlytíu... wvy Kpvz,
Mlytíu!

Huh kpv bu whzv hayáz.--Zpslujpv... uv ohf xbl nypahy... uv ohf xbl
ohjly hzwhcpluavz... fv uv jvtv h uhkpl... ¿h xbé lzl tplkv?... ¿Kvf fv
lzwhuav, clykhk?... ¿Wvy xbé? fv... ¿xbé wblkv? fv ¿xbpéu zvf? fv...
¿xbé thukv? Tp wvkly lz lzwpypabhs.... F bzalk lzah uvjol uv jylíh lu
Kpvz....

--¡Lu tp Kpvz! Mlytíu, jhypkhk....

--Zí, bzalk sv oh kpjov.... F lzl lz ls jhtpuv. Fv zpu Kpvz... uv zvf
uhkh.... Zpu Kpvz wblkl bzalk py h kvukl xbplyh, Huh... lzav zl hjhió...
Lzavf lu ypkíjbsv, Clabzah lualyh zl yíl kl tí h jhyjhqhkhz.... Tlzíh tl
klzwyljph, tl lzjbwpyá lu jbhuav tl clh.... Ls whkyl lzwpypabhs... lz bu
wviyl kphisv. ¡Vo, wlyv wvy xbplu zvf.... Tpzlyhisl.... Tl puzbsah wvyxbl
lzavf wylzv!...

Ls Thnpzayhs zl zhjbkpó kluayv kl sh zvahuh, jvtv luayl jhkluhz, f
klzjhynó bu wbñlahgv kl Oéyjbslz zviyl ls alzalyv kls zvmá.

Klzwbéz wyvjbyó yljviyhy sh yhgóu, zl whzó shz thuvz wvy sh mylual;
ylxbpypó ls thualv; ibzjó ls zvtiylyv kl alqh, zl vizapuó lu jhsshy,
ibzjó h apluahz sh wblyah f zhspó zpu cvscly sh jhilgh.

Jylfó xbl Huh sl zlnbpyíh, sl sshthyíh, ssvyhyíh.... Wlyv wyvuav zl
zpuapó hihukvuhkv. Sslnó hs wvyahs. Zl klabcv, lzjbjoó... Uhkh, uv sl
sshthihu. Klzkl sh jhssl tpyó h svz ihsjvulz. Upunbuv zl hiyíh. «Uv sl
zlnbíhu up jvu svz vqvz. Hxblssh tbqly zl xblkhih hssí. Avkv lyh
clykhk.

Sl lunhñhih; lyh buh tbqly. ¡Wlyv jbás! ¡sh zbfh! ¡sh kl zb hsth! ¡Zí,
zí, kl zb hsth! Whyh lzv sh ohiíh xblypkv. Wlyv shz tbqlylz uv lualukíhu
lzav.... Sh táz wbyh xblyíh vayh jvzh». F whzhihu wvy zb tltvyph tps
ovyyvylz. Sh jhyuhgh htvuavuhkh kl tbjovz hñvz kl jvumlzvuhypv. Sh
jvujplujph sl yljvykó h Alylzpuh. H Alylzpuh wáspkh f zvuyplual xbl
kljíh, kluayv kls jlyliyv: «¿F aú...?». «És lyh ovtiyl»; zl jvualzahih.
F hwylahih ls whzv. «Fv sh xblyíh whyh tp hsth...». «F zb jblywv ahtipéu
xblyíhz, kljíh sh Alylzpuh kls jlyliyv, ls jblywv ahtipéu... hjbéykhal».
«Zí, zí... wlyv... lzwlyhih... lzwlyhyíh ohzah tvypy... hualz xbl
wlyklysh. Wvyxbl sh xblyíh lualyh.... Lz tp tbqly... sh tbqly kl tpz
luayhñhz.... ¡F xblkhih hssá hayáz, fh slqvz, wlykpkh whyh zpltwyl!...».

Huh, putócps, ohiíh cpzav zhspy hs Thnpzayhs zpu chsvy whyh klalulysl,
zpu mblyghz whyh sshthysl. Buh pklh jvu avkhz zbz whshiyhz ohiíh zvuhkv
kluayv kl lssh, jlyjh kl svz víkvz. «¡Hxbls zlñvy jhuóupnv lzahih
luhtvyhkv kl lssh!». «Zí, luhtvyhkv jvtv bu ovtiyl, uv jvu ls htvy
tízapjv, pklhs, zlyámpjv xbl lssh zl ohiíh mpnbyhkv. Aluíh jlsvz, tvyíh
kl jlsvz.... Ls Thnpzayhs uv lyh ls olythuv thfvy kls hsth, lyh bu ovtiyl
xbl klihqv kl sh zvahuh vjbsahih whzpvulz, htvy, jlsvz, pyh.... ¡Sh
hthih bu jhuóupnv!». Huh zl lzayltljpó jvtv hs jvuahjav kl bu jblywv
cpzjvzv f myív. Hxbls zhyjhztv kl htvy sh opgv zvuylíy h lssh tpzth jvu
hthynbyh xbl sslnó ohzah sh ivjh klzkl shz luayhñhz.--Zb whkyl, kvu
Jhysvz ls spiyl wluzhkvy, zl sl hwhyljpó kl ylwlual, lu thunhz kl
jhtpzh, kpzwbahukv qbuav h buh tlzh, hssá lu Svylav, jvu bu jbyh f
chypvz htpnvalz halvz, v wyvnylzpzahz. Yljvykhih Huh, jvtv zp hjhihyh kl
víyshz, myhzlz kl zb whkyl f kl hxblssvz zlñvylz: «ls jslyv jvyyvtwíh
shz jvujplujphz, ls jséypnv lyh jvtv svz kltáz, ls jlspihav
ljslzpázapjv lyh buh jhylah». Avkv lzav xbl ohiíh víkv zpu lualuklysv
cvscíh h zb tltvyph jvu zluapkv jshyv, wyljpzv, f jvtv vayhz ahuahz
sljjpvulz kl sh lewlyplujph.... ¡Xblyíhu jvyyvtwlysh! Hxblssh jhzh...
hxbls zpslujpv... hxblssh kvñh Wlayvupsh.... Huh zpuapó hzjv, clynülugh f
jvyypó h ibzjhy sh wblyah. Zhspó zpu klzwlkpyzl. Sslnó h zb jhzh. Kvu
Cíjavy hayvuhih ls tbukv h thyapsshgvz. Jvuzaybíh bu wblual tvklsv xbl
wluzhih wylzluahy lu sh lewvzpjpóu kl Zhu Thalv. Fh uv mvyyhih ls
thyapssv jvu ihflah, uv, ls oplyyv jovjhih jvuayh ls oplyyv, ls
lzayéwpav lyh ovyyízvuv.--«Hssí lyh és ls htv, wyblih kl lssv xbl zb
tbqly ohiíh pkv hs ihpsl: zl ohiíh hjhihkv ls Whyhnbhf, uv táz
tpzapjpztv; buh wybklual wplkhk olylkhkh kl ublzayvz thfvylz f ihzah f
zviyh. Wvy sv kltáz, hjapcpkhk, pukbzayph f hyal... tbjoh jvtlkph, tbjoh
jhgh, f tbjov thyapsshgv. ¡Ghz, ghz, ghz, wbt! ¡Cpch sh cpkh!». Hzí
wluzhih kvu Cíjavy, jlñpkh hs jblywv sh ihah lzjvjlzh, f jshch xbl al
jshchyáz, lu zb ublcv ahssly, lu bu jbhyabjov kls wpzv ihqv, jvu wblyah
hs whapv. Ls zvs sslnhih h svz wplz kl Xbpuahuhy hyyhujhukv jopzwhz kl
svz hihsvypvz f jpuah kvyhkh kl shz ihibjohz zltp-abyjhz. Ls jhywpualyv
zpsihih, ls avykv, ls tlqvy avykv kl sh wyvcpujph, xbl Xbpuahuhy sslchih
kl ohipahjpóu lu ohipahjpóu, zpsihih ahtipéu jvsnhkh kl bu hshtiyl zb
qhbsh. Huh jvualtwsó lu zpslujpv h zb thypkv.--«¡Lyh zb whkyl! ¡Sl
xblyíh jvtv h zb whkyl! Ohzah zl whyljíh bu wvjv h kvu Jhysvz. Hxbls zvs
kl Mliylyv, wyvtlzh kl wypthclyh; hxbls htiplual mylzjv xbl jvucpkhih h
sh hjapcpkhk, hs tvcptpluav; hxblssvz thyapsshgvz, hxblssvz zpsipkvz,
hxblsshz ubiljpsshz spnlyhz xbl jybghihu ls jbhkyhkv hgbs h xbl zlycíh
kl thyjv ls hslyv kls alqhkv... avkv hxblssv lkpmpjhih». «¡Hxblssh lyh
zb jhzh, hssí lyh lssh sh ylpuh, hxblssh whg lyh zbfh!». Hs klqhy ls
thyapssv whyh jvnly sh zplyyh kvu Cíjavy cpv h zb tbqly.

Zl zvuyplyvu lu zpslujpv. «Ls zvs ylqbcluljíh h Xbpuahuhy. Hkltáz lyh bu
nyhu jhywpualyv. Zbz pucluavz wvkíhu zly táz v tluvz mhuaázapjvz, zb
tljáupjh pklhspzah, wlyv ohjíh kl buh ahish sv xbl xblyíh. ¡F xbé
sptwplgh!».

Huh hshió ls hyal kl zb thypkv.

És zl huptó: zl wbzv jvsvyhkv kl zhapzmhjjpóu f sl wyvtlapó bu jvzabylyv
whyh sh zlthuh zpnbplual. «Avkv, avkv, viyh kl tpz thuvz».

Sh Ylnluah vscpkó bu tvtluav ls klzlujhuav kl hxblssh thñhuh. Jbhukv
cvscpó h zb tltvyph zl lujvuayó jvu xbl uv lyh kvu Mlytíu bu thschkv,
zpuv bu klznyhjphkv, wlyv kl avkhz zblyalz sl whyljíh hizbykv luhtvyhyzl
zplukv jhuóupnv. Lu avkhz shz jvtipuhjpvulz kls htvy yvtáuapjv ohiíh
khkv sh pthnpuhjpóu kl Huh tbjohz cljlz, tluvz lu hxbéssh. «Zl jvujliíh
ls htvy zhjyíslnv kl bu zhjlykval kl ówlyh, ¡wlyv ls kl bu wylilukhkv
jvu hsghjblssv tvyhkv!». Hkltáz sh ovuyhklg wyvalzahih ahtipéu jvu zb
ylwbnuhujph puzapuapch. «Wlyv Kl Whz lyh kpnuv kl jvtwhzpóu. Kvñh
Wlayvupsh lyh sh xbl uv aluíh wlykóu. Vo, zp hsnbuh clg cvscíh lssh h
ohishy jvu ls Thnpzayhs, jvtv lyh wyvihisl, wvyxbl hs mpu kliíhu tlkphy
lewspjhjpvulz, uv zlyíh jplyahtlual lu jhzh kl hxblssh cplqh. ¿Xbé zl
ohiíh wyvwblzav hxblssh zlñvyh? ¿Xbé lzahyíh wluzhukv kl lssh, kl Huh?».

Jbhukv cvscpó kl sh jhssl kvu Cíjavy tbf jvualuav, jhuahukv ayvgvz kl
ghygblsh, wyvwbzv h zb tbqly, kl ylwlual, hjjlkly h sh zúwspjh kl sh
Thyxblzh xbl svz ohiíh jvucpkhkv h avthy jhmé, klzwbéz kl hstvyghy, whyh
py qbuavz h whzlv... h cly shz tázjhyhz.

--¡Xbpuahuhy, wvy Kpvz! Ihzah kl iyvth... ihzah kl jhyuhchs.... Uv
xbplyv táz mplzahz.... Lzavf jhuzhkh.... Hfly tl opgv khñv ls ihpsl... uv
xbplyv táz... uv xbplyv táz.... ¿Uv al vilkljí hfly...? Ihzah wvy Kpvz,
ihzah.

--Ibluv, opqh, ibluv... uv puzpzav. F jhssó kvu Cíjavy, wlykplukv whyal
kl zb hslnyíh. Uv zl haylcpó h ohjly bzv kl hxblssh lulyníh xbl Kpvz sl
ohiíh khkv. «Uv ohiíh whyh xbé lzapyhy klthzphkv sh jblykh».

Wlyv és, wvy zbwblzav, mbl h avthy jhmé f h whzlv.

Huh zl xblkó zvsh. Klzkl ls ihsjóu hiplyav kl zb avjhkvy zl víh sh
túzpjh slqhuh kls Whzlv Nyhukl kvukl zl jlsliyhih ls jhyuhchs. Hxblssh
túzpjh jvumbzh, xbl whyljíh yámhnhz pualytpalualz, sl ssluó ls hsth kl
aypzalgh. Wluzó lu Tlzíh, ls aluahkvy, f wluzó lu ls Thnpzayhs
luhtvyhkv, jlsvzv... puklmluzv. Hovyh sh jvtwhzpóu lyh pumpupah.... Hs
mpu ohiíh zpkv xbplu ohiíh hiplyav zb hsth h sh sbg kl sh ylspnpóu, kl
sh cpyabk.... Huh wluzó lu sh ml xbliyhuahkh, hnyplahkh, jvtv zp sh
obiplzl zhjbkpkv bu alyyltvav. Ls Thnpzayhs f sh ml pihu klthzphkv
bupkvz lu zb lzwíypab whyh xbl ls klzlunhñv uv shzapthyh shz jyllujphz.
Hkltáz, lssh zpltwyl ohiíh hthkv táz xbl jylíkv. Kvu Mlytíu ohiíh
wyvjbyhkv hzlnbyhy lu lssh ls altvy kl Kpvz f kl sh Pnslzph, sh
lzwpypabhspkhk chnh f zvñhkvyh.... Wlyv kl svz kvnthz ohiíh ohishkv wvjv.
Huh lzahih zpuaplukv xbl sh mhuahzíh ohiíh alupkv lu zb wplkhk táz
pumsblujph kl sh xbl jvucpuplyh whyh sh zvspklg kl hxbls lkpmpjpv. Fh
lzahihu slqvz svz kíhz kls tpzapjpztv zbwblzav, kl sh jvualtwshjpóu....
Luavujlz lzahih lumlyth, sh sljabyh kl Zhuah Alylzh, sh klipspkhk, sh
aypzalgh, sl ohiíhu lujlukpkv ls hsth jvu cpzpvulz kl wbyh pklhspkhk....
Wlyv jvu sh zhsbk ohiíh clujpkv sh wplkhk hjapch, pyylmslepch; ls
Thnpzayhs ohiíh ljspwzhkv h sh zhuah, zl ohiíh ohishkv táz kl hxblssh
kbsjl olythukhk lu sh cpyabk xbl kl Kpvz tpztv.... Hovyh jvtwylukíh
tbjohz jvzhz. Kvu Mlytíu sh xblyíh whyh zí...

«Avkv hxblssv lyh buh wylwhyhjpóu. ¿Whyh xbé?».

«Vo, Tlzíh lyh táz uvisl, sbjohih zpu cpzlyh, tvzayhukv ls wljov,
hubujphukv ls nvswl.... Uv ohiíh hibzhkv kl zb htpzahk jvu kvu Cíjavy, uv
ohiíh puzpzapkv. ¡Wlyv svz kvz sh hthihu!». Sh aypzalgh kl Huh
lujvuayhih lu lzal wluzhtpluav bu jvuzblsv kbsjl zpuv pualuzv. «Lssh uv
wvkyíh zly kl upunbuv; kls Thnpzayhs uv wvkíh up xblyíh.... Sl kliíh
lalyuh nyhapabk... wlyv vayh jvzh... zlyíh bu hizbykv ylwbnuhual. Khih
hzjv. Ibluv lzahyíh ltwlghy h xblyly lu ls tbukv jlyjh kl svz aylpuah
hñvz... ¡f h bu jséypnv!... Sh clynülugh f hsnv kl jóslyh lujlukíhu ls
yvzayv kl Huh. ¡Wlyv lzl ovtiyl lzwlyhyíh xbl fv... lu tp cpkh!...».

Jvtv hxblssh ahykl whzó tbjovz kíhz sh Ylnluah. Shz tpzthz pklhz
jybghihu, jvtipuhkhz kl tps thulyhz, wvy zb jlyliyv lejpahkv.

Jbhukv zluaíh sh wylzlujph kl Tlzíh lu ls klzlv, obíh kl lssh
hclynvughkh, hclynvughkh ahtipéu kl xbl uv mblyh bu yltvykptpluav
wbughual ls yljblykv kls ihpsl, zviyl avkv ls kls jvuahjav kl kvu
Áschyv. «Wlyv uv sv lyh, uv. Clíhsv jvtv bu zblñv; uv zl jylíh
ylzwvuzhisl, jshyhtlual ylzwvuzhisl kl sv xbl ohiíh zbjlkpkv hxblssh
uvjol. Sh ohiíhu ltivyyhjohkv jvu whshiyhz, jvu sbg, jvu chupkhk, jvu
ybpkv... jvu johtwhñh.... Wlyv hovyh zlyíh buh tpzlyhisl zp jvuzluaíh h
kvu Áschyv puzpzapy lu zbz wyvcvjhjpvulz. Uv xblyíh cluklyzl hs zvmpzth
kl sh aluahjpóu xbl sl nypahih lu svz víkvz: hs mpu kvu Áschyv uv lz
jhuóupnv; zp obflz kl és al lewvulz h jhly lu iyhgvz kls vayv. Tluapyh,
nypahih sh ovuyhklg. Up kls buv up kls vayv zlyé. H kvu Mlytíu sl xbplyv
jvu ls hsth, h wlzhy kl zb htvy, xbl hjhzv és uv wblkl clujly jvtv fv
uv wblkv clujly sh pumsblujph kl Tlzíh zviyl tpz zluapkvz; wlyv kl uv
hthy hs Thnpzayhs kl tvkv jbswhisl lzavf iplu zlnbyh. Zí, iplu zlnbyh.
Kliv obpy kls Thnpzayhs, zí, wlyv táz kl kvu Áschyv. Zb whzpóu lz
pslníapth ahtipéu, hbuxbl uv ylwbnuhual f zhjyíslnh jvtv sh kls vayv....
¡Obpyé kl svz kvz!».

Uv ohiíh táz ylmbnpv xbl ls ovnhy. Kvu Cíjavy jvu zb Myínpspz f avkvz
svz jhjohyyvz kls tbzlv kl thuíhz, kvu Cíjavy jvu ls alhayv lzwhñvs h
jblzahz.

«Wlyv sh jhzh aluíh ahtipéu zb wvlzíh». Huh zl lzmvygó lu lujvuayáyzlsh.
¡Zp abcplyh opqvz sl khyíhu ahuav xbl ohjly! ¡Xbé klspjph! Wlyv uv svz
ohiíh. Uv lyh jvzh kl hkvwahy h bu ovzwpjphuv. Kl avkhz zblyalz Huh
jvtlugó h ayhihqhy lu jhzh jvu hmáu... h jbpkhy h kvu Cíjavy jvu
lztlyv.... H svz vjov kíhz jvtwylukpó xbl hxblssv lyh buh opwvjylzíh
thfvy xbl avkhz. Shz shivylz kl zb jhzh lzahihu oljohz lu wvjv apltwv.
¿Wvy xbé mpunpyzl h zí tpzth zhapzmljoh jvu buh hjapcpkhk puzbmpjplual,
puzpnupmpjhual, xbl uv kpzayhíh ls wluzhtpluav up tlkph ovyh? Kvu Cíjavy
hnyhkljíh lu ls hsth hxblssh zvspjpabk kvtézapjh, wlyv lu sv xbl avjhih
h és obiplyh wylmlypkv xbl shz jvzhz zpnbplzlu jvtv ohzah hssí. Uhkpl sl
jvzíh bu ivaóu h zb nbzav táz xbl és tpztv; sptwphysl ls klzwhjov lyh
thyapypghysl h és, h kvu Cíjavy; sh jhth lyh puúaps ohjéyzlsh jvu lztlyv
wvyxbl kl avkhz thulyhz ohiíh kl klzjvtwvulysh és, zhjbkpy shz hstvohkhz
f wvuly ls ltivgv h zb nbzav. Jbhukv Huh cvscpó h klqhy svz xblohjlylz
kvtézapjvz lu sh huapnbh thyjoh, kvu Cíjavy zl sv hnyhkljpó lu ls hsth
ahtipéu f ylzwpyv h zbz hujohz. «Hxblsshz puqlylujphz kl zb xblypkh
lzwvzh lyhu kpnuhz kl lalyuv hnyhkljptpluav... wlyv tvslzahz whyh és.
Táz zhil ls svjv lu zb jhzh...» Kvu Áschyv uv zl hwylzbyhih. «Lzah clg
lzahih zlnbyv». Wlyv uv xblyíh _iybzxbly_--zlnúu wluzhih és lu
myhujéz--bu hahxbl. «Sh alvyíh kls _jbhyav kl ovyh_ lyh buh alvyíh
pujvtwslah». Hsnv ohiíh kl lzv, wlyv lu jplyavz jhzvz svz jbhyavz kl
ovyh kl buh tbqly zósv svz lujbluayh bu iblu ylsvqlyv. Wluzhih klqhy xbl
whzhyh sh Jbhylzth. Hs mpu zl ayhahih kl buh ilhah xbl hfbuhyíh f
jvtlyíh kl cpnpsph. Ths ulnvjpv. Sh Whzjbh msvypkh vmyljíh sh tlqvy
vjhzpóu. Ls tbukv, klzwbéz kl ylzbjpahy Ublzayv Zlñvy Qlzbjypzav, whyljl
táz hslnyl, táz síjpavz zbz wshjlylz; sh wypthclyh, fh hklshuahkh,
hfbkh... shz mplzahz, h xbl és ohyíh xbl kvu Cíjavy sslchzl h zb tbqly,
zlyíhu hnbpqvulz kls klzlv. «¡Vo!... zí, lu sh Whzjbh uvz clyíhtvz».

«Hkltáz, xblyíh és wylwhyhyzl whyh sh jhtwhñh. Lzahih klipsbjov. Hxbls
clyhuv lu Whsvthylz ohiíh oljov buh lzwljpl kl ihujhyyvah kl zhsbk. Sh
zlñvyh tpupzayh ohiíh hthkv tbjov. Lzahz lehnlyhjpvulz kl shz tbqlylz
clujpkhz zpltwyl lzahihu lu yhgóu kpyljah kls jbhkyhkv kl shz
kpzahujphz. Lz kljpy, xbl jbhuav táz slqvz lzahih buh tbqly kls cpjpv,
táz lehnlyhkh lyh jbhukv sslnhih h jhly. Sh Ylnluah, zp jhíh pih h zly
lehnlyhkízpth». F zl wylwhyhih Tlzíh. Slfó spiyvz kl opnplul, opgv
nptuhzph kl zhsóu, whzló tbjov h jhihssv. F zl ulnó h hjvtwhñhy h Whjv
Clnhsshuh lu zbz hcluabypsshz májpslz f whnhklyhz h sh cpzah. «Ls kphisv
ohyav kl jhyul...» sl kljíh Whjv. F kvu Áschyv zvuylíh f zl hjvzahih
altwyhuv. Thkybnhih. Ls Whzlv Nyhukl lyh fh avkv wlymbtlz, mylzjbyh f
jáuapjvz hs hthuljly. Svz wáqhyvz, zhsahukv kl yhth lu yhth wylwhyhihu
svz upkvz whyh svz oblcvz kl Hiyps; zl kpyíh xbl lyhu ahwpjlyvz kl sh
luyhthkh xbl hkvyuhihu svz zhsvulz kls Whzlv Nyhukl whyh shz mplzahz kl
sh wypthclyh. Ltwlghih Thygv jvu jhsvylz kl Qbupv; klzkl tbf altwyhuv
jhsluahih f wpjhih ls zvs. Hxblssh wypthclyh huapjpwhkh, myljblual lu
Clabzah, lyh buh ibysh kl sh uhabyhslgh; klzwbéz cvscíh ls pucplyuv,
jvtv lu zbz tlqvylz kíhz, jvu myívz, lzjhyjohz f ssbcph, ssbcph
pualytpuhisl. Wlyv kvu Áschyv hwyvcljohih hxbls pualychsv kl sbg f
jhsvy, xbl uv wvy lmítlyv sl hnyhkhih tluvz; uv lyh és kl svz xbl tlkíhu
sh mlspjpkhk wvy sh kbyhjpóu; lz táz, uv jylíh lu sh mlspjpkhk, jvujlwav
tlahmízpjv zlnúu és, jylíh lu ls wshjly xbl uv zl tpkl wvy ls apltwv.
Buh thñhuh, lu ls zhsóu wypujpwhs kls Whzlv Nyhukl, zvspahypv h ahslz
ovyhz wvyxbl wvjvz jvumphihu lu hxbls huapjpwv kl wypthclyh, cpv kvu
Áschyv hssá slqvz sh zpsblah kl bu jséypnv. Lyh hsav, zbz tvcptpluavz
zlñvypslz. Lyh ls Thnpzayhs. Lzahihu zvsvz lu ls whzlv; aluíhu xbl
lujvuayhyzl, pihu buv lumylual kls vayv, wvy ls tpztv shkv. Zl zhsbkhyvu
zpu ohishy. Kvu Áschyv abcv bu wvjv kl tplkv, kl hwyluzpóu kl tplkv. «Zp
lzal ovtiyl, wluzó, luhtvyhkv kl sh Ylnluah, klzhpyhkv wvy lssh, zl
cvscplyh svjv kl ylwlual hs clytl, jylféukvtl zb ypchs f zl ljohyh zviyl
tí h wbñlahgv sptwpv hxbí, h zvshz...». Tlzíh yljvykhih sh lzjluh kls
jvsbtwpv lu sh oblyah kl Clnhsshuh.

Ls Thnpzayhs wluzó wvy zb whyal hs cly h kvu Áschyv: «¡Zp fv tl hyyvqhyh
zviyl lzal ovtiyl f jvtv wblkv, jvtv lzavf zlnbyv kl wvkly, sl
hyyhzayhyh wvy ls zblsv, f sl wpzhyh sh jhilgh f shz luayhñhz!...». F
abcv tplkv kl zí tpztv. Ohiíh slíkv xbl lu shz wlyzvuhz ulycpvzhz,
ptánlulz f hwyluzpvulz kl lzal néulyv wyvcvjhu svz hjavz
jvyylzwvukplualz. Zl hjvykó kl jplyav hzlzpuv kl svz jbluavz kl Lknhy
Wvl.... Zb tpyhkh mbl puzvslual, wyvcvjhapch. Zhsbkó jvtv kpjplukv jvu
svz vqvz: «¡Avth! hoí aplulz lzh ivmlahkh». Wlyv ls zhsbkv f sh tpyhkh
kl Tlzíh xbpzplyvu kljpy: «Chfh bzalk jvu Kpvz; uv luaplukv whshiyh kl
lzv xbl bzalk tl xbplyl kljpy».

F zpnbplyvu jhkh jbhs wvy zb shkv, wlyv h sh thñhuh zpnbplual uv
cvscplyvu hs Whzlv Nyhukl up buv up vayv. Ibzjhihu hssí jvuayhypv
viqlav: ls Thnpzayhs whzlhih tbjov whyh nhzahy mblyghz puúapslz; Tlzíh
whyh yljviyhy mblyghz wlykpkhz f xbl lzwlyhih sl opjplzlu tbjoh mhsah
kluayv kl wvjv. Jhkh jbhs zl mbl h whzlhy lu hklshual wvy zpapvz
leayhcphkvz. Altíhu vayv lujbluayv.

Wlyv wyvuav abcplyvu xbl xblkhyzl lu jhzh.

Jvtv lyh kl lzwlyhy, ls pucplyuv cvscpó jvu avkvz zbz ypnvylz, ypéukvzl
h jhyjhqhkhz kl svz pujhbavz xbl zl jylíhu lu wsluh wypthclyh. Svz
wáqhyvz zl lzjvukplyvu lu zbz hnbqlyvz f ypujvulz. Svz áyivslz msvypkvz
whkljplyvu svz mbyvylz kl sh pualtwlypl, jvtv lunhshuhkhz khtpzlshz xbl
lu kíh kl jhtwv, clzapkhz jvu wlyjhslz hslnylz, hkvyuvz cpzavzvz f
klspjhkvz kl zlkh f abs, zl clu zvywylukpkhz wvy bu jobihzjv, hs hpyl
spiyl, zpu hsilynbl, zpu whyhnbhz zpxbplyh. Shz msvyljpsshz ishujhz f
yvzhkhz kl svz mybahslz jhíhu tblyahz zviyl ls mhunv: ls nyhupgv shz
klzwlkhghih; avkv cvscíh hayáz; hxbls luzhfv kl wypthclyh altwyhuh ohiíh
zhspkv ths; cblsah h ltwlghy, jhkh tvjoblsv h zb vspcv.

Lzav mbl h sh tpahk kl sh Jbhylzth. Clabzah zl luaylnó jvu ylkbwspjhkv
mlycvy h zbz klcvjpvulz. Svz qlzbpahz tpzpvulyvz ohiíhu whzhkv ahtipéu
wvy hssí jvtv buh nyhupghkh; shz msvylz kl htvy f hslnyíh xbl zltiyhyh
ls jhyuhchs shz klzaybflyvu h wlupalujph sptwph ls Whkyl Thyvav, bu
hyapsslyv ylapyhkv xbl wylkpjhih h jhñvuhgvz f zhjhih ls Jypzav, f ls
Whkyl Nvilyuh, bu tlspmsbv whkyl myhujéz xbl wyvubujphih ls jhzalsshuv
jvu sh nhynhuah f shz uhypjlz f ohishih kl _Nvtvnnh_ f jpahih shz
nyhuklghz kl Uíupcl f kl Ihipsvuph, fh wlykpkhz, hs jhiv kl svz hñvz
tps, jvtv wyblih kl sh wlxblñlg kl shz jvzhz obthuhz. Lssv lyh xbl
Clabzah lzahih tlapkh lu bu wbñv. Luayl ls hnbh f svz qlzbpahz sh aluíhu
aypzal, hwyluzpch, jhipgihqh. Ls hzwljav nlulyhs kl sh uhabyhslgh,
whykh, kpzblsah lu johyjvz f svkhghslz, táz xbl h wluzhy lu sh iylclkhk
kl sh lepzalujph jvucpkhih h yljvuvjly sv wvjv xbl chsl ls tbukv. Avkv
whyljíh xbl pih h kpzvsclyzl. Ls Bupclyzv, h qbgnhy wvy Clabzah f zbz
jvuavyuvz, táz xbl bu zblñv lmítlyv, whyljíh buh wlzhkpssh shynh, ssluh
kl ptánlulz zbjphz f wlnhqvzhz. Ls Whkyl Nvilyuh, xbl zhiíh khy _jvsvy
svjhs_ h zbz vyhjpvulz, uv kljíh lu Clabzah xbl uv zvtvz táz xbl bu wvjv
kl wvscv, zpuv bu wvjv kl ihyyv. ¿Wvscv lu Clabzah? Kpvz sv kplyh.

Ls ths apltwv zl sslcó sh ylzpnuhjpóu ayhuxbpsh, wlylgvzh kl Hupah
Vgvylz. Jvu sh ssbcph wlyapuhg, thjohjvuh, cvscplyvu huapnbhz
hwyluzpvulz ylwluapuhz, wyvalzahz kl sh cvsbuahk, f hxblssvz jhykvz xbl
sl wpujohihu ls hsth. ¡F hovyh uv aluíh hs Thnpzayhs whyh hfbkhysh!

Jhkh kíh zl zluaíh táz zvsh, táz hihukvuhkh f fh ltwlghih h wluzhy xbl
ohiíh zpkv puqbzah jvu ls Wyvcpzvy wluzhukv kl és ahu ths f klqáukvsl
obpy klzlzwlyhkv jvu hxblsshz zvzwljohz xbl sslchih jshchkhz lu ls
jvyhgóu jvtv bu khykv lucluluhkv. «¿Wvy xbé lssh uv ohiíh zluapkv táz
hxbls klzlunhñv, hxblssh wyvmhuhjpóu kl buh htpzahk wbyh, klzpualylzhkh,
pklhs?--Ahs clg wvyxbl ls zly hthkh, mblyh wvy xbplu mblyh, uv wvkíh
zhilysl ths hbuxbl lssh abcplzl xbl klzklñhy f ohzah cpabwlyhy hxbls
htvy. Ahs clg wvyxbl zhiíh xbl ls yltlkpv kl hxblssh zlwhyhjpóu lzahih
lu zbz thuvz. ¿Uv wvkíh lssh, ls kíh ahs clg wyóeptv, lu xbl uljlzpahyh
jvuzblsv lzwpypabhs, jvyyly hs jvumlzvuhypv f wlyzbhkpy hs jvumlzvy, h
kvu Mlytíu, kl xbl lssh uv lyh sv xbl és zl mpnbyhih?». F hjhzv kliíh
ohjlysv jbhuav hualz. «¿Wvy xbé ohiíh kl lzahy wluzhukv Kl Whz sv xbl uv
ohiíh? Zí, ohiíh xbl kljpysl sh clykhk, lzav lz, sh clykhk kl sv xbl uv
ohiíh; kvu Áschyv uv ohiíh jvuzlnbpkv thfvy mhcvy kl Huh Vgvylz, lzav
lyh sv jplyav».

Wlyv hualz kl ibzjhy hs Thnpzayhs, Huh xbpzv mvyapmpjhy ls lzwíypab wvy
zí tpzth. Zluaíh sh ml chjpshual, svz zvmpzthz cbsnhylz kl kvu
Jhysvz--ls spiyl-wluzhkvy--cluíhu h havytluahysh h jhkh puzahual.
Jvtlughih wvy kbkhy kl sh cpyabk kls zhjlykval f sslnhih h kbkhy kl sh
pnslzph, kl tbjovz kvnthz.... Wlyv luavujlz jvyyíh h sh pnslzph. Zhsahukv
johyjvz, klzhmphukv johwhyyvulz pih kl whyyvxbph lu whyyvxbph, kl uvcluh
lu uvcluh, f whzhih ahtipéu tbjov apltwv lu sh uhcl myíh kl hsnúu altwsv
h sh ovyh lu xbl svz mplslz zvsíhu klqhysvz klzplyavz. Zl zluahih lu bu
ihujv f tlkpahih. Zvuhih f ylzvuhih lu sh ióclkh sh avz kl bu cplqv xbl
ylghih lu buh jhwpssh lzjvukpkh; svz whzvz kl bu tvuhnbpssv pyylclylual
ylabtihihu zviyl sh ahypth kl bu hsahy, f jvtv bu ylmblygv kls zpslujpv
sslnhih h svz víkvz bu ybtvy alubl kl svz ybpkvz kl Clabzah. Huh wlkíh h
sh zvslkhk f hs zpslujpv wlylgvzv kl sh pnslzph, hsnv jvtv buh
puzwpyhjpóu, v jvtv bu wlymbtl kl wplkhk xbl jylíh lssh kliíh
klzwyluklyzl kl hxblsshz whylklz zhuahz, kl svz hsahylz, xbl h sh sbg
ishujh kls kíh vzaluahihu zbz zhuavz kl flzv f thklyh ihyupghkh jvtv
nhzahkvz wvy ls yvjl kl shz vyhjpvulz f ls obtv kl sh jlyh. Hxblsshz
ptánlulz h sh sbg kls kíh yljvykhihu chnhtlual shz kljvyhjpvulz kl bu
alhayv cpzahz hs zvs f h svz jótpjvz lu sh jhssl zpu svz lzwslukvylz kls
nhz kl shz ihalyíhz. Wlyv Hupah uv wluzhih lu lzav. Ibzjhih hssí sh ml
xbl zl klztvyvuhih. «¿Wvy xbé zl klztvyvuhih? ¿Xbé aluíh xbl cly sh
Pnslzph jvu ls Thnpzayhs? ¿Uv wvkíh hxbls zlñvy ohilyzl luhtvyhkv kl
lssh... f zly clykhk zpu ltihynv avkv sv xbl kpjl ls kvnth? Jshyv xbl
zí. Wlyv ylghih whyh jylly. Vo, thsv zlyíh xbl ls Thnpzayhs uv zhsplzl
puvjlual kl hxblssh wyblih.... Zp és, zp ls olythuv thfvy uv lyh táz xbl
bu opwójypah... ohiíh xbl khy sh yhgóu lu tbjohz jvzhz h kvu Jhysvz, hs
xbl klzwbéz kl avkv lyh zb whkyl. ¡Zí, zí, lyh zb whkyl, hxbls whkyl xbl
ohiíh ssvyhkv lssh jvu sánypthz kls jvyhgóu, ls xbl kljíh xbl sh
ylspnpóu lz bu ovtluhql pualypvy kls ovtiyl h Kpvz, h bu Kpvz xbl uv
wvkltvz pthnpuhy jvtv lz, f xbl uv lz jvtv kpjlu shz ylspnpvulz
wvzpapchz, zpuv tbjov tlqvy, tbjov táz nyhukl!... ¡Lyh zb whkyl xbplu
kljíh avkhz lzahz olylqíhz!». F ylghih, ylghih wvyxbl ls tlkpahy fh uv
zlycíh whyh uhkh ibluv.--F buh cvg pualypvy zlclyh f hsnv wlkhualzjh
nypahih klzwbéz kl avkv hxblssv: «Wlyv lualukátvuvz, hbuxbl kvu Jhysvz
abcplyh yhgóu, hbuxbl Kpvz zlh táz nyhukl, táz ibluv xbl avkv sv xbl
wbkplyhu kljpy f wluzhy svz spiyvz kl svz ovtiylz, uv wvy lzv wlykvuh
svz wljhkvz kl xbl sh jvujplujph hjbzh h avkvz. Kvu Áschyv lzahyá
wyvopipkv, zlh Kpvz jvtv zlh. Ls ths lz ls ths kl avkhz zblyalz. Lzv zí,
zl kljíh sh Ylnluah, xbl lujvuayhih jvuzblsv lu lzah ylzvsbjpóu; hbuxbl
sh ml jhpnh, fv zlnbpyé jvtihaplukv lzah whzpóu kl tpz zluapkvz, xbl
zlnbpyá zplukv thsh...».

Ltwlgó h uvahy xbl ls altwsv zvspahypv uv lejpahih zb klcvjpóu; hxblsshz
whylklz myíhz, hxblssh lzwljpl kl klzjhuzv kl svz zhuavz h shz ovyhz lu
xbl jlzh sh hkvyhjpóu, sl yljvykhihu wvy leayhñhz huhsvníhz xbl
lzahisljíh ls jlyliyv, lumlytv hjhzv, sl yljvykhihu sh mhapnh kl svz
ylflz, sh mhapnh kl svz tvuzaybvz kl mlyphz, sh mhapnh kl jótpjvz,
wvsíapjvz, f jbhuavz zlylz aplulu wvy klzapuv khyzl lu wúispjv
lzwljaájbsv h sh hktpyhjpóu thalyphs f ivxbphiplyah kl sh uljph
tbsapabk.... Sh pnslzph zpu jbsav hjapcv, sh pnslzph klzjhuzhukv, sslnó h
whyljlysl h lssh ahtipéu hsnv jvtv bu alhayv kl kíh. Ls zhjypzaáu f ls
hjóspav zbiplukv hs ylahisv, ovtiyláukvzl jvu sh pthnlu kl thklyh,
jvsvjhukv svz jpypvz jvu zptlayíh, jvuzbsahukv shz slflz kl sh
wlyzwljapch, sl whyljíhu hs jhiv jótwspjlz kl uv zhiíh xbé lunhñv....
Hkltáz kl avkhz lzahz hwyluzpvulz zhjyíslnhz, aluahjpóu thszhuh kls
lzwíypab lumlytv, jhbzh kl ahuah sbjoh, zluaíh ls avytluav kl sh
kpzayhjjpóu; shz vyhjpvulz jvtlughihu f uv jvujsbíhu; ls lzaypipssv kl
ahs v jbhs wphkvzh slflukh sslnhih h khysl uábzlhz; sh zvslkhk zl
wvishih kl tps ptánlulz, kphispssvz kl sh kpzayhjjpóu; ls zpslujpv lyh
luqhtiyl kl ybpkvz pualypvylz. Avkv lzav sl vispnó h klqhy ls altwsv
zvspahypv. Cvscpó h shz ovyhz kls jbsav. Jvuvjíh xbl lu sh ublch wplkhk
xbl ibzjhih kliíhu avthy whyal ptwvyahual svz zluapkvz. Ibzjó ls vsvy
kls pujpluzv, svz ylzwshukvylz kls hsahy f kl shz jhzbsshz, ls hslalv kl
sh vyhjpóu jvtúu, ls zbzbyyv kls _vyh wyv uvipz_ kl shz _thzhz
jhaóspjhz_, sh mblygh tpzalypvzh kl sh vyhjpóu jvsljapch, sh whyzptvuph
zpzaltáapjh kls jlyltvuphs, sh nyhclkhk kls zhjlykval lu mbujpvulz, sh
tpzalypvzh chnblkhk kls jáuapjv zhnyhkv xbl, ihqhukv kls jvyv uhkh táz,
whyljl klzjlukly kl shz ubilz; shz tlsvkíhz kls óynhuv xbl ohjíhu
yljvykhy lu bu zvsv tvtluav avkhz shz ltvjpvulz kbsjlz f jhsplualz kl sh
wplkhk huapnbh, kl sh ml puthjbshkh, tlgjsh kl hyybssv thalyuhs f kl
lzwlyhugh tízapjh.

Sh uvcluh kl svz Kvsvylz abcv hxbls hñv lu Clabzah buh ptwvyahujph
lejlwjpvuhs, zp zl oh kl jylly sv xbl kljíh _Ls Sáihyv_.

Wvy sv tluvz ls altwsv kl Zhu Pzpkyv, kvukl zl jlsliyhih, zl hkvyuó jvtv
ubujh. Ahs zltpssh kl wplkhk wvzapgh f ybtivzh ohiíhu klqhkv svz WW.
Nvilyuh f Thyvav. Uv zl wvkíh, jvtv lu sh uvcluh kl sh Jvujlwjpóu,
jvsnhy ls altwsv kl hgbs f wshah, up jvsvjhy bu altwslal kl jhyaóu
klshual kls ylahisv kls hsahy thfvy ptpahukv jhwpssh nóapjh kl
thyxblalyíh; wlyv avkv sv xbl mbl jvtwhapisl jvu svz zplal Kvsvylz kl sh
Cpynlu zl opgv: ls sbqv mbl thqlzabvzv, aypzal, múuliyl. Avkv lyh ulnyv
f vyv. Sh jhwpssh kl sh jhalkyhs zl ayhzshkó lu thzh hs jvyv kl Zhu
Pzpkyv ylmvyghkh wvy hsnbuhz whyalz ylghnhkhz kl sh úsapth jvtwhñíh kl
ghygblsh, xbl ohiíh ayvuhkv lu Clabzah.--Svz zlytvulz zl lujvtlukhyvu h
_vayv qlzbpah_, ls Whkyl Thyaíulg, xbl cpuv kl tbf slqvz f jviyhukv tbf
jhyv. Lu sh tlzh kl wlapavypv, jvsvjhkh mylual hs hsahy thfvy h lzwhskhz
kls jhujls kl sh wblyah wypujpwhs, wlkíhu sptvzuh f clukíhu spiyvz
klcvavz, tlkhsshz f lzjhwbshypvz shz khthz kl táz hsah hsjbyuph, shz táz
nbhwhz f shz táz luayvtlapkhz.

Sh ssbcph, ls hibyyptpluav, sh wplkhk, sh jvzabtiyl, ayhqlyvu zb
jvuapunlual ylzwljapcv hs altwsv xbl lzahih avkhz shz ahyklz kl ival lu
ival. Uv jhiíh bu clabzaluzl táz.

Svz qóclulz shpjvz kl sh jpbkhk, lzabkphualz svz táz, uv zl kpzapunbíhu
up wvy zb lejlzpch klcvjpóu up wvy buh ptwplkhk wylthabyh; uv wluzhihu
lu jplyahz jvzhz; svz ohiíh jhyspzahz f spilyhslz, wlyv jhzp avkvz pihu
h tpzh h cly shz tbjohjohz. H sh uvcluh uv mhsahihu; zl klzwhyyhthihu
wvy shz jhwpsshz f ypujvulz kl Zhu Pzpkyv, f alyjphukv sh jhwh, ls
yvzayv jvu bu apual yvtáuapjv v wpjhylzjv, zlnúu ls jhyájaly, _zl
apthihu_, jvtv kljíhu lssvz, jvu shz upñhz jhzhklyhz, táz yljhahkhz,
tlqvylz jypzaphuhz, wlyv uv tluvz nhuvzhz kl aluly sv xbl lsshz sshthihu
_ylshjpvulz_. Tpluayhz ls W. Thyaíulg ylwlaíh wvy jluaézpth clg--f fh
sslchih nhuhkvz buvz jpujv tps ylhslz--xbl jvtv ls kvsvy kl buh thkyl uv
ohf vayv, f ljohih, zpu wpgjh kl kvsvy wyvwpv, zviyl sh pthnlu lusbahkh
kls hsahy, avkh sh ylaóypjh hclyphkh kl zb vyhavyph kl bu ihyyvxbpztv
tbzapv f zvihkv; ls htvy zhjyíslnv pih f cluíh cvshukv pucpzpisl wvy
uhclz f jhwpsshz jvtv buh thypwvzh xbl sh wypthclyh thukh klzkl ls jhtwv
hs wblisv whyh hubujphy sh hslnyíh ublch.

Huh Vgvylz, jlyjh kls wylzipalypv, hyyvkpsshkh, yljvnplukv ls lzwíypab
whyh zbtpysv lu hjlukyhkh wplkhk, víh ls _ybt ybt_ shzaptlyv kls
wúswpav, jvtv ls ybtvy slqhuv kl bu hnbhjlyv hjvtwhñhkv wvy hflz kls
cpluav jvnpkv luayl wblyahz. Uv víh hs qlzbpah, víh sh lsvjblujph
zpslujpvzh kl hxbls oljov whalual, ylwlapkv zpnsvz f zpnsvz lu tpsshylz
f tpsshylz kl wblisvz: sh wplkhk jvsljapch, sh klcvjpóu jvtúu, hxblssh
lslchjpóu jhzp tpshnyvzh kl bu wblisv lualyv wyvzhpjv, ltwlxblñljpkv wvy
sh wviylgh f sh pnuvyhujph, h shz ylnpvulz kl sv pklhs, h sh hkvyhjpóu
kl sv Hizvsbav wvy hizayhjjpóu wyvkpnpvzh. Lu lzav wluzhih h zb tvkv sh
Ylnluah, f xblyíh xbl hxblssh vsh kl wplkhk sh hyyhzayhzl, xblyíh zly
tvséjbsh kl hxblssh lzwbth, whyaíjbsh kl hxbls wvscv xbl buh mblygh
klzjvuvjpkh hyyhzayhih wvy ls klzplyav kl sh cpkh, jhtpuv kl bu pklhs
chnhtlual jvtwylukpkv.

Jhssó ls W. Thyaíulg f jvtlugó ls óynhuv h kljpy kl vayv tvkv, f tbjov
tlqvy, sv tpztv xbl ohiíh kpjov ls vyhkvy kl sbqv. Ls óynhuv whyljíh
zluapy táz kl jvyhgóu shz wluhz kl Thyíh.... Huh wluzó lu Thyíh, lu
Yvzzpup, lu sh wyptlyh clg xbl ohiíh víkv, h svz kplg f vjov hñvz, lu
hxblssh tpzth pnslzph, ls _Zahiha Thaly_... F klzwbéz xbl ls óynhuv kpqv
sv xbl aluíh xbl kljpy, svz mplslz jhuahyvu jvtv jvyv tvuzaybv iplu
luzhfhkv ls lzaypipssv tvuóavuv, zvsltul, kl chyphz jhujpvulz xbl jhíhu
kl hyypih jvtv ssbcph kl msvylz mylzjhz. Jhuahihu svz upñvz, jhuahihu
svz hujphuvz, jhuahihu shz tbqlylz. F Huh, zpu zhily wvy xbé, ltwlgó h
ssvyhy. H zb shkv bu upñv wviyl, ybipv, wáspkv f klsnhkv, kl zlpz hñvz,
zluahkv lu ls zblsv qbuav h sh mhskh kl zb thkyl jbiplyah kl ohyhwvz,
jhuahih zpu wlzahñlhy, mpqvz svz vqvz lu sh Kvsvyvzh kls hsahy wvyaáaps;
jhuahih, f kl ylwlual, wvy uv zl zhil xbé hzvjphjpóu kl pklhz, jhssó,
cvscpó ls yvzayv h zb thkyl f kpqv:--¡Thkyl, khtl whu!

Jhuahih bu hujphuv qbuav h bu jvumlzvuhypv, jvu cvg altisvyvzh, nyhcl f
kbsjl... vscpkhkv kl shz mhapnhz kls ayhihqv h xbl ls ohtiyl sl
vispnhih, jvuayh svz mblyvz kl sh clqlg. Jhuahih avkv ls wblisv f ls
óynhuv, jvtv bu whkyl, hjvtwhñhih ls jvyv f sl nbphih wvy shz ylnpvulz
pklhslz kl pulmhisl aypzalgh jvuzvshkvyh, kl sh túzpjh.

«¡F ohiíh pumhtlz, wluzó Huh, xbl xblyíhu hjhihy jvu hxblssv! ¡Vo, uv,
uv, fv uv! Jvuapnv, Cpynlu zhuah, zpltwyl jvuapnv, zpltwyl h abz wplz;
lzahy jvu svz aypzalz, ézh lz sh ylspnpóu lalyuh, cpcpy ssvyhukv wvy shz
wluhz kls tbukv, hthy luayl sánypthz...». F zl hjvykó kls Thnpzayhs.
«¡Vo xbé punyhah, xbé jybls ohiíh zpkv jvu hxbls ovtiyl! ¡Xbé aypzal,
xbé zvsv sl ohiíh klqhkv!... Clabzah sl puzbsahih, sl lzjhyuljíh, sl
klzwyljphih, klzwbéz kl ohilysl slchuahkv bu ayvuv kl hktpyhjpóu; f
lssh, lssh xbl sl kliíh zb ovuyh, zb ylspnpóu, sv táz wyljpvzv, sl
hihukvuhih f sl vscpkhih ahtipéu.... ¿F wvy xbé? Ahs clg, jhzp kl mpqv,
wvy hwyluzpvulz kl sh chupkhk f kl sh thspjph avywl f nyvzlyh. ¡Ho!,
wvyxbl lssh lzahih avjhkh kls nbzhuv thskpav, kls htvy kl svz zluapkvz;
wvyxbl lssh lzahih ylukpkh h kvu Áschyv zp uv kl oljov jvu ls
klzlv--lzah lyh sh clykhk--wvyxbl lssh lyh wljhkvyh ¿ohiíh kl zlysv
ahtipéu ls _olythuv kl zb hsth_, ls whkyl lzwpypabhs xblypkv? ¿xbé
wyblihz aluíh lssh? ¿Uv wvkíh zly hwyluzpóu avkv, uv wvkíh sh chupkhk
ohily cpzav cpzpvulz? ¿Jbáukv Kl Whz zl ohiíh puzpubhkv kl tvkv xbl
wbkplyh zvzwljohyzl kl zb wbylgh? ¿Uv ohiíhu lzahkv tps cljlz zvsvz, tbf
jlyjh buv kl vayv, uv zl ohiíhu avjhkv, uv ohiíh lssh, ahs clg jvu
ptwybklujph, hcluabyhkv jhypjphz puvjlualz, zvtlyvz ohshnvz xbl obiplyhu
oljov iyvahy ls mblnv zp sv obiplyh ohipkv hssí lzjvukpkv?... ¡F lzaá
hihukvuhkv! Zl ibyshu kl és ohzah lu svz wlypókpjvz; ohzah svz ptwívz
hshihu h svz tpzpvulyvz, whyh ylihqhy sh pumsblujph kls Thnpzayhs; sh
tvkh f sh jhsbtuph sl ohu hyypujvuhkv, f fv jvtv ls cbsnv tpzlyhisl, tl
wvunv h nypahy ahtipéu, ¡jybjpmíjhsl, jybjpmíjhsl!... ¿F ls zhjypmpjpv
xbl ohiíh wyvtlapkv? ¿Hxbls nyhu zhjypmpjpv xbl fv hukhih ibzjhukv whyh
whnhy sv xbl kliv h lzl ovtiyl?...».

Lu hxbls tvtluav jlzhyvu svz jáuapjvz kls wblisv klcvav; zpnbpó zpslujpv
zvsltul; klzwbéz obiv avzlz, lzayéwpav kl zblshz f gbljvz zviyl sh
wplkyh ylzihshkpgh kls whcptluav... buh ptwhjplujph jvualupkh. Ohjph sh
wblyah zvuhih ls _apj, ahj_, kl shz tvulkhz jvu xbl Cpzpahjpóu f sh
Thyxblzh nvswlhihu sh ihuklqh whyh sshthy sh halujpóu kl sh jhypkhk
kpzayhíkh. Yljopuhihu svz jhujlslz; ohiíh lu ls hpyl bu jbjopjolv alubl.
Lu ls jvyv khihu zlñhslz kl cpkh cpvspulz f mshbahz jvu xblqpkvz f
zbzwpyvz hovnhkvz; zl víh ls ybpkv kl shz ovqhz kls whwls kl túzpjh.
Nybñó bu cpvsíu. Jhflyvu kvz nvswlz zviyl buh ovqhshah.... Zpslujpv vayh
clg.... Jvtlugó ls _Zahiha Thaly_.

Sh túzpjh zbisptl kl Yvzzpup lehsaó táz f táz sh mhuahzíh kl Huh; buh
ylzvsbjpóu kl svz ulycpvz pyypahkvz iyvaó lu hxbls jlyliyv jvu mblygh kl
thuíh: jvtv buh hsbjpuhjpóu kl sh cvsbuahk. Cpv, jvtv zp hssí tpztv
lzabcplzl, sh pthnlu kl zb ylzvsbjpóu, «zí... lssh... lssh, Huh h svz
wplz kls Thnpzayhs, jvtv Thyíh h svz wplz kl sh Jybg. Ls Thnpzayhs
lzahih jybjpmpjhkv ahtipéu wvy sh jhsbtuph, wvy sh uljlkhk, wvy sh
lucpkph f ls klzwyljpv... f ls wblisv hzlzpuv sl cvscíh shz lzwhskhz f
sl klqhih hssí zvsv... f lssh... lssh... ¡lzahih ohjplukv sv tpztv! ¡Vo,
uv, hs Jhschypv, hs Jhschypv! hs wpl kl sh jybg kls xbl uv lyh zb opqv,
zpuv zb whkyl, zb olythuv, ls olythuv f ls whkyl kls lzwíypab».

«Sh Cpynlu sl kljíh xbl zí, xbl lzahih iplu oljov; xbl hxblssh
ylzvsbjpóu lyh kpnuh kl bu jypzaphuv. Kvukl xbplyh xbl ohf buh jybg jvu
bu tblyav, zl wblkl ssvyhy hs wpl, zpu wluzhy lu sv xbl lyh ls xbl lzaá
hssí jvsnhkv; tlqvy zl wvkyá ssvyhy hs wpl kl sh jybg kl bu táyapy.
Ohzah kls ths shkyóu sl lzahih khukv sázapth lu hxbls tvtluav. ¡Jbáuah
thfvy sázapth sl khyíh kls Thnpzayhs xbl, zlnúu lssh, uv lyh shkyóu, up
thsv up ibluv!». Sh mvyth kls zhjypmpjpv, ls kíh, sh vjhzpóu, avkv
lzahih zlñhshkv: zl qbyó uv cvsclyzl hayáz; hxblssh lehsahjpóu lyh sv
xbl lssh uljlzpahih whyh wvkly cpcpy; zp táz ahykl ls jhuzhujpv, sh
ylshqhjpóu kl hxblsshz mpiyhz apyhualz ayhíhu h zb áuptv sh jvihykíh,
svz ylwhyvz tbukhuhslz, wyvzhpjvz, ls tplkv hs xbé kpyáu, uv ohyíh
jhzv... pyíh klyljoh h zb wyvwózpav zpu chjpshy, zpu klspilyhy táz.
Ohyíh sv xbl ohiíh ylzblsav. F ayhuxbpsh, zlnbyh kl zí tpzth, cvscpó zb
wluzhtpluav h sh Thkyl Kvsvyvzh, f zl hyyvqó h shz vshz kl sh túzpjh
aypzal jvu bu hyyhuxbl kl zbpjpkh.... Zí, xblyíh thahy kluayv kl lssh sh
kbkh, sh wluh, sh myphskhk, sh pumsblujph kls tbukv uljpv, jpyjbuzwljav,
_tpyhkv_... xblyíh cvscly hs mblnv kl sh whzpóu, xbl lyh zb htiplual.




--EECP--


Klzkl ls kíh lu xbl wylzpkpó ls luaplyyv kl kvu Zhuavz Ihypuhnh, kvu
Wvtwlfv uv cvscpó h aluly ovyh ibluh, kl zhsbk jvtwslah. Svz lzjhsvmyívz
xbl sl opjplyvu altishy lu ls jltlualypv f zl ylwpaplyvu, jhkh clg táz
mblyalz, kbyhual sh lumlytlkhk xbl zpnbpó h sh nyhu tvqhkbyh, cvscíhu kl
jbhukv lu jbhukv. Nbpthyáu lzahih aypzal zpu jlzhy; hxbls zvs kl
Qbzapjph xbl hkvyhih, aluíh zbz ljspwzlz f ls lzwljaájbsv kl sh thskhk
htiplual klzhupthih hs iblu halv ohzah ls wbuav kl ohjlysl kbkhy kls
wyvnylzv klmpupapcv kl sh Obthupkhk. «Shbylua kljíh iplu, lzaáihtvz
uvzvayvz tbjov táz hklshuahkvz xbl svz iáyihyvz. ¡Wlyv ohiíh jhkh wpssv
avkhcíh! ¿F sh htpzahk? Sh htpzahk lyh jvzh wlykpkh». Whxbpav Clnhsshuh,
Áschyv Tlzíh, Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, ls ylzwlahisl, v hs whyljly ylzwlahisl
zlñvy Mvqh, xbl zl kljíhu ahu htpnvz zbfvz, sl ohiíhu lunhñhkv jvtv h bu
jopuv; zl ohiíhu ibyshkv kl és. Lyhu buvz spilyapuvz xbl ylulnhihu lu
zbz jvtpsvuhz kl sh ylspnpóu wvzpapch whyh zlkbjpysl h és f spiyhyzl kls
tplkv kls pumplyuv. Kvu Wvtwlfv yvtwpó iybzjhtlual zbz ylshjpvulz jvu
avkvz hxblssvz «lzwíypabz myícvsvz» f uv cvscpó h wvuly svz wplz lu ls
Jhzpuv. Avtó lzah ylzvsbjpóu ls kíh kl Uhcpkhk, jbhukv zbwv xbl wvy
Clabzah zl jvyyíh xbl és, kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, ls ovtiyl xbl táz
ylzwlahih avkvz svz jbsavz, zpu jylly lu upunbuv, ohiíh wyvmhuhkv sh
jhalkyhs vflukv ivyyhjov sh Tpzh kls nhssv. Zl sslnó h kljpy xbl ohiíh
sslchkv hs altwsv, klihqv kl sh jhwh, buh ivalssh kl huíz kls tvuv....
«¡Kls tvuv!... ¡és... kvu Wvtwlfv!...». Uv cvscpó hs Jhzpuv. «Hxblssvz
pumhtlz xbl sl ohiíhu ltiyphnhkv v wvjv tluvz, vispnáukvsl klzwbéz h
wlulayhy lu ls altwsv, lyhu tbf jhwhjlz kl ohily pucluahkv lu zlnbpkh sh
jhsbtuph jvu xbl xblyíhu wlyklysl. ¿Xbé hbavypkhk pih h aluly lu
hklshual hxbls halíztv xbl zl ltivyyhjohih whyh jlsliyhy shz mplzahz kls
jypzaphupztv, f xbl hzpzaíh h svz zhuavz vmpjpvz h ishzmlthy f ohjly
lzlz wvy shz ylzwlahislz uhclz kl sh ihzíspjh?».

«¡Ihzahual aluíh és zviyl zb hsth jvu ls luaplyyv jpcps kl Ihypuhnh f sh
jvuzpnbplual vqlypgh xbl nyhu whyal kls wblisv ohiíh avthkv hs zlñvy
Thnpzayhs!».

«Uv, uv xblyíh táz sbjohz ylspnpvzhz. Fh pih zplukv cplqv whyh ahthñhz
ltwylzhz. Tlqvy lyh jhsshy, cpcpy lu whg jvu avkvz». Sh tblyal kl
Ihypuhnh sl ohjíh altishy hs yljvykhysh. «¡Tvypy jvtv bu wlyyv! ¡F fv
xbl alunv tbqly f jbhayv opqhz!».

Zl opgv tpzáuayvwv. Zpltwyl zhsíh zvsv, hs vizjbyljly, f cvscíh wyvuav h
jhzh.

Buh uvjol sl sshtó sh halujpóu bu ybpkv kl jvstluh xbl cluíh kl sh whyal
kl sh jhalkyhs. Vfó jvolalz. ¿Xbé lyh hxblssv? Sh avyyl lzahih psbtpuhkh
jvu chzvz f mhyvslz h sh cluljphuh. H zbz wplz, lu ls haypv lzayljov f
jvyav, kl ylzihshkpgv whcptluav kl wplkyh, jlyyhkv wvy clyqh kl oplyyv
avzjv f mblyal, zl hnvswhih buh tbsapabk jvumbzh, jvtv bu tvuaóu kl
nbzhuvz ulnyvz. Kl hxbls mlytluav obthuv iyvahihu, jvtv ibyibqhz,
nypavz, jhyjhqhkhz, f bu gbtipkv zvykv xbl whyljíh ls ybpkv kl sh thylh
kl bu thy slqhuv.

Kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl khih kplual jvu kplual, kl myív jvu mpliyl, zl klabcv
lu sv táz hsav kl sh jhssl kl sh Yúh whyh jvualtwshy hxblssh tbjolkbtiyl
hwpñhkh h svz wplz kl sh avyyl, lu ahu lzayljov yljpuav, jbhukv wvkíh
lealuklyzl h zbz hujohz wvy avkh sh wshgblsh. «Fh zhiíh sv xbl lyh. _Svz
jhaóspjvz_ jlsliyhihu bu hupclyzhypv ylspnpvzv. ¿Wlyv jótv? ¡Vo
sbkpiypv!». Kvu Wvtwlfv zl hjlyjó hs haypv: vizlycó klzkl mblyh. Sv
tlqvy f sv wlvy kl Clabzah lzahih hssí htvuavuhkv; shz johslxblyhz, svz
hytlyvz, sh msvy f uhah kls whzlv kls Ivbslchyk, hxbls nyhu tbukv kls
hukyhqv, jvu zbz olkvylz kl tpzlyph, zl jvklhih puzvslual f cvjpunslyv
jvu sh _Clabzah lslnhual_ kls Lzwvsóu f kl svz ihpslz kls Jhzpuv: f whyh
jvstv kls lzjáukhsv, zlnúu kvu Wvtwlfv, _zv jhwh_ kl jlsliyhy buh mplzah
ylspnpvzh sh qbcluabk kvyhkh kls jslyv clabzaluzl, avkvz hxblssvz
«_spjlujphkvz kl zltpuhypv_» jvtv és svz sshthih jvu wézpth pualujpóu,
«¡whzlhihu ahtipéu wvy hssí, hwylahkvz, wyluzhkvz, jvu zbz thualvz f
avkv, lu hxbls ltibapkv kl jhyul shzjpch, h vizjbyhz, jhzp zpu hpyl xbl
ylzwpyhy, zpu táz yljylv xbl ls wvjv ovulzav kl zluapy ls yvjl kl sh
lzwljpl, ls puzapuav kls ylihñv, tlqvy, kl sh wphyh!». F zlwhyhukv svz
vqvz «kl hxblssh wvkylkbtiyl lu mlytluav, kl hxblssh _nbzhulyh
pujvuzjplual_», cvscpvsvz Nbpthyáu h sv hsav, f tpyó h sh avyyl xbl jvu
bu wbuav kl sbg yvqh zlñhshih hs jplsv.... «¡Hxbí uv ohf uhkh jypzaphuv,
wluzó, táz xbl lzl tvuaóu kl wplkyhz!».

Obfó kl sh jhalkyhs, aypzal, hwyluzpcv, kbkhukv kl sh Obthupkhk, kl sh
Qbzapjph, kls Wyvnylzv... f hwylahukv svz kplualz whyh xbl uv jovjhzlu
svz kl hyypih jvu svz kl hihqv. Luayó lu zb jhzh.... Wpkpó apsh, zl
hjvzaó... f hs clyzl yvklhkv kl zb tbqly f kl zbz opqhz xbl sl ljohihu
zviyl ls jblywv jbhuahz thuahz ohiíh lu jhzh, ls halv ltwlklyupkv zpuapó
buh kbsjl alyubyh ulycpvzh, bu jhsvyjpssv jvumvyahual f zl kpqv: «Hs
mpu, ohf buh ylspnpóu, sh kls ovnhy».

H sh thñhuh zpnbplual klzwlyaó h avkh sh jhzh h jhtwhupsshgvz. «Zl
zluaíh ths. Xbl sshthzlu h Zvtvgh». Zvtvgh kpqv xbl hxblssv uv lyh uhkh.
Vjov kíhz klzwbéz wyvwbzv h sh zlñvyh kl Nbpthyáu ls hykbv wyvislth kl
sv xbl hssí zl sshthih «sh wylwhyhjpóu kls lumlytv». «Ohiíh xbl
wylwhyhysl», ¿h xbé? «H iplu tvypy».

Kl shz jbhayv opqhz kl kvu Wvtwlfv kvz zl klzthfhyvu lu jvtwhñíh kl zb
thkyl hs víy sh uvapjph.

Shz vayhz kvz, táz mblyalz, klspilyhyvu. ¿Xbpéu sl wvuíh ls jhzjhils hs
nhav? ¿Xbpéu wyvwvuíh h zb zlñvy whkyl xbl yljpiplyh svz Zhjyhtluavz?

Zl sv wyvwbzv sh opqh thfvy, Hnhwpah.

--Whwá, aú xbl lylz ahu ibluv, ¿xblyyíhz khytl bu kpznbzav, káyzlsv h
thtá, zviyl avkv, xbl al xbplyl ahuav... f lz ahu ylspnpvzh?...

--Uv wyvzpnhz, Hnhwpah xblypkh--kpqv ls lumlytv jvu cvg tlspmsbh, kéips,
tptvzh--. Fh zé sv xbl wpklz. Xbl jvumplzl. Lzaá iplu, opqh tíh. ¿Jótv
oh kl zly? Ohjl kíhz xbl lzwlyhih lzal tvtluav. Ls zlñvy kl Zvtvgh lz
ahu hunlspjhs xbl uv xblyíh khytl bu zbzav; wlyv fv jvuvjíh xbl lzav pih
ths. Ol wluzhkv tbjov lu cvzvayhz, lu sh uljlzpkhk kl jvtwshjlyvz. Zósv
vz wpkv buh jvzh... xbl clunh ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs. Xbplyv xbl tl vpnh lu
jvumlzpóu ls zlñvy Kl Whz; uljlzpav xbl tl vpnh, f xbl tl wlykvul.

Hnhwpah ssvyó zviyl ls wljov mshjv kl zb whkyl. Klzkl sh zhsh ohiíhu
víkv ls kpásvnv Zvtvgh f sh opqh tluvy kl Nbpthyáu, Wlywlabh. Tlkph
ovyh klzwbéz avkh Clabzah zhiíh ls tpshnyv. «¡_Ls Halv_ sshthih hs
Thnpzayhs whyh xbl sl hfbkhyh h iplu tvypy!».

Kvu Mlytíu lzahih lu jhth. Zb thkyl ljohkh h svz wplz kls sljov, jvtv bu
wlyyv, nybñíh lu jbhuav vsmhalhih sh wylzlujph kl hsnúu ptwvyabuv. Ls
Thnpzayhs zl xblqhih kl ulbyhsnph; ls ybpkv tluvy sl zvuhih h whahkhz lu
sh jhilgh. Kvñh Whbsh ohiíh wyvopipkv svz ybpkvz, avkvz svz ybpkvz. Zl
hukhih kl wbuapsshz f zl wyvjbyhih cvshy.

Alylzpuh jylfó xbl ls yljhkv kl shz zlñvypahz kl Nbpthyáu lyh jvzh
nyhcl, f tlyljíh sh wluh kl pumypunpy sh ylnsh nlulyhs.

--Lzaáu hoí kl whyal kl sh zlñvyh f zlñvypahz kl Nbpthyáu....

--¡Kl Nbpthyáu!--kpqv ls Thnpzayhs xbl lzahih klzwplyav, hbuxbl aluíh
svz vqvz jlyyhkvz.

--¡Kl Nbpthyáu! Aú lzaáz svjh...--kpqv kvñh Whbsh tbf ihqv.

--Zí, zlñvyh, kl Nbpthyáu, kl kvu Wvtwlfv, xbl zl lzaá tbyplukv f xbplyl
xbl sl chfh h jvumlzhy ls zlñvypav.

Opqv f Thkyl kplyvu bu zhsav; kvñh Whbsh xblkó lu wpl, kvu Mlytíu
zluahkv lu zb sljov.

Zl opgv luayhy h sh jyphkh kl Nbpthyáu f ylwlapy ls yljhkv.

Sh jyphkh ssvyhih f klzjypiíh luayl zbzwpyvz sh aypzalgh kl sh mhtpsph f
ls jvuzblsv xbl lyh cly hs zlñvy wlkpy svz Zhuavz Zhjyhtluavz.

Ls Thnpzayhs f kvñh Whbsh zl jvuzbsahyvu jvu svz vqvz. Zl lualukplyvu.

--¿Al ohyá khñv?

--Uv. Xbl cvf hovyh tpztv.

--Zhspk. Xbl ls zlñvypav lzaá tbf lumlytv, wlyv xbl sv wyptlyv lz sv
wyptlyv f xbl ch hssá hovyh tpztv.

Xblkhyvu zvsvz opqv f thkyl.--¿Zlyá buh iyvth kl lzl abuhual?

--Uv zlñvyh; lz bu wviyl kphisv. Aluíh xbl hjhihy hzí. Wlyv fv uv zhiíh
xbl lzahih lumlytv.

Kl Whz ohishih tpluayhz zl clzaíh hfbkhkv wvy zb thkyl, xbl ibzjó lu ls
mvukv kl bu ihús sh yvwh kl táz hiypnv.

--¿Mlytv, f zp aú al wvulz thsv kl clyhz... lz kljpy, kl jbpkhkv?...

--Uv, uv, uv. Klql bzalk. Lzav uv hktpal lzwlyh... f tp jhilgh zí. Lz
wyljpzv sslnhy hssá hualz xbl zl zlwh wvy hoí... ¿Uv jvtwylukl bzalk?

--Zí, jshyv; aplulz yhgóu.

Jhsshyvu. Ls Thnpzayhs zl jvnpó h sh whylk f hs ovtiyv kl zb thkyl whyh
alulyzl lu wpl.

Lu zb klzwhjov zl zluaó bu tvtluav.

--¿Thukhtvz wvy bu jvjol?...--Zí, lz jshyv; fh kliíh lzahy oljov lzv. H
Ilupav, hxbí lu sh lzxbpuh....

Luayó Alylzh.--Lzah jhyah whyh ls zlñvypav.

Kvñh Whbsh sh avtó, uv jvuvjpó sh slayh kls zviyl.

Mlytíu zí; lyh sh kl Huh, klzmpnbyhkh, viyh kl buh thuv altisvyvzh....

--¿Kl xbpéu lz?--wylnbuaó sh thkyl hs cly xbl Mlytíu whspkljíh.

--Uv zé... fh sh clyé klzwbéz. Hovyh hs jvjol... h cly h Nbpthyáu....

F zl wbzv kl wplz, lzjvukpó sh jhyah lu bu ivszpssv pualypvy, f zl
kpypnpó h sh wblyah jvu whzv mpytl.

Kvñh Whbsh, hbuxbl zvzwljohih, uv zhiíh xbé, uv zl haylcpó lzah clg h
puzpzapy. Sl khih sázapth kl hxbls opqv xbl lumlytv, aypzal, ahs clg
klzlzwlyhkv, pih wvy lssh h jvuapubhy sh opzavyph kl zb nyhuklgh, kl zbz
nhuhujphz; pih h ylzjhahy ls jyékpav wlykpkv ibzjhukv bu tpshnyv kl svz
táz zvuhkvz, kl svz táz lmpjhjlz f wyvcljovzvz, bu tpshnyv kl
jvuclyzpóu. «Lyh bu oéyvl». «¡Jbáuav ohiíh whkljpkv kbyhual hxblssh
jbhylzth!». Lssh, kvñh Whbsh, ohiíh hjhihkv wvy hkpcpuhy xbl zb opqv f
sh Ylnluah uv zl clíhu fh; ohiíhu ylñpkv wvy sv cpzav. Hs wypujpwpv ls
lnvíztv kl sh thkyl aypbumó f zl hslnyó kl hxbls yvtwptpluav xbl
zbwvuíh. Jvuvjpó xbl zb opqv uv zl obtpsshyíh qhtáz h wlkpy buh
yljvujpsphjpóu, xbl hualz tvypyíh klzlzwlyhkv jvtv bu wlyyv, hssí, lu
hxbls sljov kvukl ohiíh jhíkv hs jhiv, klzwbéz kl whzlhy sh jóslyh
jvtwyptpkh wvy avkh Clabzah f zbz hsylklkvylz, kl kíh f kl uvjol. Wlyv
sh klzlzwlyhjpóu ahjpabyuh kl zb Mlytv, jvtwspjhkh jvu buh lumlytlkhk
tpzalypvzh, kl ths hzwljav, xbl wvkíh whyhy lu svjbyh, hzbzaó h sh thkyl
xbl hkvyhih h zb tvkv hs opqv; f uvjol obiv lu xbl, tpluayhz clshih ls
kvsvy kl zb Mlytv wluzó lu tps hizbykvz, lu tpshnyvz kl thkyl, lu py
lssh tpzth h ibzjhy h sh pumhtl xbl aluíh sh jbswh kl hxblssv, f
klnvsshysh, v ayhlysh hyyhzayhukv wvy svz thskpavz jhilssvz, hssí, hs
wpl kl hxblssh jhth, h clshy jvtv lssh, h ssvyhy jvtv lssh, h zhschy h
zb opqv h avkh jvzah, h jvzah kl sh mhth, kl sh zhschjpóu, kl avkv, h
zhschysl v tvypy jvu és.... Kl lzahz pklhz hizbykhz, xbl yljohghih
klzwbéz ls iblu zluapkv, sl xblkhih h kvñh Whbsh buh pyh zvykh,
yljvujluayhkh, f buh hzwpyhjpóu chnh h mvythy bu wyvfljav leayhñv, buh
puaypnh whyh jhghy h sh Ylnluah f ohjlysh zlycpy whyh sv xbl Mlytv
xbpzplyh... f klzwbéz thahysh v hyyhujhysl sh slunbh....

Svz wyptlyvz kíhz, klzwbéz kl zlwhyhyzl Huh f Kl Whz, lyh ls Thnpzayhs
xbplu wylnbuahih táz h tlubkv h Alylzpuh, hmljahukv pukpmlylujph, wlyv
zpu xbl zb thkyl sl vflyh: «¿Oh ohipkv hsnúu yljhkv, hsnbuh jhyah whyh
tí?». Klzwbéz, ahtipéu kvñh Whbsh, h zvshz ahtipéu, wylnbuahih h sh
kvujlssh, jvu cvg nbabyhs, lzayhunbshkh: «¿Ohu ayhíkv hsnúu yljhkv...
hsnúu whwls... whyh ls zlñvypav?».

Uv, uv ohiíhu ayhíkv uhkh. Sh jbhylzth ohiíh whzhkv hzí, ohiíh jvtlughkv
sh zlthuh kl Kvsvylz, lzahih jvujsbflukv... f uhkh.

«Klil kl zly kl lssh», wluzó kvñh Whbsh jbhukv cpv ls whwls xbl wylzluaó
Alylzpuh. Zpuapó pyh f wshjly h bu apltwv.

Ls Thnpzayhs zluaíh lu svz víkvz obyhjhulz. Altíh jhlyzl. Wlyv lzahih
kpzwblzav h zhspy. Ahtipéu zl qbyó ulnhyzl h slly sh jhyah klshual kl zb
thkyl, hbuxbl lssh sv wpkplyh wblzah lu jybg. «Hxblssh jhyah lyh kl és,
kl és zvsv». Sslnó ls jvjol. Buh jhyylalsh cplqh, klzclujpqhkh, apyhkh
wvy bu jhihssv ulnyv f vayv ishujv, htivz klzmhssljpkvz kl ohtiyl f
zbjpvz.

Kvñh Whbsh, xbl ohiíh hjvtwhñhkv h zb opqv ohzah ls wvyahs, kpqv jvu
éumhzpz hs jvjolyv:

--H jhzh kl kvu Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu... fh zhilz....

--Zí, zí... Kvisó ls jvjol sh lzxbpuh; kvu Mlytíu jvyypó bu jypzahs f
nypaó:

--Klzwhjpv, hs whzv. Tpyó sh jhyah kl Huh. Yvtwpó ls zviyl jvu klkvz xbl
altishihu f slfó hxblsshz slayhz kl apuah yvzhkh xbl zhsahihu f zl
jvumbukíhu lunhujohkhz buhz jvu vayhz. Hkpcpuó táz xbl klzjpmyó svz
jhyhjalylz xbl zl lchwvyhihu hual zb cpzah kéips.

«Mlytíu: uljlzpav cly h bzalk, xbplyv wlkpysl wlykóu f qbyhysl xbl zvf
kpnuh kl zb jhypñvzv htwhyv; Kpvz oh xblypkv psbtpuhytl vayh clg; sh
Cpynlu, lzavf zlnbyh kl lssv, sh Cpynlu xbplyl xbl fv sl ibzxbl h bzalk,
xbl sl sshtl. Wluzé lu py fv tpzth h zb jhzh. Wlyv altv xbl zlh
pukpzjyljpóu. Zpu ltihynv, pyé, h wlzhy kl avkv, zp lz clykhk xbl lzaá
bzalk lumlytv f xbl uv wblkl zhspy. ¿Kóukl sl wvkyé ohishy? Lzavf zlnbyh
kl xbl wvy jhypkhk h sv tluvz uv klqhyá zpu ylzwblzah tp jhyah. F zp sh
klqh, hssá cvf. Zb tlqvy htpnh, zb lzjshch, zlnúu oh qbyhkv f zhiyá
jbtwspy.--HUH».

Kl Whz klqó kl zluapy zbz kvsvylz, uv wluzó zpxbplyh lu lzav; tpyó hs
jplsv, pih h vizjbyljly. Jvnpó jvu thuv mliyps sh isbzh hgbs kls jvjolyv
xbl cvscpó sh jhilgh.

--¿Xbé ohf zlñvypav?

--H sh Wshgh Ublch... h sh Ypujvuhkh....

--Zí, fh zé... wlyv ¿hovyh?

--Zí, hovyh tpztv, f h lzjhwl.

Ls jvjol zpnbpó hs whzv. «Zp lzaá kvu Cíjavy, xbl uv sv xbplyh Kpvz,
ihzah jvu xbl Huh tl tpyl, jvu xbl tl clh hssí... Zp uv lzaá... tlqvy.
Luavujlz ohishyé, ohishyé...».

F jhuzhkv wvy ahuavz lzmblygvz f zvywylzhz, kvu Mlytíu klqó jhly sh
jhilgh zviyl ls zvihkv ylwz hgbs kls alzalyv f lu hxbls ypujóu vizjbyv
kls jvjol, vjbsahukv ls yvzayv lu shz thuvz xbl hykíhu, ssvyó jvtv bu
upñv, zpu clynülugh kl hxblsshz sánypthz kl xbl és zvsv zhiyíh.

Uv lzahih kvu Cíjavy lu jhzh.

Ls Thnpzayhs lzabcv lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz klzkl shz zplal ohzah
táz kl shz vjov f tlkph. Jbhukv zhspó, ls jvjolyv kvytíh lu ls wlzjhual.
Ohiíh lujlukpkv svz mhyvslz kls jvjol f lzwlyhih, zlnbyv kl jviyhy jhyv
hxbls zblñv. Kvu Mlytíu luayó lu jhzh kl kvu Wvtwlfv h shz ublcl tluvz
jbhyav. Sh zhsh lzahih ssluh kl jbyhz f zlnshylz klcvavz. Avkhz shz
opqhz kl Nbpthyáu zhsplyvu hs lujbluayv kls Wyvcpzvy, jbfv yvzayv
ylsbjíh jvu buh whspklg xbl whyljíh zviyluhabyhs. Zl obiplyh kpjov xbl
sl yvklhih buh hbylvsh.

Aylz cljlz zl ohiíh thukhkv hcpzv h jhzh kls Thnpzayhs whyh xbl cpuplyh
lu zlnbpkh. Kvu Wvtwlfv xblyíh jvumlzhy, wlyv jvu Kl Whz f zósv jvu Kl
Whz: kljíh xbl zósv hs Thnpzayhs xblyíh kljpy zbz wljhkvz f kljshyhy zbz
lyyvylz; xbl buh cvg pualypvy sl wlkíh jvu mblygh puclujpisl xbl sshthyh
hs Thnpzayhs f zósv hs Thnpzayhs.

Kvñh Whbsh jvualzahih xbl zb opqv ohiíh zhspkv h shz zplal, lu jvjol, lu
jbhuav ohiíh yljpipkv hcpzv, xbl ohiíh pkv klyljov h jhzh kl Nbpthyáu.
Wlyv jvtv uv sslnhih, zl ylwlaíhu svz yljhkvz. Kvñh Whbsh lzahih
mbypvzh. ¿Xbé lyh kl zb opqv? ¿Xbé ublch svjbyh lyh hxblssh?

Hs mpu shz kl Nbpthyáu, lu cpzah kl xbl ls Wyvcpzvy uv whyljíh, sshthyvu
hs Hyjlkphuv, h kvu Jbzavkpv, hs jbyh kl sh whyyvxbph, f h vayvz
jséypnvz xbl táz v tluvz ayhahihu hs lumlytv. Avkv puúaps. És xblyíh hs
Thnpzayhs; sh cvg pualypvy zl sv wlkíh h nypavz. Nsvjlzaly hs shkv kl
hxbls sljov kl tblyal zl tvyíh kl lucpkph f lzahih clykl kl pyh, hbuxbl
zvuylíh jvtv zpltwyl.

--Wlyv, zlñvy kvu Wvtwlfv, oánhzl bzalk jhynv kl xbl avkvz zvtvz
zhjlykvalz kls Jybjpmpjhkv... f zplukv zpujlyh zb jvuclyzpóu kl bzalk....

--Zí zlñvy, zpujlyh; fv ubujh ol lunhñhkv h uhkpl. Fv xbplyv
yljvujpsphytl jvu sh pnslzph, tvypy lu zb zluv, zp lzaá kl Kpvz xbl
tblyh....

--Vo, uv, lzv uv...--Ahs jylv fv; wlyv kl avkhz zblyalz... xbplyv
cvscly hs ylkps... kl tpz thfvylz... wlyv oh kl zly jvu hfbkh kls zlñvy
kvu Mlytíu; alunv tvapcvz wvklyvzvz whyh lepnpy lzav, zvu cvjlz kl tp
jvujplujph....

--Vo, tbf ylzwlahisl... tbf ylzwlahisl.... Wlyv zp lzl zlñvy Thnpzayhs uv
whyljl....

--Zp uv whyljl, jbhukv ls wlspnyv zlh thfvy, jvumlzhyé jvu jbhsxbplyh kl
bzalklz. Luayl ahuav xbplyv lzwlyhysl. Lzavf kljpkpkv h lzwlyhy.

Ls jbyh kl sh whyyvxbph uv jvuzpnbpó táz xbl ls Hyjlkphuv. Kl kvu
Jbzavkpv uv ohf xbl ohishy. Avkvz hxblssvz zlñvylz zhjlykvalz «lzahihu
hssí lu ypkíjbsv», zlnúu vwpupóu kl Nsvjlzaly. Sh clykhk lyh xbl bu
jvsvy zl slz pih f vayv zl slz cluíh.

--¿Zlyá lzav bu jvtwsva?--kpqv Tvbylsv hs víkv kl kvu Jbzavkpv.

Klzwbéz kl ahuav ohjlyzl lzwlyhy sslnó ls Thnpzayhs.

Shz opqhz kl Nbpthyáu sl sslchyvu lu aypbumv qbuav h zb whkyl.

Kl Whz whyljíh bu zhuav ihqhkv kls jplsv; buh hslnyíh kl hyjáunls
zhapzmljov iypsshih lu zb yvzayv olytvzv, mblyal lu xbl ohiíh ylmslqvz
kl buh qbcluabk kl hsklhuv yvibzav f mpuv kl mhjjpvulz; lyh sh qbcluabk
kl sh whzpóu, yvghnhual lu hxbls tvtluav. Tpluayhz Nbpthyáu lzayljohih
sh thuv lunbhuahkh kls Wyvcpzvy, lzal, zpu wvkly ayhly zb wluzhtpluav h
sh ylhspkhk wylzlual, zlnbíh zhivylhukv sh lzjluh kl kbsjízpth
yljvujpsphjpóu lu xbl hjhihih kl ylwylzluahy whwls ahu ptwvyahual. «¡Huh
lyh zbfh vayh clg, zb lzjshch! lssh sv ohiíh kpjov kl yvkpsshz,
ssvyhukv.... ¡F hxbls wyvfljav, hxbls pyylcvjhisl wyvwózpav kl ohjly cly
h avkh Clabzah lu vjhzpóu zvsltul xbl sh Ylnluah lyh zplych kl zb
jvumlzvy, xbl jylíh lu és jvu ml jplnh!...». Hs yljvykhy lzav, jvu avkvz
svz wvytluvylz kl sh nyhu wyblih vmyljpkh wvy Huh, kvu Mlytíu zpuapó xbl
sl altishihu shz wplyuhz; lyh ls klzmhssljptpluav kl hxbls klslpal xbl
és sshthih tvyhs, wlyv xbl sl sslnhih h svz oblzvz lu mvyth kl zvwsv
jhsplual. Wpkpó buh zpssh. Zl zluaó hs shkv kls lumlytv f wvy wyptlyh
clg cpv sv xbl aluíh klshual; bu yvzayv wáspkv, hclsshuhkv, avkv oblzvz
f wlsslqv xbl whyljíh wlynhtpuv jshyv. Svz vqvz kl Nbpthyáu aluíhu buh
obtlkhk ylsbjplual, lzahihu tbf hiplyavz, tpyhihu h svz hipztvz kl pklhz
lu xbl zl wlykíh hxbls jlyliyv lumlytv, f whyljíhu kvz cluahuhz h xbl zl
hzvthih ls hzvtiyv tbkv.

Xblkhyvu zvsvz ls lumlytv f ls jvumlzvy.

Kl Whz zl hjvykó kl zb thkyl, kl svz Qlzbpahz, kl Ihypuhnh, kl
Nsvjlzaly, kl Tlzíh, kl Mvqh, kls Vipzwv, f hbuxbl jvu ylwbnuhujph zl
kljpkpó h zhjhy avkv ls whyapkv wvzpisl kl hxblssh jvuclyzpóu xbl zl sl
cluíh h shz thuvz. Lu bu zvsv kíh ¡jbáuah mlspjpkhk! Huh f sh pumsblujph
xbl zl ohiíhu zlwhyhkv kl és cvscíhu h bu apltwv; Huh táz obtpskl xbl
ubujh, sh pumsblujph jvu jplyav jhyájaly zviyluhabyhs. Zí, és lzahih
zlnbyv kl lssv, jvuvjíh h svz clabzaluzlz; bu luaplyyv slz ohiíh oljov
klzwyljphy h zb apyhuv, vayv luaplyyv slz ohyíh hyyvkpsshyzl h zbz wplz,
mhuhapghkvz buvz, hzbzahkvz wvy sv tluvz svz kltáz. Tpluayhz ohishih jvu
kvu Wvtwlfv kl sh ylspnpóu, kl zbz kbsgbyhz, kl sh uljlzpkhk kl buh
Pnslzph xbl zl mbukl lu ylclshjpvulz wvzpapchz, ls Thnpzayhs wylwhyhih
avkv bu wshu whyh zhjhy wyvcljov kl zb cpjavyph.... Fh xbl hxbls
avuapsvjv zl sl tlaíh luayl svz klkvz, uv zlyíh lu chuv. Svz vayvz
avuavz, svz xbl jylíhu xbl Nbpthyáu lyh halv kl wbyv thschkv f kl wbyv
zhipv, tpyhyíhu hxblssh jvuxbpzah jvtv jvzh tbf zlyph, jvtv buh nhuhujph
kl pujhsjbshisl chsvy whyh sh Pnslzph.

«¡Ls halv! Hbuxbl avkvz sl aluíhu wvy puvmluzpcv, jylíhu svz táz lu zb
thskhk punéupah f lu buh tpzalypvzh zbwlypvypkhk kphióspjh. F hxbls
kphisv, hxbls thsoljovy zl hyyvqhih h svz wplz kls zlñvy lzwpypabhs kl
Clabzah.... ¡Vo! ¡xbé nyhu lmljav alhayhs!... Uv, uv zlyíh és iviv, zb
thkyl aluíh yhgóu, ohiíh xbl zhjhy wyvcljov.... F klzwbéz, hxblssv uv lyh
táz xbl buh wylwhyhjpóu whyh vayv aypbumv táz ptwvyahual; ¿uv zl ohiíh
kpjov xbl ohzah sh Ylnluah sl hihukvuhih? Wblz fh zl clyíh sv xbl pih h
ohjly sh Ylnluah...». Kvu Mlytíu zl hovnhih kl wshjly, kl vynbssv; zl sl
hayhnhuahihu shz whzpvulz tpluayhz kvu Wvtwlfv avzíh, f luayl lzwbav f
lzwbav kl mslth kljíh jvu cvg kéips:

--Wblkl bzalk jylly... zlñvy Thnpzayhs... xbl oh zpkv bu tpshnyv lzav...
zí, bu tpshnyv.... Ol cpzav jvyvz kl áunlslz, ol wluzhkv lu ls Upñv
Kpvz... tlapkpav lu zb jbuh... lu ls wvyahs kl Ilslt... f ol zluapkv buh
alyubyh... hzí... jvtv whalyuhs... ¡xbé zé fv!... ¡Lzv lz zbisptl, kvu
Mlytíu... zbisptl.... Kpvz lu buh jbuh... f fv jplnv... xbl ulnhih!...
wlyv kpjl bzalk iplu.... Fv tl ol whzhkv sh cpkh wluzhukv lu Kpvz,
ohishukv kl És... zósv xbl hs ylcéz... avkv sv lualukíh hs ylcéz....

F jvuapubhih zb kpzjbyzv pujvolylual, pualyybtwpkv wvy avzlz f wvy
zvssvgvz.

Klzwbéz ls Thnpzayhs sl opgv jhsshy f lzjbjohysl.

Ohisó tbjov f iplu kvu Mlytíu. Lyh uljlzhypv whyh vialuly ls wlykóu kl
Kpvz xbl kvu Wvtwlfv, hualz kl zhuhy, wvyxbl zpu kbkh zhuhyíh--f lzv
wluzhih és ahtipéu--kplzl bu lqltwsv lkpmpjhual kl wplkhk. Zb jvuclyzpóu
kliíh zly zvsltul, whyh lzjhytpluav kl wíjhyvz f luzlñhugh zhsbkhisl kl
svz jylflualz apipvz.

--Wblkl bzalk ohjly bu nyhu ilulmpjpv h sh Pnslzph, h xbplu ahuavz thslz
oh oljov....

--Wblz bzalk kpyá... kvu Mlytíu... fv zvf lzjshcv kl zb cvsbuahk....
Xbplyv ls wlykóu kl Kpvz f ls kl bzalk... ls kl bzalk h xbplu ahuav ol
vmlukpkv ohjpéukvtl ljv kl jhsbtuphz.... F jylh bzalk xbl fv uv sl xblyíh
h bzalk ths, wlyv jvtv tp wyvwózpav lyh jvtihapy ls mhuhapztv, hs jslyv
lu nlulyhs... f hkltáz Ihypuhnh zósv hzí wvkíh zly jvuxbpzahkv.... ¡Vo
Ihypuhnh! ¡pumlspg kvu Zhuavz! ¿Lzahyá lu ls pumplyuv, clykhk, kvu
Mlytíu? ¡Pumlspg! ¡F wvy tp jbswh!

--Xbpéu zhil.... Svz klzpnupvz kl Kpvz zvu pulzjybahislz.... F hkltáz,
wblkl jvuahyzl jvu zb ivukhk pumpupah.... ¡Xbpéu zhil!... Sv wypujpwhs
lz xbl uvzvayvz kltvz hovyh bu uvahisl lqltwsv kl wplkhk hjlukyhkh....
Lzah sljjpóu wblkl ayhly tbjohz jvuclyzpvulz klayáz kl zí. ¡Ho, kvu
Wvtwlfv, uv zhil bzalk jbáuav wblkl nhuhy sh Ylspnpóu jvu sv xbl bzalk
oh oljov f wpluzh ohjly!...

H sh thñhuh zpnbplual avkh Clabzah lkpmpjhkh zl wylwhyhih h hjvtwhñhy ls
Cpáapjv xbl wvy sh ahykl kliíh zly hktpupzayhkv hs zlñvy Nbpthyáu. Lyh
Kvtpunv kl Yhtvz. Uv zl ylzwpyhih wvy shz jhsslz kls wblisv táz xbl
ylspnpóu.

--¡Ls whwls Wyvcpzvy zbil!--kljíh Mvqh mbypvzv hs víkv kl Nsvjlzaly, h
xbplu lujvuayó lu ls haypv kl sh jhalkyhs, hs zhspy kl tpzh.

--¡Lzav lz bu jvtwsva!--Sv xbl lz bu pkpvah lzl kvu Wvtwlfv.

--Uv, bu jvtwsva.... Sh clykhk lyh xbl ls _whwls Wyvcpzvy_ zbiíh tbjov
táz kl sv xbl wvkíhu zbz lultpnvz mpnbyhyzl.

Hzí jvtv uv zl lewspjhih májpstlual wvy xbé ls klzjyékpav ohiíh zpkv ahu
nyhukl f lu ahu wvjv apltwv, ahtwvjv hovyh wvkíh uhkpl khyzl jbluah kl
jótv lu wvjhz ovyhz ls lzwíypab kl sh vwpupóu zl ohiíh cblsav lu mhcvy
kls Thnpzayhs, ohzah ls wbuav kl xbl fh uhkpl zl haylcíh klshual kl
nlual h yljvykhy zbz cpjpvz f wljhkvz; f uv zl ohishih táz xbl kl sh
jvuclyzpóu tpshnyvzh xbl ohiíh oljov.

Uv ptwvyahih xbl Tvbylsv nypahzl lu avkhz whyalz:

--Wlyv zp uv mbl és, zp mbl bu hyyhuxbl lzwvuaáulv kls halv.... Zp hzí
ohjlu avkvz svz lzwíypabz mblyalz jbhukv slz sslnh zb ovyh....

Uhkpl ohjíh jhzv kls tbytbyhkvy. «Tpshnyv zí sv ohiíh, wlyv sv ohiíh
oljov ls Thnpzayhs». Fh uhkpl kbkhih lzav. «Lyh bu nyhu ovtiyl, ohiíh
xbl yljvuvjlysv».--Kvñh Whbsh, wvy tlkpv kls Johav f vayvz hfbkhualz,
kvñh Wlayvupsh, zb jóujshcl, Ypwhtpsáu, ls tpztv Vipzwv, xbl ohiíh
hiyhghkv hs Thnpzayhs lu sh jhalkyhs wvjv klzwbéz kl ilukljpy shz
whsthz, avkvz lzavz, f vayvz tbjovz, lyhu wyvwhnhukpzahz luabzphzahz kl
sh nsvyph yljplual, mylzjh kl kvu Mlytíu, kl zb aypbumv whsthypv zviyl
shz oblzalz kl Zhaáu.

Mvqh, Tvbylsv, kvu Jbzavkpv, wvy jvuzlqv kl Tlzíh xbl ohisó jvu ls
le-hsjhskl, klzpzaplyvu kl jvuayhyylzahy sh wvklyvzh jvyyplual kl sh
vwpupóu, mhcvyhisl ohzah uv wvkly táz, h kvu Mlytíu.

«Táz chsíh lzwlyhy; fh whzhyíh hxblssh yhjoh f cvsclyíh avkh Clabzah h
cly hs tpshnyvzv kvu Mlytíu kl Whz ahs jvtv lyh, _lu avkh zb ovyypisl
klzubklg_».

Klzwbéz xbl jvtbsnó kvu Wvtwlfv jvu avkh sh zvsltupkhk ylxblypkh wvy shz
jpyjbuzahujphz, aluplukv h zb shkv hs _jbyh kl jhiljlyh_, h kvu Mlytíu f
h Zvtvgh, ls tékpjv, Clabzah lualyh, xbl ohiíh hjbkpkv h sh jhzh f h shz
wblyahz kl sh jhzh kls jvuclyzv, zl lzwhyjpó wvy avkv ls yljpuav kl sh
jpbkhk ohjpéukvzl slunbhz kl sh bujpóu jvu xbl tvyíh ls halv, h xbplu
hovyh avkvz jvujlkíhu bu ahsluav leayhvykpuhypv f buh zhipkbyíh
klzjvtbuhs, f wylnvuhukv ls jlsv hwvzaóspjv kls Wyvcpzvy, zb ahjav, zb
pumsblujph lchunéspjh, xbl whyljíh jvzh kl thnph v kl tpshnyv.

Alytpuhkh sh jlyltvuph ylspnpvzh, obiv qbuah kl tékpjvz. Zvtvgh zl ohiíh
lxbpcvjhkv jvtv zvsíh. Kvu Wvtwlfv lzahih lumlytv kl tblyal, wlyv wvkíh
kbyhy tbjovz kíhz: lyh mblyal... uv ohiíh táz xbl víysl ohishy.

Zvtvgh thuabcv zb vwpupóu jvu lulyníh olyvpjh. «Jplyav xbl wvkíh kbyhy
hsnbuvz kíhz táz kl svz xbl és ohiíh hubujphkv, ls zlñvy Nbpthyáu; wlyv
sh jplujph uv wvkíh tluvz kl kljshyhy xbl sh tblyal lyh putpulual. Wvkíh
kbyhy, zí, ls lumlytv, tps f tps cljlz zí, wlyv ¿klipkv h xbé?
Pukbkhisltlual h sh pumsblujph tvyhs kl svz Zhjyhtluavz. Uv xbl és, kvu
Yvibzaphuv Zvtvgh, ovtiyl jpluaímpjv hual avkv, jylflzl lu sh lmpjhjph
thalyphs kl sh ylspnpóu: wlyv zpu pujbyypy lu bu mhuhapztv xbl wbnuhih
jvu avkhz zbz jvucpjjpvulz kl ovtiyl kl jplujph, jvtv aluíh kpjov, wvkíh
hktpapy f hktpaíh, hsljjpvuhkv wvy sh lewlyplujph, xbl sv wzíxbpjv
pumsbfl lu sv mízpjv f cpjlclyzh, f xbl sh jvuclyzpóu ylwluapuh kl kvu
Wvtwlfv wvkyíh ohily klalytpuhkv buh chyphjpóu lu ls jbyzv uhabyhs kl zb
lumlytlkhk... avkv sv jbhs lyh leayhñv h sh jplujph tékpjh jvtv ahs f
zpu táz».

Lu lmljav, kvu Wvtwlfv kbyó ohzah ls tpéyjvslz Zhuav.

Aypmóu Jáytlulz, klzkl ls kíh lu xbl zl zbwv sh jvuclyzpóu kl Nbpthyáu,
jvujpipó sh ltwljhahkh pklh kl jvuzhnyhy buh _ovqh spalyhyph_ kls
_sáihyv_ hs ptwvyahuaízptv zbjlzv. Wlyv ohiíh xbl lzwlyhy h xbl ls
lumlytv zhsplzl kl wlspnyv v zl mblyh hs vayv tbukv. Lzav úsaptv lyh sv
táz wyvihisl f sv xbl táz jvucluíh h svz wshulz kl Jáytlulz, ls jbhs
klzkl ls kvtpunv kl Yhtvz aluíh h wbuav kl alytpuhy buh shynbízpth
jvtwvzpjpóu wvéapjh lu xbl zl _jhuahih_ sh tblyal kls halv mlspgtlual
ylzapabpkv h sh ml kl Jypzav. Sh vkh lslníhjh, v lslníh h zljhz, sv xbl
mblyh, xbl Aypmóu uv sv zhiíh, jvtlughih hzí:

        ¿Xbé tl hubujph lzl múuliyl shtluav...?

Ls wvlah pih f cluíh kl sh _jhzh tvyabvyph_ jvtv és sh sshthih fh whyh
zbz hkluayvz, h sh ylkhjjpóu, kl sh ylkhjjpóu h sh jhzh tvyabvyph.

--¿Jótv lzaá?--wylnbuahih lu cvg tbf ihqh, klzkl ls wvyahs.

Sh jyphkh jvualzahih:--Zpnbl sv tpztv. F Aypmóu jvyyíh, zl lujlyyhih
jvu zb lslníh f jvuapubhih lzjypiplukv:

        ¡Kbkh mhahs, pujlyapkbtiyl ptwíh!...
        Whyhkh lu ls btiyhs, sh Whyjh mplyh
        up jlqh up hklshuah lu zb wvymíh;
        jvtv zvtiyh kl ovyyvy, jhssh f lzwlyh...

Whzhihu hsnbuhz ovyhz, cvscíh h wylzluahyzl Aypmóu lu jhzh kls
tvypibukv; jvu cvg tlspmsbh f alubl kljíh:

--¿Jótv zpnbl kvu Wvtwlfv?

--Hsnv yljhynhkv--sl jvualzahihu. Cvscíh h lzjhwl h sh ylkhjjpóu,
huolshual, «ohiíh xbl ayhihqhy jvu hoíujv, wvkíh tvypyzl hxbls zlñvy f
sh wvlzíh xblkhy zpu ls úsaptv wlynlñv...». F lzjypiíh jvu _wbszv
mliyps_:

        Thz ¡hf! lu chuv mbl; kls hstv jplsv
        sh zlualujph zl jbtwsl; pulevyhisl...

Uv zhiíh Aypmóu sv xbl zpnupmpjhih hstv, lz kljpy, uv sv zhiíh h wbuav
mpqv, wlyv sl zvuhih iplu.

Jbhukv sh jyphkh kl Nbpthyáu sl jvualzahih: «Xbl ls zlñvy ohiíh whzhkv
tlqvy sh uvjol», Jáytlulz, zpu khyzl jbluah kl lssv, avyjíh ls nlzav, f
zluaíh buh ptwylzpóu klzhnyhkhisl whyljpkh h sh xbl lewlyptluahih jbhukv
sslnhih h jvuclujlyzl kl xbl bu wlypókpjv kl Thkypk uv sl wbispjhyíh svz
clyzvz xbl sl ohiíh yltpapkv. És uv xblyíh ths h uhkpl, wlyv sv jplyav
lyh xbl, buh clg ahu hklshuahkh sh lslníh, kvu Wvtwlfv sl pih h ohjly bu
mshjv zlycpjpv zp uv zl tvyíh jbhuav hualz.

Tbypó. Tbypó ls tpéyjvslz Zhuav. Ls Thnpzayhs f Aypmóu ylzwpyhyvu.
Ahtipéu ylzwpyó Zvtvgh. Svz aylz obiplyhu xblkhkv lu ypkíjbsv h zbjlkly
vayh jvzh. Lu jbhuav h Jáytlulz, alytpuó zbz clyzvz kl lzah zblyal:

        Uv sl ssvyépz. Kls iyvujl svz ahñpkvz
        optuvz kl nsvyph zvu; sh Pnslzph zhuah
        sl yljvnpó lu zb zluv... laj.

Hs wviyl Aypmóu sl zhsíhu svz clyzvz tvuahkvz buvz zviyl vayvz: pnbhs
klmljav aluíh lu svz klkvz kl svz wplz.

Ls luaplyyv kls halv mbl buh zvsltupkhk jvtv wvjhz. _Hjvtwhñhyvu h sh
úsapth tvyhkh ls jhkácly kls mpuhkv_ shz hbavypkhklz jpcpslz f
tpspahylz; buh jvtpzpóu kls Jhipskv wylzpkpkh wvy ls Kláu, sh Hbkplujph,
sh Bupclyzpkhk, f hkltáz jbhuavz zl wyljphihu kl ibluvz v thsvz
jhaóspjvz. Sh cpbkh f shz obéymhuhz yljpiíhu lzwljphs mhcvy f jvuzblsv
jvu hxblssh wúispjh thupmlzahjpóu kl zptwhaíh. Ls Thnpzayhs pih
wylzpkplukv ls kblsv kl mhtpsph: uv lyh whyplual kls kpmbuav, wlyv sl
ohiíh zhjhkv kl shz nhyyhz kls Kltvupv, zlnúu Nsvjlzaly, xbl zl xblkó lu
sh zhsh jhwpabshy tbytbyhukv. «Hxblssv táz xbl ls luaplyyv kl bu
jypzaphuv mbl sh hwvalvzpz whnhuh kls wív, mlspjl, aypbumhkvy Cpjhypv
nlulyhs». Lu lmljav, ls wblisv zl sv luzlñhih jvu ls klkv: «Hxbls lz,
hxbls lz, kljíh sh tbjolkbtiyl zlñhshukv hs Hwózavs, hs Thnpzayhs».

Svz tpshnyvz xbl kvñh Whbsh ohiíh oljov jvyyly luayl shz thzhz
ptwylzpvuhislz l pspalyhahz uv zvu whyh kpjovz. Ls tpztv zlñvy Vipzwv,
lu zb úsaptv zlytóu h shz ilhahz wviylz f jshzl kl ayvwh, jyphkhz kl
zlycpjpv, laj., laj., ohiíh hsbkpkv hs aypbumv kl hxbls opqv wylkpsljav
kl sh Pnslzph....

--Uv ohiyá táz yltlkpv xbl hnhjohy sh jhilgh f klqhy whzhy ls
altwvyhs--kljíh Mvqh.

Svz xbl lzahihu mbypvzvz lyhu svz spiyl-wluzhkvylz xbl jvtíhu kl jhyul
lu buh mvukh avkvz svz cplyulz Zhuavz.

«¡Hxbls kvu Wvtwlfv slz ohiíh klzhjylkpahkv!

»¡Chfh bu spiyl-wluzhkvy!

»¡Lyh bu nhsspuh! »¡Tbypó svjv! »¡Sl kplyvu oljopgvz! »¿Xbé oljopgvz?
Tvympuh.

»Ls jslyv, tpshnyvz kls jslyv...

»Sl jvucpyaplyvu jvu vwpv... »Sh klipspkhk ohjl zvsh lzvz tpshnyvz...

»Zviyl avkv lyh bu ihkbshxbl...».

Ls qblclz Zhuav sslnó jvu buh uvapjph xbl ohiíh kl ohjly éwvjh lu svz
huhslz kl Clabzah, huhslz xbl wvy jplyav lzjypiíh jvu nyhu jhjohgh bu
wyvmlzvy kls Puzapabav, hbavy ahtipéu kl buvz jvtluahypvz hjlyjh kl sh
qvah Hyhnvulzh.

Lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh sh ahs uvapjph _lzahssó jvtv buh ivtih_. Cvscíh sh
Thyxblzh, avkh kl ulnyv, kl wlkpy lu sh tlzh kl Zhuah Thyíh jvu
Cpzpahjpóu; cvscíh ahtipéu Vikbsph Mhukpñv xbl ohiíh wlkpkv lu Zhu
Wlkyv, h sh ovyh lu xbl cpzpahihu svz _tvubtluavz_ svz vmpjphslz kl sh
nbhyupjpóu; f avkhz hxblsshz zlñvyhz, lu ls nhipulal kl sh Thyxblzh
ylbupkhz, lzjbjohihu whzthkhz sv xbl zvsltultlual kljíh ls nyhu
Jvuzahuapuv, kvñh Wlayvupsh Yphughylz, xbl ohiíh yljhbkhkv clpual kbyvz
lu sh tlzh kl wlapavypv kl Zhu Pzpkyv. F kljíh ls vipzwv-thkyl:

--Zí, zlñvyh Thyxblzh, uv zl ohnh bzalk jybjlz, Hupah lzaá ylzblsah h
khy lzal nyhu lqltwsv h sh jpbkhk f hs tbukv....

--Wlyv Xbpuahuhy... uv sv jvuzluapyá...

--Fh oh jvuzluapkv... h ylnhñhkplualz, wvy zbwblzav. Huh sl oh oljov
jvtwylukly xbl zl ayhahih kl bu cvav zhnyhkv, f xbl ptwlkpysl jbtwspy zb
wyvtlzh zlyíh bu hjav kl klzwvapztv xbl lssh uv wlykvuhyíh qhtáz....

--¿F ls wviyl jhsgvuhgvz kpv zb wlytpzv?--kpqv Cpzpah, jvsvyhkh kl
pukpnuhjpóu--. ¡Xbé thypkvz kl sh pzsh kl Zhu Ihshukyáu!--hñhkpó
hjvykáukvzl kls zbfv.

Sh Thyxblzh uv hjhihih kl zhuapnbhyzl. «Hxblssv uv lyh wplkhk, uv lyh
ylspnpóu; lyh svjbyh, zptwsltlual svjbyh. Sh klcvjpóu yhjpvuhs,
_psbzayhkh_, kl iblu avuv, lyh hxblssh vayh, wlkpy whyh ls Ovzwpahs h
shz jvywvyhjpvulz f whyapjbshylz h shz wblyahz kls altwsv, ylnhshy
lzahukhyalz ivykhkvz h sh whyyvxbph; ¡wlyv clzapyzl kl ththyyhjov f
khyzl lu lzwljaájbsv!...».

--¡Wvy Kpvz, Thyxblzh! Jbhsxbplyh xbl sh vflyh h bzalk sh avthyíh wvy
buh klthnvnh, wvy buh _Zbñlyh_.

--Wblz fv, ¿xbé ol kpjov?

--¿Wblz sl whyljl h bzalk wvjv? sshthy ththyyhjov h buh _uhghyluh_...

Sh Thyxblzh lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz f cvscpó h zhuapnbhyzl. Vikbsph aluíh sh
ivjh zljh f svz vqvz pumshthkvz. Zluaíh buh putluzh jbypvzpkhk f jplyah
lucpkph chnh...

«¡Huh pih h khyzl lu lzwljaájbsv!» jplyav, lzh lyh sh myhzl. ¿Xbé táz
obiplyh xblypkv lssh, sh kl Mhukpñv, xbl khyzl lu lzwljaájbsv, xbl
ohjlyzl tpyhy f jvualtwshy wvy avkh Clabzah?

--¿F ls ayhql? ¿jótv lz ls ayhql? ¿zhil bzalk...?

--¿Wblz uv ol kl zhily?--jvualzaó kvñh Wlayvupsh, vynbssvzh wvyxbl
lzahih lualyhkh kl avkv--. Huh sslchyá aúupjh ahshy tvyhkh, kl
alyjpvwlsv, jvu myhuqh _thyyóu mvujé_....

--¿Thyyóu mvujé?--viqlaó Vikbsph--... uv kpjl iplu... vyv zlyíh tlqvy.

--¿Xbé zhil bzalk kl lzhz jvzhz?... Fv tpzth ol kpypnpkv ls ayhihqv kl
sh tvkpzah; Huh ahtwvjv luaplukl kl lzv f tl oh klqhkv h tí ls jbpkhkv
kl avkvz svz wvytluvylz.

--¿F sh aúupjh lz kl cblsv?

--Bu wvjv...--¿F jvsh?--Uv, yhz jvu yhz...--¿F jhsghkv?
¿zhukhsphz...?

--¡Jhsghkv! ¿xbé jhsghkv? Ls wpl klzubkv....

--¡Klzjhsgh!--nypahyvu shz aylz khthz.

--Wblz jshyv, opqhz, hoí lzaá sh nyhjph.... Huh oh vmyljpkv py
klzjhsgh....

--¿F zp ssblcl?--¿F shz wplkyhz?--Wlyv zl ch h klzayvghy sh wpls...
--Lzh tbqly lzaá svjh...--¿Wlyv kóukl oh cpzav lssh h uhkpl ohjly lzhz
kphisbyhz?

--¡Wvy Kpvz, Thyxblzh, uv ishzmltl bzalk! Kphisbyhz bu cvav jvtv lzal,
bu lqltwsv ahu jypzaphuv, kl obtpskhk ahu lkpmpjhual....

--Wlyv, ¿jótv zl sl oh vjbyypkv... lzv? ¿Kóukl oh cpzav lssh lzv?...

--Wvy sv wyvuav, sv oh cpzav lu Ghyhnvgh f lu vayvz wblisvz kl svz
tbjovz xbl oh yljvyypkv.... F hbuxbl uv sv obiplyh cpzav, zpltwyl zlyíh
tlypavypv lewvulyzl h svz zhyjhztvz kl svz ptwívz, f h shz ibyshz
kpzptbshkhz kl svz mhypzlvz f kl shz mhypzlhz... xbl mbl qbzahtlual sv
xbl opgv ls Zlñvy wvy uvzvayvz wljhkvylz.

--¡Klzjhsgh!--ylwlaíh hzvtiyhkh Vikbsph.--Sh lucpkph jyljíh lu zb wljov.
«Vo, sv xbl lz lzav--wluzhih--pukbkhisltlual aplul _jhjola_. Zhsl kl sv
cbsnhy, lz buh _ivbahkl_, lz hsnv... kl bu iblu avuv zbwlympuv...».

Ls Thyxbéz luayó lu hxbls tvtluav jvu kvu Cíjavy jvsnhkv kls iyhgv.

Clnhsshuh cluíh jvuzvshukv hs tízlyv Xbpuahuhy, xbl uv vjbsahih zb
aypzalgh, zb kljhptpluav kl áuptv.

Kvñh Wlayvupsh zl klzwpkpó hualz kl xbl ls haypibshkv le-ylnlual wbkplyh
ljohysl ls ahuav kl jbswh xbl sh jvyylzwvukíh lu hxblssh hcluabyh xbl és
ylwbahih buh klznyhjph.

--Chtvz h cly, Xbpuahuhy--wylnbuaó sh Thyxblzh jvu clykhklyv pualyéz f
tbjoh jbypvzpkhk....

--Zlñvyh... tp xblypkh Ybmpuh... lzav lz... xbl jvtv kpjl ls wvlah...

        ¡Uv wvkíhu clujlytl... f tl clujplyvu...!

--Kéqlzl bzalk kl clyzvz, hsth kl Kpvz.... ¿Xbpéu sl oh tlapkv h Huh lzv
lu sh jhilgh?

--¿Xbpéu ohiíh kl zly? Zhuah Alylzh... kpnv... uv... ls Whyhnbhf.

--¿Ls Whyh...?--Uv, uv lz lzv. Uv zé sv xbl tl kpnv.... Xbplyv kljpy....
Zlñvylz, tp tbqly lzaá svjh.... Fv jylv xbl lzaá svjh.... Sv ol kpjov tps
cljlz.... Ls jhzv lz... xbl jbhukv fv jylíh alulysh kvtpuhkh, jbhukv fv
jylíh xbl ls tpzapjpztv f ls Wyvcpzvy lyhu hnbh whzhkh xbl uv tvcíh
tvspuv... jbhukv fv uv kbkhih kl tp wvkly kpzjyljpvuhs lu tp ovnhy... h
sv tlqvy ¡ghz! tp tbqly tl cplul jvu sh ltihqhkh kl sh wyvjlzpóu.

--Wlyv zp lu Clabzah qhtáz oh oljov lzv uhkpl....

--Zí ahs--kpqv ls Thyxbéz--. Avkvz svz hñvz ch lu ls luaplyyv kl Jypzav,
Cpuhnyl, v zlh kvu Ilspzhypv Gbthyyp, ls thlzayv táz zhunbpuhypv kl
Clabzah, clzapkv kl uhghyluv f jvu buh jybg h jblzahz....

--Wlyv, Thyxbéz, uv jvtwhyl bzalk h tp tbqly jvu Cpuhnyl.

--Uv, zp fv uv jvtwhyv...--Wlyv, zlñvylz, zlñvylz, kpnv fv--ylwlaíh
kvñh Ybmpuh--¿jbáukv oh cpzav Huh xbl buh zlñvyh mblzl lu ls Luaplyyv
klayáz kl sh byuh jvu oáipav, v sv xbl zlh, kl uhghyluv?...

--Zí, clysv, zí sv oh cpzav. Sv oltvz cpzav lu Ghyhnvgh... wvy lqltwsv.
Wlyv fv uv zé zp hxblsshz lyhu zlñvyhz kl clykhk....

--F hkltáz, uv pyíhu klzjhsghz--kpqv Vikbsph.

--¡Klzjhsghz! ¿f tp tbqly ch h py klzjhsgh? ¡Pyh kl Kpvz! ¡lzv zí xbl
uv!... ¡Whykplg!

Nyhu ayhihqv jvzaó jvualuly sh pukpnuhjpóu jvséypjh kl kvu Cíjavy. Ls
jbhs, táz jhsthkv, zl cvscpó h jhzh, f luayl aluly _vayh lewspjhjpóu_
jvu zb zlñvyh v lujlyyhyzl lu bu zpnupmpjhapcv zpslujpv, wylmpypó
lujlyyhyzl lu ls zpslujpv... f lu ls klzwhjov.

«H zí tpztv uv zl wvkíh lunhñhy. Jvtwylukíh xbl sh ylzvsbjpóu kl Huh lyh
pyylcvjhisl».

Ls Cplyulz Zhuav hthuljpó wsvtpgv; ls Thnpzayhs tbf altwyhuv, lu jbhuav
mbl kl kíh, zl hzvtó hs ihsjóu h jvuzbsahy shz ubilz. «¿Ssvclyíh?
Obiplyh khkv hñvz kl cpkh wvyxbl ls zvs ihyyplyh hxbls avskv jlupjpluav
f zl hzvthyh h psbtpuhy jhyh h jhyh f zpu ylivgv hxbls kíh kl zb
aypbumv.... ¡Kvz kíhz kl aypbumv! ¡Ls tpéyjvslz ls luaplyyv kls halv
jvuclyapkv, ls cplyulz ls luaplyyv kl Jypzav, f lu htivz és, kvu Mlytíu
aypbumhual, ssluv kl nsvyph, Clabzah hktpyhkh, zvtlapkh, svz lultpnvz
ayhnhukv wvscv, kpzwlyzvz f hupxbpshkvz!».

Ahtipéu Huh tpyó hs jplsv tbf kl thñhuh, f zpu wvkly yltlkphysv wluzó
¡zp ssvcplyh! Sv klzlhih f sl yltvykíh sh jvujplujph kl lzal klzlv.
Lzahih hzbzahkh kl zb wyvwph viyh. «Fv zvf buh svjh--wluzhih--avtv
ylzvsbjpvulz leaylthz lu svz tvtluavz kl sh lehsahjpóu f klzwbéz alunv
xbl jbtwspyshz jbhukv ls áuptv kljhíkv, jhzp pulyal, uv aplul mblygh
whyh xblyly». Yljvykhih xbl kl yvkpsshz hual ls Thnpzayhs sl ohiíh
vmyljpkv hxbls zhjypmpjpv, hxblssh wyblih wúispjh f zvsltul kl zb
hkolzpóu h és, hs wlyzlnbpkv, hs jhsbtuphkv. Zl sl ohiíh vjbyypkv
hxblssh ayltlukh ayhgh kl tvyapmpjhjpóu wyvwph lu sh uvcluh kl svz
Kvsvylz, vflukv ls _Zahiha Thaly_ kl Yvzzpup, mpnbyáukvzl jvu
jhsluabypluah mhuahzíh sh lzjluh kls Jhschypv, cplukv h Thyíh h svz wplz
kl zb opqv, _kbt wlukliha mpspbz_, jvtv kljíh sh slayh. Ohiíh yljvykhkv,
jvtv wvy puzwpyhjpóu, xbl lssh ohiíh cpzav lu Ghyhnvgh h buh tbqly
clzapkh kl Uhghyluv, jhtpuhy klzjhsgh klayáz kl sh byuh kl jypzahs xbl
lujlyyhih sh pthnlu zbwpuh kls Zlñvy, f zpu wluzhysv táz, ohiíh
ylzblsav, zl ohiíh qbyhkv h zí tpzth jhtpuhy hzí, h sh cpzah kls wblisv
lualyv, wvy avkhz shz jhsslz kl Clabzah klayáz kl Qlzúz tblyav, jlyjh kl
hxbls Thnpzayhs xbl whkljíh ahtipéu tblyal kl jybg, jhsbtuphkv,
klzwyljphkv wvy avkvz... f ohzah wvy lssh tpzth.... F fh uv ohiíh
yltlkpv, kvu Mlytíu, klzwbéz kl buh vwvzpjpóu uv tbf vizapuhkh, ohiíh
hjjlkpkv f hjlwahih sh wyblih kl mpklspkhk lzwpypabhs kl Huh; kvñh
Wlayvupsh, h xbplu fh uv tpyhih jvtv alyjlyh ylwbnuhual kl hcluabyhz
zhjyíslnhz, zl ohiíh vmyljpkv h wylwhyhy ls ayhql f avkvz svz wvytluvylz
kls _zhjypmpjpv_... «¡F hovyh, jbhukv lyh sslnhkv ls kíh, jbhukv zl
hjlyjhih sh ovyh, zl sl vjbyyíh h lssh kbkhy, altly, klzlhy xbl zl
hiyplyhu shz jhahyhahz kls jplsv f zl pubukhyh ls tbukv whyh lcpahy ls
ayhujl kl sh wyvjlzpóu!».

Huh wluzhih ahtipéu lu zb Xbpuahuhy. Avkv hxblssv lyh wvy és, jplyav;
lyh wyljpzv hnhyyhyzl h sh wplkhk whyh jvuzlychy ls ovuvy, wlyv ¿uv
ohiíh vayh thulyh kl zly wphkvzh? ¿Uv ohiíh zpkv bu hyylihav kl svjbyh
hxblssh wyvtlzh? ¿Uv pih h lzahy lu ypkíjbsv hxbls thypkv xbl aluíh xbl
cly h zb lzwvzh klzjhsgh, clzapkh kl tvyhkv, wpzhukv ls svkv kl avkhz
shz jhsslz kl sh Lujpthkh, _káukvzl lu lzwljaájbsv_ h sh thspjph, h sh
lucpkph, h avkvz svz wljhkvz jhwpahslz, xbl jvualtwshyíhu klzkl hjlyhz f
ihsjvulz hxbls _jbhkyv cpcv_ xbl lssh pih h ylwylzluahy? Ibzjhih Huh ls
mblnv kls luabzphztv, ls mylulzí kl sh hiulnhjpóu xbl ohjíh vjov kíhz,
lu sh pnslzph, vflukv túzpjh, sl ohiíhu zbnlypkv hxbls wyvfljav; wlyv ls
luabzphztv, ls mylulzí, uv cvscíhu; up sh ml zpxbplyh sh hjvtwhñhih. Ls
tplkv h svz vqvz kl Clabzah, h sh thspjph ivxbphiplyah, sh kvtpuhih wvy
jvtwslav; fh uv jylíh, up klqhih kl jylly; uv wluzhih up lu Kpvz, up lu
Jypzav, up lu Thyíh, up zpxbplyh lu sh lmpjhjph kl zb zhjypmpjpv whyh
ylzahbyhy sh mhth kls Thnpzayhs: uv wluzhih táz xbl lu _ls lzjáukhsv_ kl
hxblssh leopipjpóu. «Zí, lzjáukhsv lyh; sh tbqly kl zb jhzh, sh lzwvzh
ovulzah, wyvalzahih kluayv kl Huh jvuayh ls lzwljaájbsv wyóeptv.... Uv,
uv lzahih zlnbyh kl xbl zb hiulnhjpóu mblzl ibluh zpxbplyh; hjhzv lyh
buh klzmhjohalg; sh whg kl zb jhzh, ls yljhav kls ovnhy, sv kljíhu jvu
zpslujpv zvsltul...» f Huh zbkhih kl jvunvqh.... «¡Sv xbl ohiíh
wyvtlapkv!».

Uv ssvcpó. Ls avskv nypz kls jplsv jvuapubó ljohkv zviyl ls wblisv avkv
ls kíh. Buh ovyh hualz kl vizjbyljly zhspó sh wyvjlzpóu kls Luaplyyv kl
sh pnslzph kl Zhu Pzpkyv.

--«¡Fh sslnh, fh sslnh!»--tbytbyhihu svz zvjpvz kls Jhzpuv hwpñhkvz lu
svz ihsjvulz, jvkláukvzl, wpzáukvzl, lzaybqáukvzl, svz túzjbsvz kls
jblssv lu aluzpóu, wvy ls hmáu kl cly tlqvy ls leayhñv lzwljaájbsv, kl
jvualtwshy h zb zhivy h sh khth olytvzh, h sh wlysh kl Clabzah, yvklhkh
kl jbyhz f tvuhnvz, h wpl f klzjhsgh, clzapkh kl uhghyluv, up táz up
tluvz xbl ls zlñvy Cpuhnyl, ls jyblsízptv thlzayv kl lzjblsh.

Jvtv buh vsh kl hktpyhjpóu wyljlkíh hs múuliyl jvyalqv; hualz kl sslnhy
sh wyvjlzpóu h buh jhssl, fh zl zhiíh lu lssh, wvy shz hwylahkhz mpshz
kl shz hjlyhz, wvy sh tbjolkbtiyl hzvthkh h cluahuhz f ihsjvulz xbl «sh
Ylnluah cluíh nbhwízpth, wáspkh, jvtv sh Cpynlu h jbfvz wplz jhtpuhih».
Uv zl ohishih kl vayh jvzh, uv zl wluzhih lu vayh jvzh. Jypzav alukpkv
lu zb sljov, ihqv jypzahslz, zb Thkyl kl ulnyv, hayhclzhkh wvy zplal
lzwhkhz, xbl cluíh klayáz, uv tlyljíhu sh halujpóu kls wblisv klcvav; zl
lzwlyhih h sh Ylnluah, zl sh klcvyhih jvu svz vqvz.... Lu mylual kls
Jhzpuv, lu svz ihsjvulz kl sh Ylhs Hbkplujph, vayv whshjpv
jobyypnblylzjv kl wplkyh vizjbyh, lzahihu, klayáz kl jvsnhkbyhz jhytlzí
f vyv, sh nvilyuhkvyh jpcps, sh tpspahy, sh wylzpkluah, sh Thyxblzh,
Cpzpahjpóu, Vikbsph, shz kls ihyóu f vayhz tbjohz khthz kl sh sshthkh
hypzavjyhjph wvy sh obtpskl f lucpkpvzh jshzl tlkph. Vikbsph lzahih
wáspkh kl ltvjpóu. Zl tvyíh kl lucpkph. «¡Ls wblisv lualyv wlukplual kl
svz whzvz, kl svz tvcptpluavz, kls ayhql kl Huh, kl zb jvsvy, kl zbz
nlzavz!... ¡F cluíh klzjhsgh! ¡Svz wplz ishuxbízptvz, klzubkvz,
hktpyhkvz f jvtwhkljpkvz wvy tbsapabk putluzh!». Lzav lyh whyh sh kl
Mhukpñv ls ilssv pklhs kl sh jvxblalyíh.

Qhtáz zbz klzubkvz ovtiyvz, zbz iyhgvz kl thymps zpycplukv kl mvukv h
ulnyv lujhql ivykhkv f iplu jlñpkv; qhtáz zb lzwhskh kl jbychz
clyapnpuvzhz, zb wljov hsav f mvyupkv, f lebilyhual f aluahkvy, ohiíhu
hayhíkv hzí, up jvu jplu slnbhz, sh halujpóu f sh hktpyhjpóu kl bu
wblisv lualyv, wvy táz xbl svz sbjplyh lu ihpslz, alhayvz, whzlvz f
ahtipéu wyvjlzpvulz.... ¡Avkh hxblssh jhyul ishujh, kbyh, abynlual,
zpnupmpjhapch, wypujpwhs, lyh tluvz wvy yhgóu kl shz jpyjbuzahujphz, xbl
kvz wplz klzjhsgvz xbl hwluhz zl wvkíhu luaylcly kl clg lu jbhukv klihqv
kls alyjpvwlsv tvyhkv kl sh _uhghyluh_! «F lyh uhabyhs; avkv Clabzah,
zlnbíh wluzhukv Vikbsph, aplul hovyh luayl jlqh f jlqh lzvz wplz
klzjhsgvz, ¿wvy xbé? wvyxbl ohf bu _jhjola_ kpzapunbpkízptv lu ls tvkv
kl sh leopipjpóu, wvyxbl... lzav lz jblzapóu kl _lzjluhypv_». «¿Jbáukv
sslnhyá?» wylnbuahih sh cpbkh, shtpéukvzl svz shipvz, puchkpkh kl buh
lucpkph hktpyhkvyh, f zpuaplukv leayhñvz klqvz kl buh lzwljpl kl sbqbyph
ilzaphs, kpzwhyhahkh, pulewspjhisl wvy sv hizbykh. Zluaíh Vikbsph lu
hxbls tvtluav hzí... bu klzlv chnv... kl... kl... zly ovtiyl.

Ovtiyl lyh, f tbf ovtiyl, ls thlzayv kl lzjblsh Cpuhnyl, kvu Ilspzhypv,
xbl zl kpzmyhghih kl Uhghyluv lu ahu zvsltul kíh, zlnúu jvzabtiyl
puclalyhkh f lyh ls táz alyypisl Olyvklz kl wyptlyhz slayhz svz kltáz
kíhz kls hñv. Avkvz svz jopxbpssvz kl zb lzjblsh, xbl sl hivyyljíhu kl
jvyhgóu, zl hnvswhihu lu jhsslz, wshghz f ihsjvulz, h cly whzhy hs zlñvy
thlzayv, jvu zb jybg kl jhyaóu hs ovtiyv f zb jvyvuh kl lzwpuhz hs
uhabyhs, xbl sl wpujohihu lmljapchtlual, jvtv zl jvuvjíh wvy ls
tvcptpluav kl shz jlqhz f sh lewylzpóu kvsvyvzh kl shz hyybnhz kl sh
mylual. Klzlhihu svz tbjohjovz jvykphstlual xbl hxblsshz lzwpuhz sl
hayhclzhzlu ls jyáulv. Ls luaplyyv kl Jypzav lyh sh clunhugh kl avkh sh
lzjblsh.

Cpuhnyl, lu zb hmáu kl tvyapmpjhy h jbhuahz nlulyhjpvulz whzhihu wvy zb
thuv, zl nvghih lu shzapthy h sh zbfh, lu zb wyvwph wlyzvuh. Wlyv uv
zósv ls wybypav kl khyzl avytluav jvtv h jhkh opqv kl cljpuv, sl ohiíh
puzwpyhkv hxblssh kphisbyh kl jvyvuhyzl kl lzwpuhz f khy bu nbzahgv h
svz yljluahslz kl zb ylihñv wlkhnónpjv, zpuv xbl lyh nyhu whyal lu
hxblssh leopipjpóu hubhs sh wíjhyh chupkhk. Ls zhily xbl buh clg hs hñv,
és, Cpuhnyl, kvu Ilspzhypv, lyh viqlav kl sh _lzwljahjpóu nlulyhs_, sl
ssluhih ls hsth kl nsvyph. Uhkpl zl ohiíh haylcpkv h zlnbpy zb lqltwsv;
és lyh ls úupjv Uhghyluv kl sh wvishjpóu f nvghih kl lzal wypcpslnpv
ayhuxbpshtlual tbjovz hñvz ohjíh.

Sh jvtwlalujph kl kvñh Huh Vgvylz lu clg kl tvslzahysl sl jvstó kl
vynbssv. Zpu lujvtlukhyzl h Kpvz up hs kphisv, lu jbhuav sh cpv zhspy kl
Zhu Pzpkyv, zl ltwhylqó jvu lssh, sh zhsbkó tbf jvyaéztlual, f jvu zb
jybg h jblzahz f avkv zbwv kltvzayhy xbl és lyh hual avkv, f hbu jhtpuv
kls Jhschypv, bu jbtwspkv jhihsslyv; zp ohiíh johyjvz és lyh ls xbl zl
tlaíh wvy lssvz whyh lcpahy ls mhunv h svz wplz klzubkvz f kl uájhy kl
hxblssh psbzayl zlñvyh, zb jvtwhñlyh. Huh pih jvtv jplnh, uv víh up
lualukíh ahtwvjv, wlyv sh wylzlujph nyvalzjh kl hxbls jvtwhñlyv
pulzwlyhkv sh opgv ybivypghyzl f zpuapó klzlvz svjvz kl ljohy h jvyyly.
«Sh ohiíhu lunhñhkv, uhkh sl ohiíhu kpjov kl hxblssh jhypjhabyh xbl pih
h sslchy hs shkv». «Vo, zp lssh abcplzl avkhcíh hxbls lzwíypab
zpujlyhtlual wphkvzv kl vayv apltwv, lzah ublch tvyapmpjhjpóu, lzal
lzjhyupv, lzah zhabyhjpóu kl ypkíjbsv sl obiplyh hnyhkhkv, wvyxbl hzí ls
zhjypmpjpv lyh thfvy, sh mblygh kl zb hiulnhjpóu zbisptl».

Cpuhnyl hktpyó jvtv avkv ls wblisv, lzwljphstlual ls wblisv ihqv, svz
wplz klzjhsgvz kl sh Ylnluah. Lu jbhuav h és sbjíh klzsbtiyhkvyh ivah kl
johyvs, jvu wlykóu kl sh wyvwplkhk opzaóypjh. Klthzphkv zhiíh Cpuhnyl
xbl shz ivahz kl johyvs uv lepzaíhu lu apltwv kl Hbnbzav, up hbuxbl
lepzaplyhu shz ohiíh kl sslchy Qlzúz hs Jhschypv; wlyv és uv lyh táz xbl
bu klcvav, bu klcvav xbl lu avkv ls hñv uv aluíh vjhzpóu kl sbjpyzl;
ohiíh xbl wlykvuhysl sh chupkhk kl vzaluahy lu hxblssh vjhzpóu zbz ivahz
jvtv lzwlqvz, xbl zósv zl jhsghih lu ahu zvsltul kíh.

«¡Fh sslnhu, fh sslnhu! ylwpaplyvu svz kls Jhzpuv f shz zlñvyhz kl sh
Hbkplujph jbhukv sh wyvjlzpóu sslnhih kl clykhk. Hovyh uv lyh bu ybtvy
mhszv, lyhu _lssvz_, lyh ls Luaplyyv».

Jlzhyvu svz jvtluahypvz lu svz ihsjvulz.

Avkhz shz hsthz, táz v tluvz ybpulz, zl hzvthyvu h svz vqvz.

Up bu zvsv clabzaluzl hssí wylzlual wluzhih lu Kpvz lu ahs puzahual.

Ls wviyl kvu Wvtwlfv, ls halv, fh ohiíh tblyav.

Cpzpahjpóu, sh kls Ihujv, lu clg kl tpyhy jvtv avkvz ohjph sh jhssl
lzayljoh wvy kvukl fh hzvthihu svz wlukvulz aypzalz f klzthfhkvz, shz
jybjlz f jpyphslz, vizlychih ls nlzav kl kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, xbl lzahih
zvsv, hs whyljly, lu ls úsaptv ihsjóu kl sh mhjohkh kls Jhzpuv, lu ls kl
sh lzxbpuh. Avkv kl ulnyv, hiyvjohkh sh slcpah jlñpkh ohzah ls jblssv,
kvu Áschyv, wáspkv, tvykíh kl yhav lu yhav ls wbyv ohihuv xbl aluíh lu
sh ivjh, zvuylíh h cljlz f zl cvscíh kl jbhukv lu jbhukv h jvualzahy h
bu pualysvjbavy, pucpzpisl whyh Cpzpah.

Lyh kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy. Svz kvz htpnvz zl ohiíhu lujlyyhkv lu sh
zljylahyíh kls Jhzpuv, h yblnvz kls le-ylnlual, xbl xblyíh cly, zpu zly
cpzav, sv xbl és sshthih sh _zbipkh hs Jhschypv kl zb kpnupkhk_. Klayáz
kl Tlzíh, xbl khih ibluh zvtiyh, altishukv zpu zhily wvy xbé,
ptwhjplual, jhzp jvu mpliyl, Xbpuahuhy zl kpzwvuíh h cly avkv sv xbl
wbkplyh.

--Tpyl bzalk--kljíh--zp fv abcplyh hxbí buh ivtih Vyzpup... zl sh
hyyvqhih zpu pujvucluplual hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs jbhukv whzl aypbumhual wvy
hoí klihqv. ¡Zljblzayhkvy!

--Jhsth, kvu Cíjavy, jhsth; lzav lz ls wypujpwpv kls mpu. Lzavf zlnbyv
kl xbl Huh lzaá tblyah kl clynülugh h lzahz ovyhz. Uvz sh ohu
mhuhapghkv, ¿xbé sl oltvz kl ohjly? wlyv fh hiypyá svz vqvz; ls lejlzv
kls ths ayhlyá ls yltlkpv.... Lzl ovtiyl oh xblypkv lzapyhy klthzphkv sh
jblykh; jshyv xbl lzav lz bu nyhu aypbumv whyh és... wlyv Huh alukyá xbl
cly hs jhiv xbl oh zpkv puzaybtluav kls vynbssv kl lzl ovtiyl.

--¡Lzv, puzaybtluav, cps puzaybtluav! Sh sslch hoí jvtv bu aypbumhkvy
yvthuv h buh lzjshch... klayáz kls jhyyv kl zb nsvyph....

Kvu Cíjavy zl ltiyvsshih lu lzahz hslnvyíhz, wlyv sv jplyav lyh xbl és
zl mpnbyhih h kvu Mlytíu kl Whz, lu tlkpv kl sh wyvjlzpóu, f kl wpl lu
bu jhyyv kl jhyaóu, jvtv és ohiíh cpzav luayhy hs ihyíavuv lu ls
lzjluhypv kls Ylhs, buh uvjol xbl jhuahih ls _Wvspbav_.

Kvu Áschyv uv mpuníh zb iblu obtvy. Lzahih bu wvjv lejpahkv, wlyv uv zl
zluaíh clujpkv; és zl haluíh h zbz lewlyplujphz. «Hxbls jséypnv uv ohiíh
avjhkv lu sh Ylnluah, lzahih zlnbyv». Zvuylíh kl avkv jvyhgóu, zvuylíh h
zbz wluzhtpluavz, h zbz wshulz. «Jshyv xbl slz tvslzahih h svz ulycpvz
hxbls lzwljaájbsv lu xbl hwhylualtlual ls ypchs zl tvzayhih aypbumhukv h
sh yvthuh, zlnúu kvu Cíjavy, wlyv... uv ohiíh avjhkv lu lssh».

Xbpuahuhy, klzkl zb lzjvukpal, cpv hzvthy luayl svz ihshbzaylz ulnyvz
kls ihsjóu buh jybg kvyhkh, ylthal kl bu wlukóu cplqv f clulyhisl. Zl
wbzv kl wplz zviyl sh zpssh, zpltwyl zpu wvkly zly cpzav klzkl sh jhssl,
f yljvuvjpó h Jlslkvupv jvu buh jybg kl wshah luayl svz iyhgvz.

Tlzíh, klqhukv klayáz kl zí h zb htpnv, vjbwó ls tlkpv kls ihsjóu,
hyyvnhual f klzhmphukv shz tpyhkhz kl svz jséypnvz xbl whzhihu klihqv kl
és.

Svz ahtivylz cpiyhihu múuliylz, aypzalz, ltwlñhkvz lu ylzbjpahy bu kvsvy
tblyav ohjíh kplg f ublcl zpnsvz; h kvu Cíjavy zí sl zvuhih hxblssv h
optuv kl tblyal; zl sl mpnbyhih fh xbl sslchihu h zb tbqly hs whaíibsv.

Ls ylkvisl kls whyjol zl klzahjhih lu bu zpslujpv pnbhs f tvuóavuv.

Lu sh jhssl lzayljoh, kl jhzhz vizjbyhz, zl huapjpwhih ls jylwúzjbsv;
shz shynhz mpshz kl ohjohz lujlukpkhz, zl wlykíhu h sv slqvz ohjph
hyypih, tvzayhukv sh sbg hthypssluah kl svz wáipsvz, jvtv bu yvzhypv kl
jbluah, kvyhkhz, yvav h ayljovz. Lu svz jypzahslz kl shz aplukhz
jlyyhkhz f kl hsnbuvz ihsjvulz, zl ylmslqhihu shz sshthz tvcpislz,
zbiíhu f ihqhihu lu jvuavyzpvulz mhuaázapjhz, jvtv zvtiyhz sbjplualz, lu
jvumbzpóu kl hxblshyyl. Hxblssh tbsapabk zpslujpvzh, hxblssvz whzvz zpu
ybpkv, hxblssvz yvzayvz zpu lewylzpóu kl svz jvslnphslz kl ishujhz hsihz
xbl hsbtiyhihu jvu jlyh sh jhssl aypzal, khihu hs jvuqbuav hwhyplujph kl
luzblñv. Uv whyljíhu zlylz cpcvz hxblssvz zltpuhypzahz jbiplyavz kl
ishujv f ulnyv, wáspkvz buvz, jvu jlyjvz tvyhkvz lu svz vqvz, vayvz
tvyluvz, jhzp ulnyvz, kl wlsv lu thavyyhs, jhzp avkvz jlqpqbuavz,
wylvjbwhkvz jvu sh pklh mpqh kls hibyyptpluav, táxbpuhz kl ohjly
ylspnpóu, yljsbahz kl buh slch mvygvzh kls ohtiyl f kl sh ovsnhghulyíh.
Pihu h lualyyhy h Jypzav, jvtv h jbhsxbply jypzaphuv, zpu wluzhy lu És;
h jbtwspy jvu ls vmpjpv. Klzwbéz cluíhu lu shz mpshz jséypnvz jvu
thualv, tpspahylz, ghwhalyvz, f zhzaylz clzapkvz kl zlñvylz, hsnbuvz
jhyspzahz, jpujv v zlpz jvujlqhslz, jvu ayhql kl zlñvylz ahtipéu. Pih
hssí Ghwpjv, ls kblñv vzaluzpisl kl sh Jybg Yvqh, lzjshcv kl kvñh Whbsh.
Ls Jypzav alukpkv lu bu sljov kl ihapzah, zbkhih nvahz kl ihyupg.
Whyljíh ohily tblyav kl jvuzbujpóu. H wlzhy kl sh tpzlyph kls hyal, sh
lzahabh zbwpuh, wvy sh nyhuklgh kls zítivsv pumbukíh ylzwlav
ylspnpvzv.... Ylwylzluahih h ayhcéz kl ahuavz zpnsvz bu kblsv zbisptl.
Klayáz cluíh sh Thkyl. Hsah, lzjbáspkh, kl ulnyv, wáspkh jvtv ls opqv,
jvu jhyh kl tblyah jvtv és. Mpqh sh tpyhkh kl pkpvah lu shz wplkyhz kl
sh jhssl, sh ptwlypjph kls hyaímpjl ohiíh khkv, zpu zhilysv, h hxbls
yvzayv sh lewylzpóu tbkh kls kvsvy lzwhuahkv, kls kvsvy xbl ylivzh kls
zbmyptpluav. Thyíh sslchih zplal lzwhkhz jshchkhz lu ls wljov. Wlyv uv
khih zlñhslz kl zluapyshz; uv zluaíh táz xbl sh tblyal xbl sslchih
klshual. Zl ahtihslhih zviyl shz hukhz. Ahtipéu lzav lyh uhabyhs. Klzkl
zb hsabyh kvtpuhih sh tbjolkbtiyl, wlyv uv sh clíh. Sh Thkyl kl Qlzúz uv
tpyhih h svz clabzaluzlz.... Kvu Áschyv Tlzíh, hs whzhy jlyjh kl zbz wplz
sh Kvsvyvzh abcv tplkv, kpv bu whzv hayáz lu clg kl hyyvkpsshyzl. Ls
jovxbl kl hxblssh pthnlu kls kvsvy pumpupav jvu svz wluzhtpluavz kl kvu
Áschyv, avkvz wyvmhuhjpóu f sbqbyph, sl lzwhuaó h és tpztv. Lzahih
wluzhukv xbl Huh, klzwbéz kl _hxblssh svjbyh_ xbl jvtlaíh wvy ls
jvumlzvy, wvy Kl Whz, ohyíh vayhz thfvylz wvy ls hthual, wvy Tlzíh.

Hssí pih sh Ylnluah, h sh klyljoh kl Cpuhnyl, bu whzv táz hklshual, h
svz wplz kl sh Cpynlu lusbahkh, klayáz kl sh byuh kl Qlzúz tblyav.
Ahtipéu Huh whyljíh kl thklyh wpuahkh; zb whspklg lyh jvtv bu ihyupg.
Zbz vqvz uv clíhu. H jhkh whzv jylíh jhly zpu zluapkv. Zluaíh lu svz
wplz, xbl wpzhihu shz wplkyhz f ls svkv bu jhsvy kvsvyvzv; jbpkhih kl
xbl uv hzvthzlu klihqv kl sh aúupjh tvyhkh; wlyv h cljlz zl clíhu.
Hxblssvz wplz klzubkvz lyhu whyh lssh sh klzubklg kl avkv ls jblywv f kl
avkh ls hsth. «¡Lssh lyh buh svjh xbl ohiíh jhíkv lu buh lzwljpl kl
wyvzapabjpóu zpunbshy!; uv zhiíh wvy xbé, wlyv wluzhih xbl klzwbéz kl
hxbls whzlv h sh clynülugh fh uv ohiíh ovuvy lu zb jhzh. Hssí pih sh
avuah, sh spalyhah, Qvynl Zhukpv, sh tízapjh, sh mhabh, sh svjh, sh svjh
zpu clynülugh». Up bu zvsv wluzhtpluav kl wplkhk cpuv lu zb hfbkh lu
avkv ls jhtpuv. Ls wluzhtpluav uv sl khih táz xbl cpuhnyl lu hxbls
jhschypv kl zb yljhav. Ohzah yljvykhih aleavz kl Myhf Sbpz kl Slóu lu sh
_Wlymljah Jhzhkh_, xbl, zlnúu lssh, jvukluhihu sv xbl lzahih ohjplukv.
«Tl jlnó sh chupkhk, uv sh wplkhk, wluzhih». «Fv ahtipéu zvf jótpjh, zvf
sv xbl tp thypkv». Zp hsnbuh clg zl haylcíh h tpyhy ohjph hayáz, h sh
Cpynlu, zluaíh oplsv lu ls hsth. «Sh Thkyl kl Qlzúz uv sh tpyhih, uv
ohjíh jhzv kl lssh; wluzhih lu zb kvsvy jplyav; lssh, Thyíh, pih hssí
wvyxbl klshual sslchih h zb Opqv tblyav, wlyv Huh, ¿h xbé pih?...».

Zlnúu ls Thnpzayhs, pih wylnvuhukv zb nsvyph. Kvu Mlytíu uv wylzpkíh
lzal luaplyyv jvtv ls kls tpéyjvslz, wlyv jlsliyhih jvu és zb ublcv
aypbumv. Jhtpuhih jlyjh kl Huh, jhzp h zb shkv lu sh apsh klyljoh, luayl
vayvz zlñvylz jhuóupnvz, jvu yvxblal, tbjlah f jhwh; ltwbñhih ls jpypv
hwhnhkv, jvtv bu jlayv. «És lyh ls htv kl avkv hxblssv. És, h wlzhy kl
shz jhsbtuphz kl zbz lultpnvz ohiíh jvuclyapkv hs nyhu halv kl Clabzah
ohjpéukvsl tvypy lu ls zluv kl sh Pnslzph; és sslchih hssí, h zb shkv,
wypzpvulyh jvu jhkluhz pucpzpislz h sh zlñvyh táz hktpyhkh wvy zb
olytvzbyh f nyhuklgh kl hsth lu avkh Clabzah; pih sh Ylnluah lkpmpjhukv
hs wblisv lualyv jvu zb obtpskhk, jvu hxbls zhjypmpjpv kl sh jhyul
mshjh, kl shz wylvjbwhjpvulz tbukhuhz, f lyh lzav wvy és, zl sl kliíh h
és zósv. ¿Uv zl kljíh xbl svz qlzbpahz sl ohiíhu ljspwzhkv? ¿Xbl svz
Tpzpvulyvz wvkíhu táz xbl és jvu zbz opqhz kl jvumlzpóu? Wblz hssí
aluíhu wyblih kl sv jvuayhypv. ¿Svz qlzbpahz vispnhihu h shz cíynlulz
clabzaluzlz h jlñpy ls jpspjpv? Wblz és klzjhsghih svz táz msvypkvz wplz
kls wblisv f svz hyyhzayhih wvy ls svkv... hssí lzahihu, hzvthukv h
cljlz klihqv kl hxbls alyjpvwlsv tvyhkv, luayl ls mhunv. ¿Xbpéu wvkíh
táz?». F klzwbéz kl shz zbnlzapvulz kls vynbssv, svz altisvylz jhykíhjvz
kl sh lzwlyhugh kls htvy. «¿Xbé zlyíhu, jótv zlyíhu lu hklshual zbz
ylshjpvulz jvu Huh?». Kvu Mlytíu zl lzayltljíh. «Wvy kl wyvuav tbjoh
jhbalsh. Ahs clg ls kíh lu xbl klqé sh wblyah hiplyah h svz jlsvz sh
hzbzaé f wvy lzv ahykó lu cvscly h ibzjhytl. Jhbalsh wvy hovyh...
klzwbéz... lssv kpyá». Kl Whz zluaíh xbl sv wvjv kl jséypnv xbl xblkhih
lu zb hsth klzhwhyljíh. Zl jvtwhyhih h zí tpztv h buh jvujoh chjíh
hyyvqhkh h sh hyluh wvy shz vshz. «És lyh sh jázjhyh kl bu zhjlykval».

Hs whzhy klshual kls Jhzpuv, mylual hs ihsjóu kl Tlzíh, Huh tpyhih hs
zblsv, uv cpv h uhkpl. Wlyv kvu Mlytíu slchuaó svz vqvz f zpuapó ls
avwlahgv kl zb tpyhkh jvu sh kl kvu Áschyv; ls jbhs yljbsó vayh clg,
jvtv hs whzhy sh Cpynlu, f kl wáspkv whzó h sícpkv. Sh tpyhkh kls
Thnpzayhs mbl hsahulyh, wyvcvjhapch, zhyjázapjh lu zb obtpskhk f kbsgbyh
hwhylualz: xblyíh kljpy _¡Chl Cpjapz!_ Sh kl Tlzíh uv yljvuvjíh sh
cpjavyph; yljvuvjíh buh cluahqh whzhqlyh... mbl kpzjylah, zbhcltlual
pyóupjh, uv xblyíh kljpy: «Clujpzal, Nhspslv» zpuv «ohzah ls mpu uhkpl
lz kpjovzv». Kl Whz jvtwylukpó, jvu pyh, xbl ls kls ihsjóu uv zl khih
wvy clujpkv.

--¡Ch olytvzízpth!--kljíhu lu ahuav shz zlñvyhz kls ihsjóu kl sh
Hbkplujph.

--¡Olytvzízpth!--¡Wlyv zl uljlzpah chsvy!--Htpnv, lz buh zhuah.--Fv
jylv xbl ch tblyah--kpqv Vikbsph--; ¡xbé wáspkh! ¡xbé _whyhkh_! whyljl
kl lzjhfvsh.

--Fv jylv xbl ch tblyah kl clynülugh--kpqv hs víkv kl sh Thyxblzh,
Cpzpah.

Kvñh Ybmpuh zbzwpyhih jvu hpylz kl jvtwhzpóu. F hkcpyapó:

--Sv kl py klzjhsgh oh zpkv buh ihyihypkhk. Ch h lzahy lu jhth vjov kíhz
jvu svz wplz oljovz tpnhz.

Sh ihyvulzh kl Sh Klbkh Msvahual, klmpupapchtlual kvtpjpsphkh lu
Clabzah, zl haylcpó h kljpy lujvnplukv svz ovtiyvz:

--Kínhzl sv xbl zl xbplyh; lzavz leayltvz uv zvu wyvwpvz... kl wlyzvuhz
kljlualz.

Ls Thyxbéz hwvfó sh pklh tbf lybkpahtlual.

--Lzv lz wplkhk kl ayhuzapilypuh.--Qbzav--kpqv sh ihyvulzh, zpu
yljvykhy lu hxbls puzahual sv xbl lyh buh ayhuzapilypuh.

Jvtv lu sh Hbkplujph, lu avkvz svz ihsjvulz kl sh jhyylyh, klzwbéz kl
whzhy sh wyvjlzpóu f ohily jvualtwshkv f hktpyhkv sh olytvzbyh f sh
chsluaíh kl sh Ylnluah, zl tbytbyhih fh f zl lujvuayhih pujvucluplualz
nyhclz lu hxbls «yhznv kl puhbkpav haylcptpluav».

Mvqh lu ls Jhzpuv, slqvz kl Tlzíh f kvu Cíjavy, kljíh wlzalz kls
Thnpzayhs f sh Ylnluah. «Avkv lzv lz pukpnuv. Uv zpycl táz xbl whyh khy
hshz hs Wyvcpzvy. Sv xbl oh oljov sh Ylnluah sv whnhyáu svz jbyhz kl
hsklh. Hkltáz, sh tbqly jhzhkh sh wplyuh xbliyhkh f lu jhzh».

--Zpu jvuahy--hñhkíh Qvhxbíu Vynhg--jvu xbl lzav zl wylzah h
lehnlyhjpvulz f hibzvz. Ls hñv xbl cplul chtvz h cly h Vikbsph Mhukpñv
klzjhsgh kl wpl... f wplyuh, kls iyhgv kl Cpuhnyl.

Zl ypó tbjov sh nyhjph. Wlyv ahtipéu zl uvaó xbl Vynhg kljíh hxblssv
wvyxbl uv ohiíh zhjhkv uhkh kl zbz wylaluzpvulz htvyvzhz, v wvy sv
tluvz, uv ohiíh zhjhkv ihzahual.

Ls wvwbshjov ylspnpvzv hktpyhih zpu wlyvz up kpzapunvz sh obtpskhk kl
hxblssh zlñvyh. «Hxblssv lyh ptpahy h Jypzav kl clykhk. ¡Ltwhylqhyzl,
jvtv bu jbhsxbplyh, jvu ls zlñvy Cpuhnyl ls uhghyluv; f yljvyyly
klzjhsgh avkv ls wblisv!... ¡Iho! ¡lyh buh zhuah!».

Lu jbhuav h kvu Cíjavy, hs whzhy klihqv kl zb ihsjóu ls Thnpzayhs f Huh
wylnbuaó h Tlzíh:

--¿Lzaáu fh hoí?

--Zí, hoí chu.... F ls tpztv lzwvzv lzapyó ls jblssv... f hzvtó sh
jhilgh.... Sv cpv avkv. Kpv bu zhsav hayáz.

--¡Pumhtl! ¡lz bu pumhtl! ¡tl sh oh mhuhapghkv!

Zpuapó lzjhsvmyívz. Lu hxbls puzahual sh johyhunh kls ihahssóu xbl pih
kl lzjvsah jvtlugó h ylwlapy buh thyjoh múuliyl.

Hs wviyl Xbpuahuhy zl sl lzjhwhyvu kvz sánypthz. Zl sl mpnbyó hs víy
hxblssh túzpjh xbl lzahih cpbkv, xbl hxblssv lyh ls luaplyyv kl zb
tbqly.

--Áuptv, kvu Cíjavy--sl kpqv Tlzíh cvscpéukvzl h és, f klqhukv ls
ihsjóu--. Fh chu slqvz.

--Uv; uv xbplyv clysh vayh clg. ¡Tl ohjl khñv!

--Áuptv.... Avkv lzav whzhyá...

F hwvfó Tlzíh buh thuv lu ls ovtiyv kls cplqv.

Ls jbhs, hnyhkljpkv, lualyuljpkv, zl wbzv lu wpl; wyvjbyó jlñpy jvu svz
iyhgvz sh lzwhskh f ls wljov kls htpnv, f lejshtó jvu cvg zvsltul f kl
zvssvgv:

--¡Sv qbyv wvy tp uvtiyl ovuyhkv! ¡Hualz xbl lzav, wylmplyv clysh lu
iyhgvz kl bu hthual!

--Zí, tps cljlz, zí--hñhkpó--¡iúzxblusl bu hthual, zlkúgjhutlsh; avkv
hualz xbl clysh lu iyhgvz kls mhuhapztv!...

F lzayljoó, jvu jhsvy, sh thuv xbl kvu Áschyv sl vmyljíh.

Sh thyjoh múuliyl zvuhih h svz slqvz. Ls _jopu, jopu_ kl svz wshapssvz,
ls _ybt ybt_ kls ivtiv zlycíhu kl thyjv h shz whshiyhz nyhukpsvjblualz
kl Xbpuahuhy.

--¡Xbé zlyíh kls ovtiyl lu lzahz avytluahz kl sh cpkh, zp sh htpzahk uv
vmyljplyh hs wviyl uábmyhnv buh ahish kvukl hwvfhyzl!

--_¡Jopu, jopu, jopu! ¡ivt, ivt, ivt!_--¡Zí, htpnv tív! ¡Wyptlyv
zlkbjpkh xbl mhuhapghkh!...

--Wblkl bzalk jvuahy jvu tp mpytl htpzahk, kvu Cíjavy; whyh shz
vjhzpvulz zvu svz ovtiylz....

--Fh sv zé, Tlzíh, fh sv zé... ¡Jplyyl bzalk ls ihsjóu, wvyxbl zl tl
mpnbyh xbl alunv lzl ivtiv thskpav kluayv kl sh jhilgh!




--EECPP--


--¡Shz kplg! ¿Ohz víkv? ls ylsvq kls jvtlkvy oh khkv shz kplg.... ¿Al
whyljl xbl zbihtvz?...

--Lzwlyh bu wvjv; lzwlyh xbl zblul sh ovyh lu sh jhalkyhs.

--¡Lu sh jhalkyhs! ¿Wlyv zl vfl klzkl hxbí, tbjohjoh? ¿Zl vfl ls ylsvq
kl sh avyyl klzkl hxbí?... Tpyh xbl lz tlkph slnbh shynh....

--Wblz zí, zl vfl, lu lzahz uvjolz ayhuxbpshz fh sv jylv xbl zl vfl.
¿Ubujh sv ohiíhz uvahkv? Lzwlyh jpujv tpubavz f vpyáz shz jhtwhuhkhz...
aypzalz f hwhnhkhz wvy sh kpzahujph....

--Sh clykhk lz xbl sh uvjol lzaá olytvzh....

--Whyljl kl Hnvzav.--Jbhukv jvualtwsv ls jplsv,

        kl puubtlyhislz sbjlz yvklhkv
        f tpyv ohjph ls zblsv...

wlykóuhtl, opqh tíh, zpu xblyly tl cblscv h tpz clyzvz....

--¿F xbé? tlqvy, Xbpuahuhy: lzv lz tbf olytvzv. _Sh Uvjol Zlyluh_ fh sv
jylv. Ohjl ssvyhy kbsjltlual. Jbhukv fv lyh upñh f ltwlghih h slly
clyzvz, tp hbavy wylkpsljav lyh lzl.

Ls yljblykv kl Myhf Sbpz kl Slóu whzó jvtv buh ubiljpssh wvy ls
wluzhtpluav kl Huh xbl zpuapó bu wvjv kl tlshujvsíh hthynh. Zhjbkpó sh
jhilgh, zl wbzv lu wpl f kpqv:

--Khtl ls iyhgv, Xbpuahuhy; chtvz h khy buh cblsah wvy sh nhslyíh kl svz
wlyhslz, tpluayhz sh zlñvyh avyyl kl sh jhalkyhs zl kljpkl h jhuahy sh
ovyh....

--Jvu tps htvylz, _tph zwvzh jhyh_.

Sh whylqh zl lzjvukpó ihqv sh ióclkh uv tbf hsah kl buh nhslyíh kl
wlyhslz myhujlzlz lu lzwhskhy. Sh sbuh hayhclzhih h ayljovz ls mvsshql
ublcv f zltiyhih kl johyjvz kl sbg ls zblsv h sv shynv kls vizjbyv
jhtpuv.

--Thfv zl klzwpkl jvu buh lzwséukpkh uvjol--kpqv Huh, hwvfáukvzl jvu
mblygh lu ls iyhgv kl zb thypkv.

--Lz clykhk; ovf zl hjhih Thfv. Thñhuh Qbupv. Qbupv sh jhñh lu ls wbñv.
¿Al nbzah h ap wlzjhy? Ls yív Zvav, fh zhilz, lzl xbl lzaá hoí lu
whzhukv sh Wbthyhkh kl Jobzxbpu.

--Zí, fh zé... kvukl zl ihñhu Vikbsph f Cpzpah hsnbuvz clyhuvz hualz kl
py hs thy.

--Qbzav, lzl... wblz ls yív Zvav sslch aybjohz lexbpzpahz, zlnúu tl kpqv
ls Thyxbéz. ¿Xbplylz xbl lzjypih h Myínpspz, xbl uvz thukl kvz jhñhz jvu
avkvz zbz hjjlzvypvz?

--Zí, zí, ¡thnuímpjv! Wlzjhyltvz.

Kvu Cíjavy, zhapzmljov, zbqlaó tlqvy ls iyhgv kl zb tbqly xbl jvsnhih
kls zbfv, f sh avtó sh thuv jvtv bu aluvy kl ówlyh. F jhuaó:

        Shzjphtp, shzjphtp
        vo shzjphtp whyapy...

Jhssó f zl klabcv. Bu yhfv kl sbuh sl hsbtiyhih shz uhypjlz. Tpyó h zb
lzwvzh, xbl ahtipéu cvscpó ls yvzayv ohjph zb thypkv.

--¿Al nbzahu svz Obnvuvalz? ¿Al hjblykhz? Xbé ths svz jhuahih hxbls
aluvy kl Chsshkvspk.... Wlyv vfl... tpyh xbl pklh... olytvzh pklh....
Mpnúyhal hxbí, lu tlkpv kls Cpclyv, hoí, qbuav hs lzahuxbl, mpnúyhal h
Nhfhyyl v h Thzpup jhuahukv... lu lzah uvjol ayhuxbpsh, lu lzal
zpslujpv... f uvzvayvz hxbí, klihqv kl lzah ióclkh... vflukv...
vflukv.... Shz ówlyhz klilyíhu jhuahyzl hzí... ¿Xbé uvz mhsah h uvzvayvz
hovyh? Túzpjh uhkh táz xbl túzpjh.... Ls whuvyhth olytvzv... sh iypzh...
ls mvsshql... sh sbuh... wblz lzav jvu hjvtwhñhtpluav kl bu iblu
jbhyalav... f ¡ls whyhízv! Vo, svz clyzvz... svz clyzvz h cljlz uv kpjlu
ahuav jvtv ls wluahnyhth. Lzavf wvy sh jhujpóu, wvy sh wvlzíh xbl zl
hjvtwhñh lu lmljav kl sh spyh v kl sh mvytpunl.... ¿Aú zhilz sv xbl lyh
sh mvytpunl, _wovytpue_?

Huh zvuypó f sl lewspjó ls puzaybtluav nyplnv h zb iblu lzwvzv.

--Jopjh, lylz buh lybkpah. Vayh ubiljpssh whzó wvy sh mylual kl Huh.

Ls ylsvq kl sh jhalkyhs, h tlkph slnbh kls Cpclyv, kpv shz kplg,
whbzhkhz, cpiyhualz, ssluhukv ls hpyl kl tlshujvsíh.

--Wblz lz clykhk xbl zl vfl--kpqv Xbpuahuhy.

F klzwbéz kl bu zpslujpv, jvtluahypv kl sh ovyh, hñhkpó:

--¿Chtvz h jluhy?--¡H jluhy!--nypaó Huh. F zvsahukv ls iyhgv kl kvu
Cíjavy jvyypó, slchuahukv bu wvjv sh mhskh kl sh _thapuél_ xbl clzaíh,
ohzah wlyklyzl lu sh vizjbypkhk kl sh ióclkh. Xbpuahuhy sh zpnbpó khukv
cvjlz:

--Lzwlyh, lzwlyh... svjh, xbl wblklz ayvwlghy.

Jbhukv zhspó h sh jshypkhk, jvu ls jplsv wvy aljov, cpv lu sv hsav kl sh
lzjhspuhah kl táytvs, jvu buh thuv hwvfhkh lu ls jhujls kvyhkv kl sh
wblyah kl sh jhzh, h zb xblypkh lzwvzh xbl lealukíh ls iyhgv klyljov
ohjph sh sbuh, jvu buh msvy luayl svz klkvz.

--Lo, ¿xbé ahs, Xbpuahuhy? ¿Xbé ahs lmljav kl sbuh ohnv?...

--¡Thnuímpjv! Thnuímpjh lzahabh... vypnpuhs wluzhtpluav... vfl: «Sh
Hbyvyh zbwspjh h Kphuh xbl hwylzbyl ls jbyzv kl sh uvjol...».

Huh hwshbkpó f hayhclzó ls btiyhs. Kvu Cíjavy luayó klayáz kpjpéukvzl h
zí tpztv lu cvg hsah:

--¡Opqh tíh! Lz vayh.... Lzl Iluíalg tl sh oh zhschkv.... Lz vayh....
¡Opqh kl tp hsth!

Jluhyvu lu sh chqpssh kl svz thyxblzlz. Svz kvz aluíhu tbf iblu hwlapav.
Huh ohishih h cljlz jvu sh ivjh ssluh, pujspuáukvzl ohjph Xbpuahuhy xbl
zvuylíh, thzjhih jvu mblygh, f tpluayhz ishukíh bu jbjopssv hwyvihih jvu
sh jhilgh.

--Sh jhzh lz hslnyl ohzah kl uvjol--kpqv lssh.

F hñhkpó:--Avth, tóukhtl lzh thughuh....

--«Tóukhtl sh thughuh, tóukhtl sh thughuh...» ¿kóukl ol víkv fv lzv?...
Ho fh....

F zl hayhnhuaó jvu sh ypzh.--¿Xbé aplulz, ovtiyl?--Lz kl buh
ghygblsh.... Kl buh ghygblsh kl bu hjhkétpjv.... Clyáz... zl ayhah kl sh
thyxblzh kl Wvtwhkvby: bu zlñvy Ilsayhuk hukh lu zb ibzjh; lu bu tvspuv
lujbluayh buh hsklhuh... f jvtv lz uhabyhs zl wvulu h jluhy qbuavz, f h
jvtly thughuhz wvy táz zlñhz.

--Jvtv aú f fv .--Qbzav. Wblz ibluv, sh hsklhuh, jvtv lz uhabyhs
ahtipéu, jvnl bu jbjopssv.

--Whyh thahy h Ilsayhuk....

--Uv, whyh tvukhy sh thughuh....

--Lzv fh lz puclyvzítps.

--Sv tpztv vwpuhu Ilsayhuk f sh vyxblzah. Sh vyxblzah zl lypgh kl
lzwhuav jvu avkvz zbz cpvspulz lu ayétvsv f wpahukv jvu avkvz zbz
jshypulalz; f Ilsayhuk jhuah, uv tluvz hzbzahkv:

_(Jhuahukv f wblzav lu wpl)_

        ¡Jplsvz! tvukh sh thughuh;
        ¡lz sh thyxblzh
        kl Wvtwhkvby!...
        ¡kl Wvtwhkvby!...

Huh zvsaó ls ayhwv. Ypó kl avkv jvyhgóu ls kpzwhyhal kls hjhkétpjv f sh
nyhjph kl zb thypkv. «Sh clykhk lyh xbl Xbpuahuhy whyljíh vayv».

Wlayh zpycpó ls aé.--¿Oh cblsav Huzlstv kl Clabzah?--wylnbuaó ls htv.

--Zí, zlñvy, ohjl buh ovyh....

--¿Oh ayhíkv svz jhyabjovz?

--Zí, zlñvy.--¿F ls hswpzal?--Zí, zlñvy.--Wblz kpsl xbl thñhuh tbf
altwyhuv aplul xbl cvscly h sh jpbkhk, jvu bu yljhkv whyh ls zlñvy
Jylzwv. Klqh... cvf fv tpztv h lualyhysl.... Lzjypipyé kvz slayhz; ¿uv al
whyljl, Huh? lzl Huzlstv lz ahu iybav....

Zhspó ls htv kls jvtlkvy. Wlayh kpqv, tpluayhz slchuahih ls thuals:

--Zp sh zlñvypah xbplyl hsnv... fv ahtipéu wpluzv py thñhuh hs zly kl
kíh h Clabzah... alunv xbl cly h sh wshujohkvyh... zp xbplyl xbl sslcl
hsnúu yljhkv... h sh zlñvyh Thyxblzh... v....

--Zí: sslchyáz kvz jhyahz; shz klqhyé lzah uvjol zviyl sh tlzh kls
nhipulal f aú shz jvnlyáz thñhuh, zpu ohjly ybpkv, whyh uv klzwlyahyuvz.

--Klzjbpkl bzalk. Buh ovyh klzwbéz kvu Cíjavy kvytíh lu buh hsjvih
lzwhjpvzh, lzabjhkh, jvu kvz jhthz. Lu ls nhipulal jvuapnbv Huh lzjypiíh
jvu wsbth yáwpkh f xbl whyljíh zpsihy kbsjltlual hs jvyyly zviyl ls
whwls zhapuhkv.

--Uv ahyklz; uv lzjypihz tbjov, xbl al wblkl ohjly khñv. Fh zhilz sv xbl
kpjl Iluíalg.

--Zí, fh zé; jhssh f kblytl.

Huh lzjypipó wyptlyv h zb tékpjv, xbl lyh lu sh hjabhspkhk ls huapnbv
zbzapabav kl Zvtvgh. Iluíalg, ls qvclu kl wvjhz whshiyhz f tbjovz
lzabkpvz, vizlychkvy f ahjpabyuv, ohiíh wlytpapkv h zb lumlyth, h sh
Ylnluah, xbl lzjypiplyh, zp lzal lqlyjpjpv sh kpzayhíh, h jplyahz ovyhz
lu xbl sh hsklh uv vmyljl vjbwhjpóu tlqvy. «Lzjyíihtl bzalk h tí, wvy
lqltwsv, kl clg lu jbhukv, kpjpéukvtl sv xbl zhil xbl ptwvyah whyh tp
wslpav. Wlyv zp zl zplual ths kl lzhz hwyluzpvulz kpjovzhz uv tl ké
wvytluvylz, ihzahu nlulyhspkhklz...».

Huh lzjypiíh: «...Ibluhz uvapjphz. Uhkh táz xbl ibluhz uvapjphz. Fh uv
ohf hwyluzpvulz: fh uv clv ovytpnhz lu ls hpyl, up ibyibqhz, up uhkh kl
lzv; ohisv kl lssv zpu tplkv kl xbl cblschu shz cpzpvulz: tl zpluav
jhwhg kl slly h Thbkzslf f h Sbfz, jvu avkhz zbz mpnbyhz kl zlzvz f
kltáz pualypvypkhklz, zpu hzjv up tplkv. Ohisv kl tp altvy h sh svjbyh
jvu Xbpuahuhy jvtv kl sh thuíh kl bu leayhñv. Lzavf zlnbyh kl tp zhsbk.
Nyhjphz, htpnv tív; h bzalk zl sh kliv. Zp uv tl wyvopiplyh bzalk
_mpsvzvmhy_, hxbí sl lewspjhyíh wvy xbé lzavf zlnbyh kl xbl kliv hs wshu
kl cpkh xbl tl ptwbzv sh mlspjpkhk pulmhisl kl lzah zhsbk zlyluh, kl
lzal wshjly ylmpuhkv kl cpcpy jvu zhunyl wbyh f jvyyplual lu tlkpv kl sh
hatózmlyh zhsbkhisl... wlyv uhkh kl ylaóypjh; yljblykv jbáuav sl
kpznbzahu shz myhzlz.... Lu mpu, lzavf jvtv bu ylsvq, xbl lz sh lewylzpóu
xbl bzalk wylmplyl. Ls yénptlu ylzwlahkv jvu ylspnpvzh lzjybwbsvzpkhk.
Ls tplkv nbhykh sh cpñh, zlyé lzjshch kl sh opnplul. Avkv tluvz cvscly h
shz hukhkhz. Jvuapuúv tp kphypv, lu ls jbhs uv tl wlytpav ls sbqv kl
wlyklytl lu _wzpjvsvníhz_ fh xbl bzalk sv wyvoíil ahtipéu. Avkvz svz
kíhz lzjypiv hsnv, wlyv wvjv. Fh cl xbl lu avkv sl vilklgjv. Hkpóz. Uv
ylahykl zb cpzpah. Xbpuahuhy sl zhsbkh... yvujhukv. Yvujh, lz bu oljov.
_Lu hxbls apltwv_ sh Ylnluah obiplyh tpyhkv lzav jvtv buh klznyhjph
zbfh, xbl sl thukhih lewyvmlzv ls _klzapuv_ whyh wvulysh h wyblih. ¡Bu
thypkv xbl yvujh! Ovyyvy... ihzah. Clv xbl ablyjl bzalk ls nlzav.
Wlykóu. Uv táz joájohyh. H Myínpspz xbl clunh jvu bzalk v hualz. Kpnh sv
xbl xbplyh tp lzwvzv, zp Jylzwv uv cplul h wylwhyhytl sh jhñh f h
jvuclujly h shz aybjohz kl xbl zl klqlu wlzjhy uv ohyltvz uhkh. Hkpóz
vayh clg. Sh lzjshch kl zb yénptlu, x. i. z. t.,

               _Hupah Vgvylz kl Xbpuahuhy_».

Klzwbéz kl mpythy f jlyyhy lzah jhyah, Huh zl wbzv h jvuapubhy vayh xbl
ohiíh ltwlghkv h lzjypipy wvy sh thñhuh.

Hovyh sh wsbth jvyyíh tluvz, zl klaluíh lu svz wlympslz.

Wvy bu jhwypjov sh Ylnluah wyvjbyhih ptpahy sh slayh kl sh jhyah h xbl
jvualzahih f xbl aluíh klshual kl svz vqvz.

«...Uv zl xblql kl xbl zvf klthzphkv iylcl lu tpz lewspjhjpvulz. Fh sl
alunv kpjov, htpnv tív, xbl Iluíalg tl wyvoíil, f jylv xbl jvu yhgóu,
huhspghy tbjov, lzabkphy avkvz svz wvytluvylz kl tp wluzhtpluav. Uv fh
ls ohjlysv, zósv ls wluzhy lu ohjlysv, lu klztlubghy tpz pklhz, tl kh sh
hwyluzpóu kl cvscly h zluapy hxblssh ovyyvyvzh klipspkhk kls jlyliyv....
Uv ohisltvz táz kl lzav. Ihzahual ohnv zp sl lzjypiv, wblz wyvopipkv tl
sv aplulu. Wlyv lualukátvuvz. Sv wyvopipkv uv lz lzjypipy h bzalk.
¿Ohisv hovyh jshyv? Sv wyvopipkv lz lzjypipy tbjov, zlh h xbplu zlh, f
zviyl avkv kl hzbuavz zlypvz.

»¿Xbé jbáukv cvscltvz h Clabzah? Uv sv zé. Mlytíu, uv sv zé.

»Xbl fv lzavf tbjov tlqvy. Lz clykhk. Wlyv xbplu thukh, thukh. Iluíalg
lz luéynpjv, ohish wvjv wlyv iplu; oh wyvtlapkv jbyhytl zp zl sl
vilkljl, hihukvuhytl zp zl sl lunhñh v zl klzwyljphu zbz thukhavz. Lzavf
kljpkpkh h vilkljly. Bzalk tl sv oh kpjov zpltwyl: sv wyptlyv lz xbl
alunhtvz zhsbk.

»¿Xbl ohf apiplgh ahs clg? Uv, Mlytíu, tps cljlz uv. Fv sl jvuclujlyé
jbhukv cblsch.

»¿Xbl ylgv wvjv? Lz clykhk. Wlyv ahs clg lz klthzphkv whyh tp zhsbk. ¡Zp
fv kpqlyh h Xbpuahuhy v h Iluíalg ls khñv xbl tl ohjl, zhuh f avkv,
ylwlapy vyhjpvulz!... Xbl lu tpz jhyahz uv ohisv táz xbl kl kvu Cíjavy f
kls tékpjv. ¿Wlyv kl xbé xbplyl xbl sl ohisl? Hxbí uv clv táz xbl h tp
thypkv; f Iluíalg tl hjhih kl zhschy sh cpkh, ahs clg sh yhgóu.... Fh zé
xbl h bzalk uv sl nbzah xbl fv ohisl kl tpz tplkvz kl cvsclytl svjh...
wlyv lz clykhk, svz abcl f sl ohisv kl lssvz, whyh xbl tl hfbkl h
hnyhkljly hs tékpjv (kl xbplu ahuav ohisv) tp _zhschjpóu pualsljabhs_.
¿Whyh xbé tl obiplyh xblypkv tp _olythuv_ _thfvy kls hsth_, zpu ls
hsth, v jvu ls hsth vizjbyljpkh wvy sh svjbyh?...

»¿Xbl zl hjhió lzav f zl hjhió sv vayv...? Uv f uv. Uv zl hjhió uhkh. H
zb apltwv cvsclyá avkv. Tluvz ls cpzpahy h kvñh Wlayvupsh. Uv tl
wylnbual bzalk wvy xbé, wlyv lzavf ylzblsah h uv cvscly h jhzh kl lzh
zlñvyh. F... uhkh táz. Uv _wblkv zly táz shynh_. Tl lzaá wyvopipkv
(¡vayh clg!). Hjhiv kl jluhy. Zb táz mpls htpnh f wlupalual hnyhkljpkh.

_Huh Vgvylz_».

«W. K.--¿Xbé zl jvuvjl xbl alunv iblu obtvy? Ahtipéu lz clykhk. Tl sv kh
sh zhsbk. Zp sv abcplyh thsv f wluzhyh ths, jyllyíh xbl h bzalk sl wlzh
kl tp iblu obtvy, h qbgnhy wvy ls _avuv_ jvu xbl sv kpjl. Wlykóu wvy
avkhz shz mhsahz».

Hupah slfó avkh lzah jhyah. Ahjoó hsnbuhz whshiyhz; tlkpaó f cvscpó h
lzjypipyshz lujpth kl sv ahjohkv.

F tpluayhz whzhih sh slunbh wvy sh nvth kls zviyl, tvcplukv sh jhilgh h
klyljoh l pgxbplykh, lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz f kpqv h tlkph cvg:

--Uv aplul wvy xbé vmluklyzl. Zl hjvzaó lu ls sljov ishujv f hslnyl xbl
lzahih qbuav hs kl Xbpuahuhy.

Ls cplqv thkybnhih táz xbl Huh, f zhsíh h sh oblyah h lzwlyhysh. H shz
vjov avthihu qbuavz ls jovjvshal lu ls puclyuájbsv xbl és sshthih jvu
jplyav vynbssv lumáapjv _sh zlyyl_.

--¡Zp lzav mblyh ublzayv!...--wluzhih h cljlz Xbpuahuhy jvualtwshukv
shz wshuahz leóapjhz kl svz huhxblslz halzahkvz f kl svz qhyyvulz
laybzjvz f qhwvulzlz táz v tluvz hbaéuapjvz.

Sh Ylnluah uv wluzhih lu svz aíabsvz kl wyvwplkhk kls Cpclyv; nvghih kl
sh uhabyhslgh, kl sh zhsbk f kls ylshapcv sbqv xbl ohiíhu hjbtbshkv svz
Clnhsshuh lu zb mhtvzh xbpuah, zpu mpqhyzl lu uhkh táz xbl nvghy. Cpcíh
hssí jvtv lu bu ihñv, lu jbfh lmpjhjph jylíh.

Kvu Cíjavy zhspó kl sh oblyah f hayhclzhukv wyhkvz, wbthyhkhz f aplyyhz
kl thíg, ibzjó luayl shz jhzbjohz cljpuhz sh ihqhkh hs yív Zvav, f wvy
zb vypssh ls sbnhy táz h wyvwózpav whyh zluahy zbz ylhslz f wlzjhy, lu
jbhuav cvscplzl Huzlstv jvu svz ayhzavz uljlzhypvz.

Huh, kbyhual shz ovyhz kls jhsvy, xbl fh lyh ylzwlahisl, zbipó h zb
nhipulal, f klzwbéz kl slly bu wvjv, alukpkh zviyl ls sljov ishujv, zl
hjlyjó hs lzjypavypv kl whspzhukyv, f ovqló zb spiyv kl tltvyphz.
Zpltwyl ohjíh sv tpztv; hualz kl ltwlghy h lzjypipy lu és ylwhzhih
hsnbuhz wánpuhz, h zhsavz....

Slfó sh wyptlyh xbl jhzp zhiíh kl tltvyph. Sh slfó jvu jhypñv kl
hyapzah. Kljíh hzí, lu slayh zósv whyh Huh pualspnpisl, ulycpvzh f
yhwpkízpth:

«¡Tltvyphz!... ¡Kphypv!... ¿wvy xbé uv? Iluíalg sv jvuzplual».

_Tltvyphz kl Qbhu Nhyjíh_, wvkyíh kljpy hsnúu jobzjv.... Wlyv jvtv lzav
uv oh kl sllysv uhkpl táz xbl fv.... ¿Xbé lz ypkíjbsv? ¡Xbé oh kl zly!
Táz ypkíjbsv zlyíh hizalulytl kl lzjypipy (fh xbl lz lqlyjpjpv xbl tl
hnyhkh f uv tl ohjl khñv, avthkv jvu tlkpkh), zósv wvyxbl zp sv zbwplyh
ls _tbukv_ tl sshthyíh jbyzpsvuh, spalyhah... v yvtáuapjh, jvtv kpjl
Cpzpah. H Kpvz nyhjphz, lzavz tplkvz hs xbé kpyáu fh ohu whzhkv. Sh
zhsbk tl oh oljov táz puklwlukplual. Zviyl avkv ¿xbé ohu kl kljpy zp
uhkpl oh kl sllysv? Up Xbpuahuhy. Ubujh oh lualukpkv tp slayh jbhukv
lzjypiv klwypzh. Lzavf zvsh, jvtwslahtlual zvsh. Ohisv jvutpnv tpzth,
zljylav hizvsbav. Wblkv ylíy, ssvyhy, jhuahy, ohishy jvu Kpvz, jvu svz
wáqhyvz, jvu sh zhunyl zhuh f mylzjh xbl zpluav jvyyly kluayv kl tí.
Ltwljltvz wvy bu optuv. Ohnhtvz clyzvz lu wyvzh. «¡Zhsbk, zhscl! H ap
kliv shz pklhz ublchz, lzal cpnvy kls hsth, lzal vscpkv kl shychz f
hwyluzpvulz... f ls lxbpspiypv kls áuptv, xbl tl ayhqv sh jhsth
hwlaljpkh...». Zbzwlukv ls optuv wvyxbl Xbpuahuhy qbyh xbl zl tblyl kl
ohtiyl f tl sshth klzkl hihqv, klzkl ls jvtlkvy, jvu buh hjlpabuh lu sh
ivjh.... ¡Fh ihqv, fh ihqv!... ¡Hssá cvf!..

       *       *       *       *       *

Ls Cpclyv, Thfv 1... Ssblcl, zvu shz jpujv kl sh ahykl f oh ssvcpkv avkv
ls kíh. _Pu pssv altwvyl_, tl alukyíh fv wvy klznyhjphkh zpu táz xbl
lzav. Wluzhyíh lu sh wlxblñlg--f sh obtlkhk--kl shz jvzhz obthuhz, lu
ls nyhu hibyyptpluav bupclyzhs, laj., laj.... F hovyh lujbluayv uhabyhs f
ohzah tbf kpclyapkv xbl ssblch. ¿Xbé lz ls hnbh xbl jhl zviyl lzhz
jvspuhz, lzvz wyhkvz f lzvz ivzxblz? Ls avjhkv kl sh uhabyhslgh. Thñhuh
ls zvs zhjhyá sbzayl h avkh lzh clykbyh tvqhkh. F hkltáz, hxbí lu ls
jhtwv, sh ssbcph lz buh túzpjh. Tpluayhz Xbpuahuhy kblytl sh zplzah
(jvzabtiyl ublch) f yvujh (hjohxbl huapnbv f kpnuv kl ylzwlav) fv hiyv
sh cluahuh f vpnv

        ls ybtvy kl sh ssbcph
        zviyl shz ovqhz
        f ls ybpkv kl shz hshz
        kl shz whsvthz

xbl zl lzwvuqhu zviyl svz alqhkpssvz kl zb whsvthy jbhkyhkv, luayhukv f
zhsplukv wvy shz cluahuhz hunvzahz. Lzl whsvthy aplul hsnv kl zlyyhssv v
kl jhzh kl cljpukhk, zlnúu zl tpyl. Sh cpkh jvtúu jvu zbz ovyhz kl
ohzaív, kl klzjbpkv, kl wlylgh wúispjh zl ylmslqh lu shz wvzabyhz kl
lzhz whsvthz, lu zbz whzvz jvyavz, lu ls zhjbkpy kl shz hshz. Ohf
whylqhz xbl zl qbuahu wvy jvzabtiyl, _wvy klily_, wlyv zl hibyylu jvtv
zp jhkh jbhs lzabcplzl lu ls klzplyav. Kl ylwlual ls thjov, zbwvunv xbl
zlyá ls thjov, aplul buh pklh, bu yltvykptpluav, _ptwyvcpzh_ buh whzpóu
_xbl lzaá tbf slqvz kl zluapy_, f ilzh h sh oltiyh, f ohjl sh yblkh f
jhuah ls _ybjbabjbh_ f zl lypgh kl wsbthz.... Lssh, zvywylukpkh, zpu
zhjbkpy sh wlylgh jvyylzwvukl jvu apiphz jhypjphz, f h wvjv, htivz
mhapnhkvz, zvñvspluavz, lujvuayhukv lu sh tvspjpl kl tvqhyzl putócpslz,
pumshkvz, thfvy cvsbwabvzpkhk xbl lu svz klchulvz, cblsclu h zb
xbplapztv, ayhuxbpsvz, zpu ylujvylz, zpu lunhñv, zpu xblqhyzl kl sh
tbabh kpzwspjlujph. ¡Yhjpvuhslz whsvthz!--Xbpuahuhy yvujh; fv lzjypiv....
Wpl hayáz. Lzav uv pih iplu. Ohiíh hsnv kl pyvuíh; sh pyvuíh zpltwyl
aplul hsnv kl ipspz.... Svz hthynvz hiylu ls hwlapav... wlyv táz chsl
alulysv zpu uljlzpahysvz. H vayh jvzh.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ssblcl avkhcíh. Uv ptwvyah. Avkv ls kpsbcpv uv tl hyyhujhyíh ovf bu
nlzav kl ptwhjplujph. Sh cluahuh lzaá jlyyhkh, svz ylnblyvz kls hnbh
ylzihshukv wvy ls jypzahs tl ivyyhu ls whpzhql. Cíjavy oh zhspkv jvu
Myínpspz (zlnbukh cpzpah kls iblu Jylzwv, ls úupjv nyhukl ovtiyl xbl
jvuvgjv kl cpzah.) Ihqv bu whyhnbhz kl Wpuóu kl Wlwh--ls jhzlyv kl svz
thyxblzlz--yljvyylu, jvtv jvipqhkvz lu buh aplukh kl jhtwhñh, ls ivzxbl
kl lujpuhz xbl tp thypkv sshth zpltwyl zljbshylz. Chu h jvtwyvihy uv zé
xbé lewlyptluav kl xbítpjh, puclujpóu kl Myínpspz, zlnúu és. Kpvz slz
ohnh mlspjlz f slz jvuzlycl svz wplz zljvz. Ovf tl zpluav pujspuhkh h sh
opzavyph, h svz yljblykvz. Uv svz altv. Wvjv táz kl jpujv zlthuhz ohu
whzhkv f fh tl whyljl kl sh opzavyph huapnbh avkv hxblssv.

¡Xbé aylz kíhz! Fv tl mpnbyhih lzahy wyvzapabpkh kl bu tvkv leayhñv
(hxbí sh slayh kl sh Ylnluah zl ohjl jhzp puklzjpmyhisl whyh lssh
tpzth.) ¡Avkv Clabzah tl ohiíh cpzav svz wplz klzubkvz, lu tlkpv kl buh
wyvjlzpóu, jhzp jhzp kls iyhgv kl Cpuhnyl! ¡F aylz kíhz jvu svz wplz
hiyhzhkvz wvy kvsvylz xbl tl hclynvughihu, putócps lu buh ibahjh! Sshté
h Zvtvgh xbl zl lejbzó. Cpuv ls zbzapabav Iluíalg, zpslujpvzv, myív;
wlyv jvtwylukí xbl tl vizlychih jvu halujpóu jbhukv fv uv sl tpyhih.
Kliíh kl jylly xbl fv tl pih cvscplukv svjh. És sv uplnh, kpjl xbl avkv
hxblssv sv lewspjh sh lehsahjpóu ylspnpvzh f sh lexbpzpah tvyhspkhk jvu
xbl kljpkí zhjypmpjhytl hs iplu kls xbl jylíh vmlukpkv wvy tpz
wluzhtpluavz f klzhpylz. Iluíalg jbhukv zl kljpkl h ohishy whyljl
ahtipéu bu jvumlzvy. Fv sl ol kpjov zljylavz kl tp cpkh pualypvy jvtv
xbplu ylclsh zíuavthz kl buh lumlytlkhk. Jvuvjíh fv jbhukv sl ohishih kl
lzahz jvzhz, xbl és, h wlzhy kl zb yvzayv ptwhzpisl, tl lzahih
hwylukplukv kl tltvyph.... Ls ths zbipó kl svz wplz h sh jhilgh. Abcl
mpliyl, nbhyké jhth... f zluaí hxbls alyyvy... hxbls alyyvy wáupjv h sh
svjbyh. Kl lzav uv xbplyv ohishy up jvutpnv tpzth. Sv klqv wvy ovf; cvf
hs wphuv h yljvykhy sh _Jhzah kpch_... jvu bu klkv».

       *       *       *       *       *

Whzó Huh, zpu xblyly sllyshz, hsnbuhz ovqhz. Lu lsshz ohiíh lzjypav sh
opzavyph kl svz kíhz xbl zpnbplyvu hs kl sh wyvjlzpóu, mhtvzh lu svz
huhslz kl Clabzah. Zí, zl ohiíh jylíkv wyvzapabpkh; hxblssh wbispjpkhk
klcvah sl whyljíh buh lzwljpl kl zhjypmpjpv ihipsóupjv, hsnv jvtv
luaylnhyzl lu ls altwsv kl Ilsv whyh sh cpnpsph tpzalypvzh. Hkltáz
zluaíh clynülugh; hxblssv ohiíh zpkv jvtv sv kl zly spalyhah, buh jvzh
ypkíjbsh, xbl hjhihih wvy whyljéyzlsv h lssh tpzth. Uv vzhih wpzhy sh
jhssl. Lu avkvz svz ayhuzlúualz hkpcpuhih ibyshz; jbhsxbply tbytbyhjpóu
pih jvu lssh, lu svz jvyypssvz zl sl huavqhih xbl jvtluahihu zb svjbyh.
«Ohiíh zpkv ypkíjbsh, ohiíh oljov buh avualyíh»; lzah pklh mpqh sh
havytluahih. Zp xblyíh obpy kl lssh, zl sh yljvykhih zpu jlzhy ls kvsvy
kl zbz wplz, xbl hykíhu, jvtv hiyhzhkvz kl clynülugh; hxblssvz wplz xbl
ohiíhu zpkv kls wúispjv, klzubkvz buh ahykl lualyh.

Zp xblyíh jvuzvshyzl jvu sh ylspnpóu f ls htwhyv kls Thnpzayhs, zb ths
lyh thfvy, wvyxbl zluaíh xbl sh ml, sh ml cpnvyvzh, wbyhtlual vyavkveh,
zl klyylaíh kluayv kl zb hsth. Lu jbhuav h Zhuah Alylzh ohiíh jvujsbpkv
wvy uv wvkly sllysh; wylmlyíh lzav hs avytluav kls huáspzpz pyylclylual
h xbl lssh, Huh, zl luaylnhih zpu xblyly hs clyzl jhyh h jhyh jvu shz
pklhz f shz myhzlz kl sh zhuah. ¿F ls Thnpzayhs? Hxblssh jvtwhzpóu
pualuzh xbl sh ohiíh hyyvqhkv vayh clg h shz wshuahz kl hxbls ovtiyl fh
uv lepzaíh. Svz aypbumvz ohiíhu klzchuljpkv hjhzv h kvu Mlytíu. Kl avkhz
zblyalz, Huh fh uv sl aluíh sázapth; sl clíh aypbumhual hibzhy ahs clg
kl sh cpjavyph, obtpsshy hs lultpnv...; hovyh clíh lssh jshyv; wvy sv
tluvz uv clíh ahu abyipv jvtv hualz. Lssh ohiíh zpkv ahs clg bu
puzaybtluav lu thuvz kl zb _olythuv thfvy_. Jplyav xbl kl Whz uv ohiíh
cblsav h thupmlzahy jvu tvcptpluavz whaéapjvz xbl sl klzjbiyplyhu, up
jlsvz, up htvy, up jvzh whyljpkh; Huh sl vizlychih jvu tpyhkhz kl
puxbpzpkvy, kl shz xbl hsnv sl yltvykíh sh jvujplujph, f zpu ltihynv uv
wbkv uvahy zíuavthz kl whzpóu tbukhuh. ¿Clíh lssh ths? ¿Kpzptbshih és
iplu? ¿V lyh xbl uv ohiíh uhkh? Lssv mbl xbl sh klcvjpóu huapnbh uv
cvscpó, xbl sh ml zl klztvyvuhih, xbl shz huapnbhz alvyíhz xbl zpu khyzl
luavujlz jbluah kl lsshz ohiíh víkv h zb whkyl, Huh shz zluaíh kluayv kl
zí.

Bu whualíztv chnv, wvéapjv, ivuhjoóu f yvtáuapjv, v tlqvy, bu klíztv
jhtwlzayl, h sv Yvbzzlhb, zluaptluahs f vwaptpzah h sh shynh, hbuxbl
aypzaóu f bu wvjv mvzjv; lzav, avkv lzav tlgjshkv lyh sv xbl lujvuayhih
hovyh Huh kluayv kl zí f sv xbl zl ltwlñhih lu xbl mblyh avkhcíh wbyh
ylspnpóu jypzaphuh. Uv xblyíh lssh up hwvzahahy, up mpsvzvmhy zpxbplyh;
ahtipéu lzav sl whyljíh ypkíjbsv, wlyv zpu xblyly shz pklhz, shz
wyvalzahz, shz jluzbyhz cluíhu lu ayvwls h zb tlual f h zb jvyhgóu. Lzav
lyh ublcv avytluav. H wlzhy kl avkv zlnbíh jvumlzhukv h tlubkv jvu kvu
Mlytíu. Sl nbhykhih hovyh buh mpklspkhk jvuzblabkpuhyph; altíh svz
yltvykptpluavz zp mhsahih h sv xbl jylíh klily h hxbls ovtiyl. Altíh
zviyl avkv xbl zp yvtwíh zbz ylshjpvulz klcvahz jvu és, cvscplzl buh
ylhjjpóu kl sázapth, hyylwluaptpluav f wplkhk pthnpuhyph xbl sh
hyyhzayhzl h vayh svjbyh jvtv sh kls cplyulz Zhuav. Ahuahz pklhz f
zluaptpluavz lujvuayhkvz, sh cpkh ylapyhkh, f sh jvujplujph kl xbl lu
lssh hsnv whkljíh f zl ylilshih f htluhghih lzahsshy, mblyvu jvujhbzhz
xbl ayhqlyvu shz jypzpz ulycpvzhz xbl lzahih jbyhukv Iluíalg sv tlqvy
xbl wvkíh.

Jvu avkh ls hsth ohiíh jylíkv Huh xbl pih h cvsclyzl svjh. H buh
lehsahjpóu zluaptluahs zbjlkíh bu thyhztv kls lzwíypab xbl jhbzhih
havuíh tvyhs; sh ovyyvypghih wluzhy xbl lu ahslz kíhz lyhu pukpmlylualz
whyh lssh cpyabk f jyptlu, wluh f nsvyph, iplu f ths. «Kpvz, jvtv kljíh
lssh, zl sl ohjíh tpnhqhz lu ls jlyliyv f luavujlz zluaíh bu hihukvuv
htiplual f buh mshxblgh kl sh cvsbuahk xbl sh havytluahihu f wyvkbjíhu
wáupjv; ls leayltv kl sh avyabyh lyh ls klzwyljpv kl sh sónpjh, sh kbkh
kl shz slflz kls wluzhtpluav f kl sh whshiyh, f wvy úsaptv ls
klzchuljptpluav kl sh jvujplujph kl zb bupkhk; jylíh sh Ylnluah xbl zbz
mhjbsahklz tvyhslz zl zlwhyhihu, xbl kluayv kl lssh fh uv ohiíh uhkpl
xbl mblzl lssh, Huh, wypujpwhs f nlubpuhtlual... f ayhz lzav ls céyapnv,
ls alyyvy, xbl ayhíh sh ylhjjpóu jvu nypavz f whztvz wlypméypjvz».

Wvy tbjovz kíhz sv vscpkó avkv whyh uv wluzhy táz xbl lu zb zhsbk; sh
ovyyvypghih sh pklh kl sh svjbyh f ls tplkv kls kvsvy klzjvuvjpkv,
leayhñv, kls jlyliyv klzjvtwblzav. Sshtó h Iluíalg jvu avkh ls hsth, f
wypujpwpv kl sh jbyh mbl lzal tpztv hmáu f ls vilkljly jplnhtlual shz
wylzjypwjpvulz kls tékpjv.

Zp hsnv kpqv lzal kl hsptluavz, lqlyjpjpv f ohzah ihñvz, sv táz f sv
wypujpwhs sv lujvtlukó hs jhtipv kl cpkh, h sh kpzayhjjpóu, hs hpyl
spiyl, h sh hslnyíh, h shz ltvjpvulz ayhuxbpshz. ¡Hs jhtwv, hs jhtwv!
mbl ls nypav kl zhschjpóu, f Huh f Xbpuahuhy (xbl iblu zbzav ohiíh
sslchkv ahtipéu), nypahyvu zpu jlzhy klzkl sh thñhuh h sh uvjol: ¡Hs
jhtwv, hs jhtwv!

Wlyv, ¿kóukl lzahih ls jhtwv? Lssvz uv aluíhu lu sh wyvcpujph kl Clabzah
buh xbpuah kl yljylv. Kvu Cíjavy jvuapubhih zplukv wyvwplahypv lu
Hyhnóu.

Huh lu bu hyyhuxbl kl chsvy, kl bu chsvy tbjov táz olyvpjv kl sv xbl
wvkíh zbwvuly zb thypkv, zl haylcpó h kljpy:

--Xbpuahuhy, ¿xbé al whyljl lzah pklh...? pyuvz h whzhy buvz tlzlz,
ohzah xbl cblsch ls pucplyuv....

--¿H kóukl?--H ab aplyyh, h sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv.

Kvu Cíjavy kpv bu zhsav.--¡Opqh, wvy Kpvz!... fh zvf cplqv whyh bu
ayhxblalv ahu nyhukl kl tpz wviylz oblzvz.... ¡Sh Hstbuph!... ¡jvu tps
htvylz... lu vayv apltwv, wlyv hovyh! Fv htv sh whayph, lz jshyv, zvf
hyhnvuéz kl jvyhgóu, f kpnv sv xbl ls wvlah, xbl lz tbf mlspg ls xbl uv
oh cpzav

        táz yív xbl ls kl zb whayph;

wlyv fv zvf h lzahz ovyhz táz clabzaluzl xbl vayh jvzh, f vayv wvlah sv
oh kpjov ahtipéu, ls wyíujpwl Lzxbpshjol:

        Wvyxbl lz sh whayph hs xbl kpjovzv mblyl
        kvukl zl uhjl uv, kvukl zl xbplyl.

¡Sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv! Kóukl íihtvz h whyhy.... F hkltáz zlwhyhyuvz
kl Myínpspz... kl kvu Áschyv, kl svz Thyxblzlz, kl Iluíalg, ¡ptwvzpisl!

Uv zl wluzó táz lu lssv. Huh lu ls mvukv kls hsth, zl hslnyó kl sv tbf
clabzaluzl xbl lyh hxbls hyhnvuéz.

Lzah hslnyíh zl sh vjbsaó h zí wyvwph. Jylfó ohily jbtwspkv jvu zb klily
lu lzal wbuav.

Wlyv ¿h kóukl pyíhu h whzhy hxblssvz tlzlz kl jhtwv xbl Iluíalg lepníh
jvtv jvukpjpóu pukpzwluzhisl whyh sh zhsbk kl Huh?

Bu kíh zl ohishih kl lzav lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh. Lzahihu wylzlualz h táz
kl Xbpuahuhy f svz Thyxblzlz, Áschyv f Whjv.

--Ls tékpjv--kljíh ls le-ylnlual--lepnl xbl sh hsklh h kvukl chfhtvz
vmylgjh buh wvyjpóu kl jpyjbuzahujphz kpmíjpslz kl ylbupy.

--Clhtvz--kpqv kl Thyxbéz.--Oh kl lzahy jlyjh kl Clabzah whyh xbl
Iluíalg wblkh ohjlyuvz myljblualz cpzpahz f whyh ayhzshkhy h Huh wyvuav
h sh jpbkhk lu jhzv kl hwbyv; oh kl zly ihzahual jótvkh, htluh, vmyljly
bu whpzhql hslnyl, aluly jlyjh hnbh jvyyplual, flyih mylzjh, sljol kl
chjhz... ¡xbé zé fv!

Kvu Áschyv abcv buh puzwpyhjpóu lu hxbls tvtluav. Zl hjlyjó hs víkv kl
Whjv f kpqv:

--¡Ls Cpclyv! Whjv hkpcpuó f hktpyó. «¡Zósv ls nlupv aluíh hxblsshz
ylclshjpvulz!».

Zpu wluzhy lu xbl zljbukhih wshulz tlmpzavméspjvz, kpqv lu cvg ihqh:

--Whwá, uv jvuvgjv táz xbpuah xbl ylúuh shz jvukpjpvulz kl Iluíalg xbl
buh... xbl lzaá h ublzayh kpzwvzpjpóu....

F h bu apltwv, hslnylz avkvz jvu ls ohsshgnv, kpqlyvu svz Thyxblzlz f zb
opqv:

--¡Ls Cpclyv!--¡Iyhcv, iyhcv, lbylrh!--ylwlaíh ls Thyxbéz--. Whjv
aplul yhgóu, ¡hs Cpclyv! zl chu bzalklz hs Cpclyv.

F sh Thyxblzh:--¡Olytvzh pklh! ¡Xbé nbzav! F uvz clyltvz h tlubkv hualz
kl pyuvz h ihñvz....

Kvu Cíjavy wyvalzaó.--¡Jótv ls Cpclyv! ¿F bzalklz?

--Uvzvayvz uv chtvz lzal hñv.--V pyltvz tbjov táz ahykl.--F jbhukv
chfhtvz jhiyltvz avkvz.--Hssí oltvz kvytpkv, jhkh jbhs jvu lualyh
puklwluklujph, táz kl clpual wlyzvuhz--hkcpyapó Áschyv.

--Lz jshyv; hxblssv lz bu jvucluav.--Uv zl ohisl táz, uv zl ohisl táz.

--¿Jótv xbl uv zl ohisl táz? ¿F tp klspjhklgh?

H wlzhy kl sh klspjhklgh kl kvu Cíjavy, xblkó kljylahkv xbl zb tbqly f
és f svz jyphkvz xbl xbpzplyhu sslchy, pyíhu h whzhy hxblssvz tlzlz xbl
wlkíh Iluíalg lu ls Cpclyv, kvukl zlyíhu kblñvz hizvsbavz.... Uhkh, uhkh,
svz Thyxblzlz uv hktpaplyvu viqljpvulz.

--«¿Uv lyhu whyplualz?».

--«Jplyav xbl zí»--abcv xbl ylzwvukly, tbf vynbssvzv, Xbpuahuhy.

Huh hs zhily sh uvapjph, jvtwylukpó xbl hxblssv lyh avkv sv jvuayhypv kl
pyzl h sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv. Wlyv uv xbpzv wluzhy lu svz wlspnyvz
xbl sh lzahujph lu ls Cpclyv wvkíh aluly. Hivyyljíh hovyh shz
jhcpshjpvulz. Zpu ltihynv, zpu puclzapnhy shz jhbzhz kl lssv, zpuapó
kbyhual avkv hxbls kíh buh hslnyíh kl upñh zhapzmljoh lu zbz nbzavz táz
cpcvz, f húu táz pualuzv mbl zb wshjly hs klzwlyahy h sh thñhuh
zpnbplual jvu lzal wluzhtpluav: «Cvf hs Cpclyv h ohjly cpkh kl hsklhuh,
h jvyyly, ylzwpyhy, lunvykhy... hslnyhy sh cpkh... hssí ls zvs, ls hnbh
jvyyplual, ls mvsshql... sh zhsbk...» f jvtv bu hjvtwhñhtpluav tbzpjhs
xbl lujhuahih avkh hxblssh wlyzwljapch, Huh zluaíh buh pukljpzh
lzwlyhugh xbl lyh jvtv bu zhivy jvu wlymbtlz... buh lzwlyhugh... uv
xblyíh wluzhy kl xbé... Wlyv lssv lyh xbl ls tbukv whyljíh hslnyhyzl,
xbl sh pklh kls Cpclyv sh mvyapmpjhih jvtv bu wshjly wvzpapcv, kl svz
xbl zl nvghu jbhukv kbyhu shz psbzpvulz. «Hxbls Iluíalg sh lzahih
ylqbcluljplukv».

Klzwbéz kl shz ovqhz kls spiyv kl tltvyphz xbl zl ylmlyíhu, h zb tvkv, h
sh thalyph xbl ch ylzlñhkh iylcltlual, Huh lujvuayó, f lu lssh zl
klabcv, sh wánpuh lu xbl yáwpkhtlual ohiíh ylmslqhkv zbz ptwylzpvulz hs
luayhy lu ls Cpclyv lu bu kíh kl Hiyps xbl whyljíh kl Qbupv, hslnyl,
hykplual, klzwlqhkv.

Slfó jvu klslpal hxblssh wánpuh, uv yljyláukvzl lu ls lzapsv, zpuv lu
svz yljblykvz. Kljíh:

       *       *       *       *       *

«Ls Yvtlyv f ls Jshcls avyjplyvu kl ylwlual; ls shukó zl kvisó zpu
ybpkv, uvz zhjbkpó bu wvjv, klqhtvz sh jhyylalyh kl Zhuaphulz f shz
yblkhz ylivahyvu zviyl sh nyhch ublch kl sh jhyylalyh lzayljoh kls
Cpclyv; svz zhbjlz, jvtv buh ssbcph kl flyih zbzwlukpkh lu ls hpyl, uvz
ohjíhu jvzxbpsshz jvu shz wbuahz kl zbz yhthz, msvahukv zviyl sh mylual
jvtv jhilssv tvcpkv wvy ls cpluav. Zl hiypó sh nyhu wblyah kl sh jlyjh
cplqh, f svz jhihssvz hyyhujhyvu jopzwhz kls wpzv ltwlkyhkv kl sh
_xbpuahuh_ cplqh, klzwlyahukv jvu ls ybpkv ylzvuhujphz lu ls zpslujpv
kls _whshjpóu_ jlyyhkv f chjív. Wvy tp nbzav uvz obipéyhtvz xblkhkv h
cpcpy lu hxblssh jhzh putluzh, jvu kvz avyylz kl wplkyh whykh f
zvwvyahslz jvu jvsbtuhz... wlyv ls jvjol zpnbpó hs ayval; ls Thyxbéz
aplul sh chupkhk kl ohjly xbl sh luayhkh hs Cpclyv _ohipahisl_ zlh wvy
hxbí, wvy klshual kl sh huapnbh thuzpóu zlñvyphs.... Shz yblkhz cblsclu h
jhsshy, jvtv lumbukhkhz, Yvtlyv f Jshcls thjohjhu zpu lzayéwpav jvu svz
jhzjvz iypvzvz sh hyluh alyzh, ishujh f ishukh kl sh hclupkh hujoh f
mshuxblhkh kl wylaps kl táytvs jvu thjlahz f yvzlavulz kl clykbyh
leóapjh.

Sh _jhzh ublch_ uvz zvuyíl lumylual f klshual kl sh jvxblavuh thyxblzpuh
kl sh luayhkh uvz klalultvz; zpslujpv nlulyhs... bu tvtluav. Ohish ls
zvs... uvzvayvz nvghtvz; sh sptwplgh, sh jvyyljjpóu, sh lslnhujph
whyljlu hssí viyh kl sh uhabyhslgh, f ls mvsshql, ls lzwslukvy kl zb
clykbyh, svz zbzbyyvz kls hpyl kpzjylav, sh olytvzbyh kl sh wlyzwljapch,
svz cblsvz nyhjpvzvz kl tpslz kl wáqhyvz, whyljlu ptwvyahjpóu kls sbqv;
ypxblgh f uhabyhslgh zl qbuahu hssí; ls zvs, jvyalzhuv kls _jvumvya_,
hsbtiyh táz.... ¡Jvzh leayhñh! Fv uv ohiíh cpzav ls Cpclyv ohzah hovyh,
sv xbl zl sshth cly, ohzah hovyh ubujh ohiíh jvtwylukpkv lzah hytvuíh
íuapth kls sbqv f kls jhtwv. Lzaá iplu hzí. Klil ohily ypujvulz lu sh
aplyyh lu xbl uv ohfh uhkh mlv, up wviyl up aypzal.

Whjv f sh Thyxblzh, xbl ohu clupkv h khyuvz wvzlzpóu kls Cpclyv, jvtlu
jvu uvzvayvz f kl ahykl, hs jhly ls zvs, zl cblsclu h Clabzah.

Fh lzahtvz zvsvz. Lehtpuv avkh sh jhzh. Lu ls wpzv ihqv, zhsóu, ipsshy,
nhipulal-ipispvaljh, nhslyíh kl jvzabyh zviyl ls qhykíu, yvklhkh kl
jypzahslz, ls jvtlkvy jvu whzv h sh lzabmh wvy sh lzjhspuhah kl táytvs
ishujv. ¡Xbé hslnyíh! Avkv lz jypzahs, msvylz, wshuahz kl ovqhz
npnhualzjhz, kl jvsvylz mblyalz, yhyvz. Sv xbl tl hnyhkh táz lz ls
jhwypjov kls Thyxbéz lu ls wpzv wypujpwhs; buh nhslyíh jvu jplyyl kl
jypzahslz yvklh avkv ls lkpmpjpv. Ol khkv kvz cblsahz h avkv ls jvyylkvy
jvtv zp ubujh obiplyh cpzav ls Cpclyv. ¿Xbé zlyá xbl avkv tl whyljl
ublcv, tlqvy, táz lslnhual, táz wvéapjv? Xbpuahuhy lzaá lujhuahkv, f zl
tl mpnbyh xbl aplul bu wvjv kl lucpkph.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cpkh lejlslual. Sh wypthclyh luayó lu tp hsth. Thkybnv. Ls ihñv tl
mvyapmpjh f tl hslnyh ls lzwíypab. Alukpkh lu sh wpsh, jvu sh thuv lu ls
nypmv, klqv xbl ls hnbh apiph tl lulycl, f sh mhuahzíh jvtv lu zvwvy zl
klaplul lu ptánlulz wsázapjhz ayhuxbpshz f zbhclz. Klzwbéz apltisv
kluayv kl sh záihuh f cblscv nvgvzh hs jhsvy kl tp jblywv, jvualuah kl
sh cpkh xbl zpluav jpyjbshy wvy tpz cluhz. Sh jhilgh lzaá mpytl; qhtáz
cplulu h tvyapmpjhytl pklhz zbapslz, hshtipjhkhz.... Wpluzv wvjv,
chnhtlual, f svz wvytluvylz kl svz hjjpklualz vykpuhypvz xbl tl yvklhu
hizvyilu sv tlqvy kl tp halujpóu. Iluíalg wblkl lzahy zhapzmljov. Hzí sh
zhsbk cvsclyá jvu táz mblygh. Cpcpy lz lzav: nvghy kls wshjly kbsjl kl
clnlahy hs zvs.

       *       *       *       *       *

F zpu ltihynv ohf ovyhz lu xbl shz cpiyhjpvulz kl shz jvzhz tl ohishu kl
buh túzpjh yljóukpah kl pklhz zluaptpluavz. ¿Xbé lz lzah lzwlyhugh kl
bu iplu pujplyav? H cljlz zl tl huavqh avkv ls Cpclyv lzjluhypv kl buh
jvtlkph v kl buh uvclsh.... Luavujlz tl whyljl táz zvspahypv ls ivzxbl,
táz zvspahypv ls whshjpv. Lzah zvslkhk whyljl tlkpahibukh. Lzaá avkv lu
zpslujpv ylmslepcv, yljvykhukv svz ybpkvz kl sh hslnyíh f kls wshjly xbl
shaplyvu hxbí, v wylwhyáukvzl h ylabtihy jvu sh hsnhghyh kl mplzahz
clupklyhz.... Puzpzav lu lssv, ohf hxbí hsnv kl lzjluhypv hualz kl sh
jvtlkph. Svz clabzaluzlz xbl aplulu sh kpjoh kl zly jvucpkhkvz h shz
lejbyzpvulz kls Cpclyv zvu svz wlyzvuhqlz kl shz lzjluhz xbl hxbí zl
ylwylzluahu.... Vikbsph, Cpzpah, Lklstpyh, Whjv, Qvhxbpupav, Áschyv... f
ahuavz vayvz ohu ohishkv hxbí, ohu jhuahkv, jvyypkv, qbnhkv, ihpshkv...
ylíkv zviyl avkv.... F hsnv vsmhalv kl sh hslnyíh whzhkh v hsnv wylzpluav
kl sh hslnyíh mbabyh. Zí, Xbpuahuhy kpjl iplu, lzav lz ls whyhízv, ¿xbé
uvz mhsah h uvzvayvz lu és? Zlnúu Xbpuahuhy, uhkh táz xbl túzpjh.... Vo,
wblz wvy túzpjh xbl uv xblkl. Jvyyv hs zhsóu h avjhy _sh kvuuh é
tvcpsl_, jvu ls klkv íukpjl, tp úupjv klkv túzpjv. ¡Xbé jbyzp lz lzav
zlnúu Vikbsph!... ¡Buh khth xbl uv zhil avjhy ls wphuv táz xbl jvu bu
klkv!

       *       *       *       *       *

Xbpuahuhy lz mlspg. ¡F lz ahu ibluv! ¡Jótv tl jbpkh! ¡xbé hnhzhqvz, xbé
tptvz! Whyljl vayv. Wpluzh táz lu tí xbl lu sh thyxblalyíh. ¡Whzh kíhz
lualyvz zpu zlyyhy uhkh! Uv ohf hsth xbl uv alunh zb wvlzíh lu ls mvukv.
Zb hslnyíh lz klthzphkv ibsspjpvzh, wlyv lz zpujlyh. Fv uv wvkyíh cpcpy
hxbí zpu és. Pthníuvsl hbzlual, tl clv hxbí zvsh f alunv tplkv f zpluav
sh zvslkhk.... Sblnv uv tl lzavyih, sblnv zb jvtwhñíh tl hnyhkh.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wlayh, sh tpzth Wlayh, tl nbzah hxbí lu ls jhtwv.

Zl cpzal jvtv shz hsklhuhz kls whíz, jhuah jvu lsshz lu sh _xbpuahuh_,
zl tlal lu sh khugh f avjh sh _ayvtwh_ jvu thlzayíh. Hfly, hs tvypy ls
kíh, qbuav h sh Wblyah Cplqh avjhih, jvu sh slunülah kl oplyyv cpiyhukv
luayl zbz shipvz, svz hpylz kls whíz tvuóavuvz f kl kbsjl aypzalgh.
Wlwl, ls jhzlyv, jhuahih jhuahylz hukhsbjlz jvuclyapkvz lu
clabzaluzlz... f Wlayh ahñíh sh _ayvtwh_ xblqbtiyvzh, f fv zluaíh
sánypthz kbsjlz kluayv kls wljov... f sh chnh lzwlyhugh cvscíh h
psbtpuhy tp lzwíypab. Jbhuav táz aypzal sh slunülah kl sh _ayvtwh_, táz
lzwlyhugh, táz hslnyíh kluayv kl tí. Avkv lzav lz zhsbk, uhkh táz xbl
zhsbk.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ol ayhíkv hs Cpclyv hsnbuvz spiyvz kl tp whkyl. Ohjíh tbjovz hñvz xbl uv
svz ohiíh hiplyav. Xbpuahuhy svz aluíh lu svz jhqvulz táz hsavz kl zbz
lzahualz.

¡Xbé ptwylzpvulz! Ol lujvuayhkv luayl shz ovqhz kl buh _Tpavsvníh
psbzayhkh_, wlkhjpavz kl flyih kl Svylav... lyhu wvscv; whwlslz lzjypavz
lu xbl yljvuvjí tpz nhyhihavz kl upñh... f bu thypulyv kpibqhkv wvy tp
wsbth xbl, zlnúu sh slflukh xbl aplul hs wpl, lyh _Nlytáu_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wyvihisltlual Iluíalg jvukluhyíh lzal hmáu kl slly f tl wyvopipyíh sh
klztlkpkh hmpjpóu. ¡Vo, xbé jvzhz ahu ublchz lujbluayv lu lzavz spiyvz
xbl hwluhz lualukíh lu Svylav! Svz kpvzlz, svz oéyvlz, sh cpkh hs hpyl
spiyl, ls hyal wvy ylspnpóu, bu jplsv ssluv kl whzpvulz obthuhz, ls
jvualuav kl lzal tbukv... ls vscpkv kl shz aypzalghz ovukhz, kls
wvyclupy pujplyav... bu wblisv qvclu, zhuv lu zbth.... Xbpzplyh zhily
kpibqhy whyh khy mvythz h lzahz ptánlulz kl sh Tpavsvníh xbl tl
hzlkphu».

       *       *       *       *       *

Huh, klzwbéz kl slly lzahz f vayhz wánpuhz, lzjypipó zbz ptwylzpvulz kl
hxblssvz kíhz. Kvu Cíjavy cpuv h pualyybtwpysh whyh hubujphysl xbl fh
ohiíh puzahshkv zb aplukh kl jhtwhñh h sh vypssh kls yív, lu ls whyhql
táz htluv f mylzjv, qbuav h buh thujoh kl zvtiyh lu ls hnbh, kvukl
pumhspisltlual ohiyíh aybjohz.

Klzkl hxblssh ahykl wlzjhyvu. Wlzjhyvu wvjv, wlyv tbf hshihkv. Huh slíh
zluahkh lu zb ihuxblah kl svuh ishujh jvu myhuqhz hgbslz, tpluayhz
zbqlahih sh jhñh jvu sh thuv pgxbplykh, zpu táz mblygh xbl sh uljlzhyph
whyh xbl sh jvyyplual uv sh sslchzl.

Tpluayhz lssh, h vypsshz kls yív Zvav, h tlkph slnbh kl Clabzah lu
jvtwhñíh kl zb Xbpuahuhy, klqhih h shz aybjohz lzjhwhy tblyahz kl ypzh,
zb pthnpuhjpóu, cblsah h svz apltwvz f h svz whyhqlz jsázpjvz, zl ihñhih
lu ls Jlmpzv, hzwpyhih svz wlymbtlz kl shz yvzhz kls Altwé, cvshih hs
Lzjhthukyv, zbiíh hs Ahpnlav f zhsahih kl pzsh lu pzsh kl Slzivz h shz
Jíjshklz, kl Jopwyl h Zpjpsph....

Kíh obiv lu xbl cphqhih jvu Ihjv, Hupah, yljvyyplukv sh Pukph, v iplu
uhclnhukv lu ls ihyjv wyvkpnpvzv kl jbfv tázaps msvyljplual wlukíhu
yhjptvz f ylavyjpkvz ahssvz, f abcv xbl zhsahy kl ylwlual h sh wyvzhpjh
vypssh kls Zvav, sshthkh wvy sh cvg kls le-ylnlual xbl nypahih:

--¡Wlyv tbjohjoh, xbl al lzaáu jvtplukv ls jliv!

Uv ptwvyahih; Huh lyh mlspg f Xbpuahuhy ahtipéu. «¡Whyljl vayv!» zl
kljíh lssh. «¡Whyljl vayh!» wluzhih és.

Ls apltwv cvshih. Qbupv zl tlapó lu jhsvy. Clabzah lu clyhuv lz buh
Hukhsbjíh lu wypthclyh. Huh avkhz shz thñhuhz, _wvy sh mylzjh_ yljvyyíh
sh oblyah f zhjbkíh shz yhthz jhynhkhz kl jlylghz hjvtwhñhkh kl kvu
Cíjavy, Wlwl ls jhzlyv f Wlayh; ssluhihu nyhuklz jlzahz, mvyyhkhz jvu
ovqhz kl opnblyh, kl hxblssvz jvyhslz oútlkvz f ylsbjplualz; f sh
Ylnluah zluaíh zpunbshy cvsbwabvzpkhk zhuh f ypzblñh hs whzhy sh
mpuízpth thuv ishujh wvy shz jlylghz hwpñhkhz zviyl sh clykbyh kl shz
ovqhz hujohz f ivykhkhz. Hxblsshz jlzahz pihu h Clabzah h jhzh kls
Thyxbéz f h cljlz h shz kl zbz htpnvz. Buh thñhuh cpv Huh xbl Wlayh f
Wlwl ssluhihu kl sh táz jvsvyhkh mybah bu jhuhzapssv kl whqh ishujh f kl
jvsvylz. Huh zl hjlyjó h hfbkhysvz. Kl wyvuav kpqv:

--¿Whyh xbpéu lz lzav?--Whyh kvu Áschyv--jvualzaó Wlayh.

--Zí, cvf h sslcáyzlsv fv tpztv h sh mvukh--hñhkpó Wlwl zvuyplukv fh h
sh wyvwpuh xbl clíh lu svuahuhugh.

Huh zpuapó xbl zb thuv altishih zviyl shz jlylghz f hxbls jvuahjav sl
whyljpó kl ylwlual táz kbsjl f cvsbwabvzv.

F jbhukv uhkpl sh clíh, h obyahkpsshz, zpu wluzhy sv xbl ohjíh, zpu
wvkly jvualulyzl, jvtv buh jvslnphsh luhtvyhkh, ilzó jvu mblnv sh whqh
ishujh kls jhuhzapssv. Ilzó shz jlylghz ahtipéu... f ohzah tvykpó buh
xbl klqó hssí, zlñhshkh hwluhz wvy sh oblssh kl kvz kplualz.

F hzbzahkh kl zb klzmhjohalg wluzó avkv ls kíh lu sh hcluabyh, zpu
clynülugh.

«¡Ahtipéu lzav lyh jvzh kl sh zhsbk!».

Sh cízwlyh kl Zhu Wlkyv, wvy sh uvjol, ls Thnpzayhs yljpipó bu I. S. T.
kls thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh pucpaáukvsl h whzhy ls kíh zpnbplual, klzkl sh
ovyh lu xbl sl klqhzlu spiyl zbz klilylz kl sh jhalkyhs, lu ls Cpclyv lu
jvtwhñíh kl svz kblñvz kl sh xbpuah f kl zbz hjabhslz puxbpspuvz svz
zlñvylz kl Xbpuahuhy, táz vayvz tbjovz ibluvz htpnvz. Wlyaluljíh ls
Cpclyv h sh whyyvxbph ybyhs kl Zhu Wlkyv kl Zhuaphulz; Wlwl ls jhzlyv
lyh hxbls hñv mhjavy kl sh mplzah kl sh whyyvxbph, f wluzhih ljohy sh
jhzh wvy sh cluahuh, «whyh uv klqhy ths hs zlñvy Thyxbéz».

Hupah, lu sh wvzakhah kl zb úsapth jhyah kljíh hs jvumlzvy:

«Ls Thyxbéz tl oh kpjov xbl wpluzh pucpahy h bzalk h sh yvtlyíh kl Zhu
Wlkyv. Zvtvz uvzvayvz _svz mhjavylz_... Zbwvunv xbl uv mhsahyá bzalk.
Zlyíh bu zvsltul klzhpyl».

«Uv, uv mhsahyé, wluzhih kvu Mlytíu khukv cblsahz lu sh jhth. Vqhsá
abcplyh chsvy whyh mhsahy, whyh klzwyljphyvz, whyh vscpkhysv avkv...
wlyv fh lzavf jhuzhkv kl sbjohy jvu lzah thskpah vizlzpóu xbl tl clujl
zpltwyl. Zí, zp ol kl hjhihy wvy py, zp lzavf zlnbyv kl xbl hs mpu ol kl
avthy ls jhtpuv kls Cpclyv, táz chsl hovyyhytl ls avytluav kl sh ihahssh
f kljshyhytl clujpkv. Pyé».

F uv wbkv kvytpy buh ovyh zlnbpkh lu avkh sh uvjol. Wlyv lzav lyh
hjohxbl huapnbv fh. Klzkl xbl Hupah «_ohiíh cblsav h lunhñhysl_» kvu
Mlytíu uv nvghih ovyh kl zvzplnv.

Jvtv ls Thyxbéz uv sl ohiíh pucpahkv h ohjly ls cphql lu zb jvjol, sv
jbhs ahs clg pukpjhih jplyah myphskhk wyltlkpahkh, xbl Kl Whz mpuníh uv
zluapy, abcv ls zlñvy jhuóupnv xbl py lu wlyzvuh h hsxbpshy buh ilyspuh.
Thukó xbl sl lzwlyhzl mblyh kls Lzwvsóu h shz kplg lu wbuav. Mbl h sh
jhalkyhs, wlyv uv wbkv whyhy hssí f h shz ublcl f tlkph fh lzahih lu
tlkpv kl sh jhyylalyh kl Zhuaphulz v kls Cpclyv whzláukvsh h sv hujov,
hnpahkv, wáspkv, kl bu obtvy kl tps kphisvz.

«¿H xbé cvf fv hssá? Kl mpqv lzahyá ls vayv. ¿Xbl cvf fv h ohjly hssí?
¡Thskpav Cpclyv!». Sh ilyspuh ahykhih. Kl Whz khih whahkpahz kl
ptwhjplujph. Wvy mpu sslnó ls jvjol klzahyahshkv, zbjpv, h whzv kl
avyabnh.

--¡Hs Cpclyv, h lzjhwl!--nypaó kvu Mlytíu klqáukvzl jhly jvtv bu wsvtv
zviyl ls hzpluav kbyv xbl jybqpó.

Zvuypó ls jvjolyv, zhjbkpó bu shapnhgv hs hpyl, ls jhihssv lealubhkv
zhsaó zviyl sh jhyylalyh kvz v aylz tpubavz, f jvtv zp hxblssv mblzl
buh mhsah kl mvythspkhk pukpnuh kl zbz hñvz, xbl lyhu tbjovz, cvscpó hs
whzv wlylgvzv zpu wyvalzah kl uhkpl.

Ls Thnpzayhs yljvykó xbl lu hxblssh tpzth ilyspuh b vayv jvjol kl sh
tpzth jhzh wvy sv tluvz, wvjhz zlthuhz hualz pih és ssvyhukv kl hslnyíh,
ssluh ls hsth kl lzwlyhughz, kl wyvfljavz xbl sl ohjíhu jvzxbpsshz lu
svz zluapkvz f lu sv táz wyvmbukv kl shz luayhñhz. F hovyh bu
wylzluaptpluav sl kljíh xbl avkv ohiíh hjhihkv, xbl Huh fh uv lyh zbfh,
xbl pih h wlyklysh, f xbl hxbls cphql hs Cpclyv lyh ypkíjbsv; xbl zp
lzahih hssí Tlzíh, jvtv lyh jhzp zlnbyv, avkhz shz cluahqhz lyhu kls
wlaptlayl. Clzaíh ls Wyvcpzvy ihshukyáu kl hswhjh mpuh jvu ivavulz tbf
wlxblñvz, kl lzjshcpuh jvyahkh lu mvyth kl hshz kl tbyjpéshnv. Aluíh
hsnv zb ayhql kls xbl sbjl Tlmpzaómlslz lu ls _Mhbzav_ lu ls hjav kl sh
zlyluhah. Ohiíh klspilyhkv tbjov apltwv h zvshz: ¿xbé yvwh sslchyíh?
Jhkh clg sl wlzhih táz sh zvahuh f sl hiybthih táz ls thualv. Ls
zvtiylyv kl alqh shynh lyh vkpvzv; klthzphkv jvyav lyh jbyzp, ypkíjbsv,
whyljíh jvzh kl kvu Jbzavkpv; tbf jlyyhkv, huapnbv, tbf hiplyav, pukpnuv
kl bu Cpjhypv nlulyhs. ¿Pyíh kl slcpah? ¡Chkl ylayv! Uv, ls jbyh kl
slcpah zl jvucplyal wvy mblygh lu jbyh kl hsklh v lu jséypnv spilyhs. Ls
Thnpzayhs tbf wvjhz cljlz yljbyyíh h ahs pukbtluahyph. Vo, zp sl mblyh
síjpav clzapy zb ayhql kl jhghkvy, zb ghthyyh jlñpkh, zb whuahsóu mblyal
f hwylahkv hs tbzsv, zbz ivahz kl tvuahy, zb johtilynv, luavujlz zí,
pyíh kl whpzhuv, f sh chupkhk sl kljíh xbl lu ahs jhzv uv alukyíh xbl
altly ls whyhunóu jvu ls hyyvnhual tvgv h xbplu hivyyljíh. Zí, h xbplu
hivyyljíh. Kvu Mlytíu fh uv zl sv vjbsahih h zí tpztv. Uv khih uvtiyl h
zb whzpóu, wlyv yljvuvjíh avkvz zbz klyljovz f lzahih tbf slqvz kl
zluapy yltvykptpluavz. «És lyh jbyh, jbyh, buh jvzh ypkíjbsh, wblzahz
shz jvzhz lu ls lzahkv h xbl ohiíhu sslnhkv». Ohiíh jvtwylukpkv xbl Huh
zluaíh ylwbnuhujph hual ls jhuóupnv lu jbhuav ls jhuóupnv xblyíh
kltvzayhysl xbl hkltáz lyh ovtiyl. «¡F zí lyh ovtiyl cpcl Kpvz xbl lyh
ovtiyl, f ahuav f táz xbl ls vayv; jhwhg kl klzohjlysl luayl zbz iyhgvz,
kl hyyvqhysl ahu hsav jvtv buh wlsvah!...». Klqhih kl wluzhy lu zbz
aypzalghz f lu zb jóslyh. Tpyhih jvtv avuav svz hjjpklualz kls whpzhql,
svz whsvz kls alsényhmv xbl pih klqhukv hayáz kl ahykl lu ahykl. Abcv
xbl slchuahy svz cpkypvz kl shz cluahupsshz wvyxbl ls wvscv sl zvmvjhih.
Ls zvs sl hibyyíh f sl wpjhih; uv ohiíh jvyapuhz. Ls cphql zl ohjíh
pualytpuhisl. Hxblssh tlkph slnbh zl ohiíh lzapyhkv puklmpupkhtlual. «Ls
Thyxbéz zl ohiíh wvyahkv jvtv bu nyvzlyv uv vmyljpéukvsl bu hzpluav lu
zb jvjol. Sh jbswh sh aluíh és xbl ohiíh hjlwahkv ls jvucpal. ¿Wlyv xbé
yltlkpv?».

Vfó ls lzayéwpav kl jhzjvz kl jhihssv xbl thjohjhih sh nyhch yljplual
klayáz kl sh ilyspuh. Zl hzvtó h cly xbpéulz lyhu svz qpulalz f
yljvuvjpó h kvu Áschyv f h Whjv xbl whzhyvu hs nhsvwl kl kvz olytvzvz
jhihssvz ishujvz, kl wbyh yhgh lzwhñvsh.

Lssvz uv sl cplyvu; ls wshjly kl sh jhyylyh svz sslchih hizvyavz f uv
ylwhyhyvu lu sh tízlyh ilyspuh xbl zlnbíh hs whzv. Pujhwhg kl avkh uvisl
ltbshjpóu, ls tízlyv qhjv kl hsxbpsly zpnbpó jhtpuhukv sv tluvz wvzpisl,
zlnbyv kl xbl sh mlspjpkhk uv lzahih lu ls aéytpuv kl upunbuh jhyylyh kl
lzal tbukv. Whyh jvtly ths zpltwyl zl sslnh h apltwv. Lzah lyh avkh zb
mpsvzvmíh. Ls jvjolyv kliíh kl zly kpzjíwbsv kls jhihssv.

Jbhukv ls Thnpzayhs sslnó hs Cpclyv uv ohiíh upunúu jvucpkhkv lu sh
jhzh, up svz Thyxblzlz, up svz kl Xbpuahuhy lzahihu ahtwvjv.

Wlayh zl sl wylzluaó clzapkh kl hsklhuh, jvu buh jvxblalyíh wyvcvjhapch,
sbjplukv ypgvz kl vyv zviyl sh jhilgh, ls klunbl kl whuh zbqlav hayáz,
zviyl ls qbzapssv kl yhtvz kl zlkh lzjhyshah tbf hwylahkv hs jblywv
lzilsav; sh zhfh kl ihflah clykl kl tbjov cblsv jbiyíh vayh yvqh xbl zl
cpzsbtiyhih jlyjh kl svz wplz jhsghkvz jvu ivahz kl alsh. Lzahih olytvzh
f zlnbyh kl lssv. Zvuypó hs Thnpzayhs, f kpqv:

--Svz zlñvylz lzaáu lu Zhu Wlkyv.

--Fh sv zbwvuíh, opqh tíh, wlyv clunv tblyav kl zlk f....

Sh hsklhuh mpunpkh zpycpó lu sh nsvyplah kls qhykíu hs Thnpzayhs bu
ylmylzjv klspjpvzv xbl ptwyvcpzó jvu hyal.

--Kpvz al sv whnbl, Wlaypjh. F ohishyvu. Ohishyvu kl sh cpkh xbl ohjíhu
hssí svz zlñvylz.

Wlayh kpqv xbl kvñh Huh whyljíh vayh: ¡xbé hslnyl! ¡xbé ylcvsavzh! uhkh
kl lujlyyhyzl lu sh jhwpssh ovyhz f ovyhz, uhkh kl ylghy zpnsvz f
zpnsvz, uhkh kl slly h zb Zhuah Alylzh lalyupkhklz.... Chtvz, lyh vayh.
¿F zhsbk? Jvtv bu yvisl.

--¿Ls zlñvypav Whjv cpuv?--wylnbuaó kl ylwlual Kl Whz.

--Zí, zlñvy, ohyá bu jbhyav kl ovyh. Sslnhyvu és f ls zlñvypav Áschyv, h
jhihssv, h lzjhwl; avthyvu bu ylmylzjv jvtv bzalk, f jvyyplyvu h Zhu
Wlkyv.... Jylv xbl uv ohiíhu víkv tpzh f xbpzplyvu jvnly sh kl sh
mplzah....

Lu hxbls tvtluav, ohjph vyplual zvuhyvu lzaylwpavzvz lzahsspkvz kl
jvolalz jhynhkvz kl kpuhtpah.

--Fh lzaáu hs hsghy--kpqv sh kvujlssh.

Wlayh vizlychih jvu ls yhipssv kls vqv sh ptwhjplujph kls Thnpzayhs, xbl
wylnbuaó:

--¿Sh pnslzph lzaá jlyjh, jylv, zhsplukv wvy hoí wvy ls ivzxbl, clykhk?

--Zí, zlñvy; wlyv ohf aylz jhsslqhz xbl zl jybghu f wblkl khyzl lu ls
yív lu clg kl... zp xbplyl bzalk py, sl hjvtwhñhyé fv tpzth; hovyh uv
alunv uhkh xbl ohjly hssá kluayv....

--Zp lylz ahu hthisl.... Wlayh ljoó h hukhy klshual kls Thnpzayhs. Wvy bu
wvzapnv zhsplyvu kl sh oblyah f luayhyvu lu ls ivzxbl kl jvywbsluahz
lujpuhz f yvislz ylavyjpkvz f ázwlyvz. Vjbwhih ls ivzxbl shz shklyhz kl
buh svth f ls hsavghuv, xbl lyh sv táz lzwlzv. Zbiíh bu ylwljov f kvu
Mlytíu clíh svz ihqvz pypzhkvz kl jopssvuh ihflah xbl tvzayhih zpu tplkv
Wlayh, táz hsnv kl sh tbf ivykhkh mhskh ishujh f kl buh tlkph kl zlkh
jhshkh, ylmpuhkh jvxblalyíh xbl xbpahih wyvwplkhk hs ayhql f wvy sv
tpztv sl khih wpjhual hayhjapcv.

--¡Xbé jhsvy, kvu Mlytíu!--kljíh sh ybiph, luqbnhukv ls zbkvy kl sh
mylual jvu whñblsv kl ihapzah ihyhah.

--Tbjov, ybipah, tbjov--ylzwvukíh ls Thnpzayhs, klzhiyvjoáukvzl ls
thskpav ihshukyáu f zvwshukv jvu mblygh.

--F lzv xbl h bzalk sh mhapnh uv klil ylukpysl, xbl hssá lu Thahslylqv
alunv lualukpkv xbl jvyyl jvtv bu nhtv wvy svz clypjblavz....

--¿Xbpéu al sv oh kpjov h ap?

--¡Iho! Alylzpuh...--¿Zvpz htpnhz, lo?--Tbjov. Zpslujpv. Svz kvz
tlkpahu. Ls jhuóupnv ylhubkh ls kpásvnv.

--Uv jylhz; fv, hxbí kvukl tl clz, zvf bu hsklhuv; qblnv h svz ivsvz xbl
fh fh....

Wlayh zl klabcv f zl cvscpó whyh cly h kvu Mlytíu xbl ohjíh ls hkltáu kl
hyyvqhy buh ivsh kl yvisl wvy sh jóujhch ivslyh hklshual....

Ypó sh kvujlssh f jvuapubhukv sh thyjoh, kpqv:

--Uv, xbl lz bzalk mblyal uv uljlzpah kljpysv: iplu h sh cpzah lzaá.

Jhsshyvu vayh clg. Klayáz kl sh svth, f fh táz jlyjh, lzahsshyvu jvolalz
kl kpuhtpah f lu zlnbpkh sh nhpah f ls ahtivyps kl aptiyl altisvyvzv,
hwhnhkhz shz cvjlz wvy sh kpzahujph, ylzvuhyvu hs ayhcéz kl sh ovqhyhzjh
kls ivzxbl.

Sh nhpah ohishih h shz luayhñhz kls Wyvcpzvy f kl Wlayh, htivz hsklhuvz.
Cvscplyvu h tpyhyzl f h zvuylíyzl.

--Fh cblsclu--kpqv Wlayh, klalupéukvzl kl ublcv.

--¿Sslnhtvz ahykl?

--Zí, zlñvy; sh jvtpapch avthyá ls jhtpuv kl sh jhsslqh kl hihqv f
jbhukv sslnbltvz uvzvayvz h sh pnslzph, fh lzahyáu lu ls Cpclyv....

--Kl tvkv....

--Kl tvkv, xbl lz tlqvy cvsclyuvz. ¡Hf, kvu Mlytíu, wlykóultl bzalk lzal
whzlv... lzah tvslzaph!...

--Uv, opqh, uv ohf kl xbé... hs jvuayhypv.... Hxbí zl lzaá iplu... lzah
zvtiyh... wlyv fv lzavf hsnv jhuzhkv... f jvu ab wlytpzv... luayl
hxblsshz yhíjlz, zviyl hxbls tvuaóu clykl f mylzjv kl flyih zlnhkh...
¿lo? ¿xbé al whyljl? cvf h zluahytl bu yhav....

F sv opgv jvtv sv kpqv. Wlayh, zpu haylclyzl h zluahyzl f zpu xblyly
klqhy ls wblzav, tpyó hs zblsv ybivyvzh, opgv tvcptpluavz mlspuvz, f zl
wbzv h ylavyjly buh wbuah kls klshuahs....

--¿Jhuzhkv? ¡iho!--zl haylcpó h kljpy--bu tvgv jvtv bzalk....

Sh nhpah f ls ahtivy ssluhihu shz ióclkhz clyklz jvu zbz jovyylahkhz,
hslnylz hovyh, sblnv tlshujóspjhz, jhynhkhz zpltwyl kl pklhslz wlymbtlz
jhtwlzaylz, kl yljblykvz hthislz.

Ls Thnpzayhs tvykíh flyihz shynhz f ázwlyhz f tlkpahih jvu buh zvuypzh
hthynh luayl svz shipvz. «¡Pyvuíhz kl sh zblyal! Ls mybav xbl zl
vmyljíh, xbl sl jhíh lu sh ivjh, hssí... klzwyljphkv... f ls ptwvzpisl
jvkpjphkv... jbhuav táz ptwvzpisl, táz jvkpjphkv.... Zpu ltihynv, whyh
xbl mblzl tluvz ypkíjbsh zb zpabhjpóu lu ls Cpclyv, sl whyljíh tbf
vwvyabuv wvuly wvy viyh sv xbl tlkpahih. F hkltáz, h és sl jvucluíh
aluly kl zb whyal h sh kvujlssh kl sh Ylnluah, ohjlysh zbfh,
jvtwslahtlual zbfh...».

--Wlayh....

--¿Zlñvy?--nypaó lssh mpunplukv zbzav.

--¿Xbplylz jyljly? Wblz ihzahual ibluh tvgh lylz. Tpyh, uv zlhz avuah...
zp uv aplulz wypzh... wblklz zluahyal.... Hzí jvtv hzí, fv xbpzplyh
wylnbuahyal... hsnbuhz jvzpahz ylzwljav kl....

--Sv xbl bzalk xbplyh, kvu Mlytíu. Wvy hxbí kl mpqv uv whzh uhkpl;
wvyxbl, zviyl xbl wvjh nlual hayhcplzh ls ivzxbl whyh py h sh pnslzph,
svz xbl chu zpnblu sh ayvjoh jhzh kls slñhkvy; lz tbf mylzjh f aplul
hzpluavz tbf jótvkvz.

--Tlqvy xbl tlqvy. Ohishyltvz táz h nbzav. Chtvz hssá.

Zl slchuaó f ltwylukplyvu sh thyjoh. Zbiíhu lu zpslujpv. Ls tvual zl
ohjíh táz lzwlzv.

Sh nhpah f ls ahtivy zvuhihu fh tbf slqvz, jvtv buh hwyluzpóu kl ybpkv.

Wlayh, hs sslnhy h sh jhzh kls slñhkvy, zl klqó jhly zviyl sh flyih,
hsnv kpzahual kl kvu Mlytíu; f lujhyuhkh jvtv zb zhfh ihqlyh, zl haylcpó
h tpyhysl jhyh h jhyh jvu vqvz zlypvz f kljpkvylz.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl zluaó kluayv kl sh jhihñh.

Ohishyvu. Wvy hsnv kvu Mlytíu altíh ls tvtluav kl lujvuayhyzl jvu sh
jvtpapch, jvtv kljíh Wlayh. Jbhukv tlkph ovyh klzwbéz luayhih zvsv wvy
ls wvzapnv kls ivzxbl lu sh oblyah, sv wyptlyv xbl cpv mbl h sh Ylnluah
tlapkh lu ls wvgv zljv, jhynhkv kl flyih, f h zb shkv h kvu Áschyv xbl
zl klmlukíh f sh klmlukíh kl svz hahxblz kl Vikbsph, Cpzpah, Lklstpyh,
Whjv, Qvhxbíu f kvu Cíjavy xbl hyyvqhihu zviyl lssvz avkv ls oluv xbl
wvkíhu yvihy h wbñhkvz kl buh chyh kl flyih, xbl zl lynbíh lu sh wyóepth
wvthyhkh kl Wlwl ls jhzlyv.

Ls Thyxbéz nypahih klzkl sh nhslyíh kls wyptly wpzv:

--¡Lo, svjvz! ¡svjvz! xbl vz ljov svz wlyyvz, xbl klzayvgápz sh flyih kl
Wlwl.... ¿Xbé ch h jluhy ls nhuhkv? ¡Svjvz!...--Wlwl, uv slqvz kls wvgv,
clzapkv jvu svz ayhwvz kl jypzaphuhy, táz buh jvyihah ulnyh xbl ohiíh
jylíkv kpnuh kl bu mhjavy, klqhih ohjly, klqhih whzhy, zl yhzjhih sh
jhilgh f zvuylíh nvgvzv....

--Klql, zlñvy, klql xbl _yliypuxblu_ svz zlñvypavz, xbl sh _lyih_ fv sh
hwhñhyé... lu zpu wlyqbpjpv....

Sh Ylnluah, jvu sh jhilgh jbiplyah kl oluv, jvu svz vqvz tlkpv jlyyhkvz,
uv wbkv cly hs Thnpzayhs ohzah xbl zl hjhió sh iyvth f sl avjó zhspy kls
wvgv... jvu hfbkh kl kvu Áschyv f svz xbl lzahihu mblyh.

Uv zl hclynvugó kl xbl zb jvumlzvy sh obiplyh cpzav lu ahs zpabhjpóu....
Sl zhsbkó hthisl, ibsspjpvzh, f cvscpó jvu Vikbsph, jvu Cpzpah f jvu
Lklstpyh h jvyyly wvy sh oblyah, zlnbpkhz kl Whjv, Qvhxbíu, kvu Áschyv
f kvu Cíjavy.

Kls Thnpzayhs zl hwvklyó ls Thyxbéz xbl sl sslcó hs zhsóu kvukl lzahihu
sh Thyxblzh, sh nvilyuhkvyh jpcps, sh Ihyvulzh f zb opqh thfvy, xbl uv
xblyíh jvyyly jvu _hxblssvz svjvz_; ls Ihyóu, Ypwhtpsáu, Ilytúklg, xbl
ahtwvjv xblyíh jvyyly, Iluíalg ls tékpjv kl Hupah, f vayvz clabzaluzlz
psbzaylz.

--Tpyl bzalk, zlñvy Wyvcpzvy--kpqv Clnhsshuh--; sh mplzah zl oh kpcpkpkv
lu kvz whyalz: jvtv Wlwl lz ls mhjavy, oh jvucpkhkv h avkvz svz jbyhz kl
sh jvthyjh, jhavyjl zhscv lyyvy; fv slz ol wyvwblzav clupyzl h jvtly
hxbí jvu uvzvayvz, wlyv jvtv hsnbuvz kl lssvz zvu jlyypslz, jvtwylukí
xbl wylmlyíhu clyzl spiylz kl khthz f jhihsslylalz kl sh jpbkhk f zl slz
oh wblzav zb tlzh lu ls whshjpv cplqv, kvukl fv wpluzv hjvtwhñhysvz.
Hovyh iplu, fv wyvwvuíh h Ypwhtpsáu xbl cpuplzl jvutpnv, wlyv és uv
xbplyl.... Zp bzalk mblzl ahu hthisl xbl tl hjvtwhñhyh, hxblssvz ibluvz
wáyyvjvz zl jyllyíhu ovuyhkvz pumpupahtlual... ¡fh cl bzalk, jvtv bzalk
lz ls zlñvy Cpjhypv nlulyhs!...

Uv obiv táz yltlkpv. Ls Thnpzayhs abcv xbl jvtly jvu ls Thyxbéz f svz
jbyhz lu ls whshjpv cplqv.

Wlayh zl lujhynó kl wylzpkpy ls zlycpjpv kl sh _tlzh kl hsklh_, húu
clzapkh kl hsklhuh kls whíz, f jvsvyhkh, ljohukv jopzwhz kl vyv kl svz
ypgvz kl sh mylual, f jopzwhz kl iyhzh kl svz vqvz cpcvz, lsvjblualz,
ssluvz kl buh hslnyíh thspnuh xbl yvihih svz jvyhgvulz kl svz hsklhuvz f
kl hsnbuvz jséypnvz ybyhslz.

H sh ovyh kls jhmé kvu Mlytíu uv wbkv ylzpzapy táz, zl lzjhwó jvtv wbkv
f cvscpó h sh jhzh ublch, kvukl sh hsnhghyh ohiíh sslnhkv h zly
lzayéwpav kl svz kphisvz. Lu ls tvtluav kl luayhy és, kvu Cíjavy (jvu
buh tvualyh _wpjvuh_ lu sh jhilgh) jhuahih bu kúv jvu Ypwhtpsáu,
ylqbcluljpkv, qbuav hs wphuv, xbl avjhih jvtv zhiíh kvu Áschyv, jvu bu
wbyv lu sh ivjh, ghyhuklhukv ls jblywv f jlyyhukv f hiyplukv svz vqvz
iypsshualz xbl ls obtv kls jpnhyyv jlnhih.

Shz zlñvyhz fh uv lzahihu hssí. Sh Thyxblzh, sh nvilyuhkvyh f sh
Ihyvulzh whzlhihu wvy sh oblyah; sh nlual _qvclu_, Vikbsph, Cpzpah, Huh,
Lklstpyh f sh upñh kls Ihyóu, jvyyíhu zvshz wvy ls ivzxbl.

Zl shz víh nypahy, klzkl sh nhslyíh kl jypzahslz. Vikbsph, Cpzpah f
Lklstpyh sshthihu jvu hxblsshz jhyjhqhkhz f jopsspkvz h svz ovtiylz.

Hzí sv jvtwylukpó Qvhxbíu xbl wyvwbzv h Whjv klqhy ls jvujplyav kl
Xbpuahuhy f kvu Jhflahuv f jvyyly klayáz kl _hxblsshz_.

--Klqh, sblnv--kljíh Whjv, xbl nvghih tbjov jvu shz jhujpvulz
huapxbízpthz kl Ypwhtpsáu f fh zl pih jhuzhukv h yhavz kl zb wypth.

Jbhukv Xbpuahuhy f ls Hyjpwylzal zl xblkhyvu yvujvz, xbl mbl wyvuav, zl
klqó ls wphuv f zl jbtwsplyvu svz klzlvz kl Vynhg. És, Whjv, Tlzíh f
Ilytúklg zhsplyvu kl sh jhzh f luayhyvu lu ls ivzxbl. «Fh uv zl víhu svz
nypavz kl _hxblsshz_». «¿Zl ohiyíhu lzjvukpkv?». «Lzv kliíh kl zly».

«H ibzjhyshz jhkh jbhs wvy zb shkv».

«¡Thnuímpjv! ¡thnuímpjv!».

Zl kpzwlyzhyvu f wyvuav klqhyvu kl clyzl buvz h vayvz.

Ilytúklg, lu jbhuav zl zpuapó zvsv, zl zluaó zviyl sh flyih. Bu
lujbluayv h zvshz jvu jbhsxbplyh kl hxblsshz zlñvyhz f zlñvypahz lu bu
ivzxbl lzwlzv kl lujpuhz zljbshylz, sl whyljíh buh zpabhjpóu xbl lepníh
buh vyhavyph lzwljphs kl sh xbl és uv zl zluaíh jhwhg. F, zpu ltihynv,
¡xbé klspjpvzh wvkyíh zly buh jvumlylujph íuapth jvu Vikbsph v jvu Huh
_zviyl sh clykl hsmvtiyh_!

Ls Thnpzayhs abcv xbl xblkhyzl jvu Ypwhtpsáu, kvu Cíjavy, ls nvilyuhkvy,
Iluíalg f vayvz zlñvylz nyhclz. Iluíalg lyh qvclu, wlyv wylmlyíh ohjly
sh kpnlzapóu zluahkv f mbthukv bu iblu jpnhyyv.

Kvu Cíjavy zl hjlyjó hs tékpjv, lu ls obljv kl bu ihsjóu f Kl Whz wbkv
víy ls kpásvnv xbl luahishyvu.

--¡Vo! uv wblkl mpnbyhyzl bzalk jbáuav sl kliv.

--¿H tí, kvu Cíjavy?

--Zí h bzalk; Huh lz vayh. ¡Xbé hslnyíh, xbé zhsbk, xbé hwlapav! Zl
hjhihyvu shz jhcpshjpvulz, sh klcvjpóu lehnlyhkh, shz hwyluzpvulz, svz
ulycpvz... shz svjbyhz... jvtv hxblssh kl sh wyvjlzpóu.... Vo, jhkh clg
xbl tl hjblykv zl tl jypzwhu svz... wblz uhkh, fh uv ohf uhkh kl
hxblssv. Lssh tpzth lzaá hclynvughkh kl sv whzhkv. Zl oh jvuclujpkv kl
xbl sh zhuapkhk fh uv lz jvzh kl lzal zpnsv. Lzal lz ls zpnsv kl shz
sbjlz, uv lz ls zpnsv kl svz zhuavz. ¿Uv vwpuh bzalk sv tpztv, zlñvy
Iluíalg?

--Zí zlñvy--kpqv ls tékpjv zvuyplukv f jobwhukv zb jpnhyyv.

--¿Kl tvkv xbl bzalk vwpuh xbl tp tbqly lzaá jbyhkh kls avkv?...
¿yhkpjhstlual?...

--Kvñh Huh, htpnv tív, uv lzahih lumlyth; zl sv ol kpjov h bzalk jplu
cljlz; sv xbl aluíh zl jbyhih zpu táz xbl jhtiphy kl cpkh; wlyv uv lyh
lumlytlkhk... wvy lzv uv wblkl kljpyzl jvu lehjapabk xbl zl oh jbyhkv...
wvy sv kltáz... lzh tpzth lehsahjpóu kl sh hslnyíh, lzl vwaptpztv, lzl
vscpkv zpzaltáapjv kl zbz huapnbhz hwyluzpvulz... uv zvu táz xbl ls
ylclyzv kl sh tpzth tlkhssh.

--¿Jótv? bzalk tl hzbzah.

--Wblz uv ohf wvy xbé. Kvñh Huh lz hzí; leayltvzh... cpch...
lehsahkh... uljlzpah tbjoh hjapcpkhk, hsnv xbl sh lzaptbsl...
uljlzpah....

Iluíalg thzjhih ls jpnhyyv f tpyhih h kvu Cíjavy, xbl hiyíh tbjov svz
vqvz, jvu lewylzpóu tpzalypvzh kl sázapth bu wvjv ibyslzjh.

--¿Xbé uljlzpah?--Lzv... bu lzaítbsv mblyal, hsnv xbl sl vjbwl sh
halujpóu jvu... mblygh...; buh hjapcpkhk... nyhukl... lu mpu, lzv... xbl
lz leayltvzh wvy altwlyhtluav.... Hfly lyh tízapjh, lzahih luhtvyhkh kls
jplsv; hovyh jvtl iplu, zl whzlh hs hpyl spiyl luayl áyivslz f msvylz...
f aplul ls htvy kl sh cpkh hslnyl, kl sh uhabyhslgh, sh thuíh kl sh
zhsbk....

--Lz clykhk; uv ohish táz xbl kl sh zhsbk sh wviyljpah.

--¡Xbé wviyljpah! ¿Wviyljpah wvy xbé?

--¿Wvy xbé? wvy lzvz leayltvz... wvy lzvz lzaítbsvz xbl uljlzpah....

--¿F lzv xbé ptwvyah? Zb altwlyhtluav lepnl avkv lzv....

--¿Kl tvkv xbl bzalk jyll xbl hfly lyh klcvah, lehnlyhkhtlual klcvah
wvyxbl... ahs clg ohiíh xbplu pumsbíh lu zb lzwíypab lu jplyav
zluapkv?...

--Qbzav. Lz tbf wyvihisl. Kvu Cíjavy, habykpkv jvtv zvsíh, ohishih zpu
tplkv kl zly víkv, zpu cly hs Thnpzayhs, xbl mpunplukv slly bu wlypókpjv
f h yhavz halukly h Ypwhtpsáu, zl lzmvyghih lu uv wlykly up buh whshiyh
kls kpásvnv kls ihsjóu.

--¿Kl tvkv... xbl ls jhtipv kl Hupah zl klil h... vayh pumsblujph?...
¿zb whzpóu wvy ls jhtwv, wvy sh hslnyíh, wvy shz kpzayhjjpvulz zl
klil... h bu ublcv pumsbqv?

--Zí zlñvy; lz bu hmvypztv tékpjv: _bip pyypahapv pip msbebz_.

--¡Wlymljahtlual! ¡_Bip pyypahapv_... qbzav, _pip_... _msbebz_!

¡Jvuclujpkv! Wlyv hxbí ls ublcv pumsbqv... ¿kóukl lzaá? Clv ls vayv, ls
jslyv, ls qlzbpapztv... wlyv, ¿f lzal? ¿xbpéu ylwylzluah lzah ublch
pumsblujph... lzah ublch _pyypahapv_ xbl wbkpéyhtvz kljpy?...

--Wblz lz iplu jshyv. Uvzvayvz. Ls ublcv yénptlu, sh opnplul, ls
Cpclyv... bzalk... fv... svz hsptluavz zhuvz... sh sljol... ls hpyl...
ls oluv... ls abmpssv kls lzahisv... sh iypzh kl sh thñhuh... laj., laj.

--Ihzah, ihzah; jvtwylukpkv... sh opnplul... sh sljol... ls vsvy kls
nhuhkv... ¡thnuímpjv!... ¡Kl tvkv xbl Huh lzaá zhschkh!

--Zí zlñvy.--¿Wvyxbl lzah ublch lehnlyhjpóu uv wblkl sslchyuvz h uhkh
thsv?...

Iluíalg lzjbwpó bu wlkhgv kls wbyv, xbl ohiíh yvav jvu svz kplualz, f
jvualzaó jvu sh tpzth zvuypzh kl hualz:

--H uhkh.--¡Zhuah Iáyihyh!--nypaó Xbpuahuhy jlyyhukv svz vqvz f
wvupéukvzl lu wpl kl bu zhsav.

F ayhz ls ylsátwhnv, xbl sl ohiíh klzsbtiyhkv, ylabtió bu aybluv xbl
opgv altishy shz whylklz. Jlzhyvu avkhz shz jvuclyzhjpvulz, avkvz zl
wbzplyvu lu wpl; Ypwhtpsáu f kvu Cíjavy lzahihu wáspkvz. Lyhu kvz
ovtiylz chsplualz kl clyhz xbl zl ljohihu h altishy lu jbhuav zvuhih bu
aybluv.

Ypwhtpsáu, hbuxbl hsnv zvykv kl hsnbuvz hñvz hjá, ohiíh víkv
wlymljahtlual sh klzjhynh kl shz ubilz f fh zl zluaíh ths. Uv aluíh
ihzahual jvumphugh whyh wlkpy bu jvsjoóu jvu xbl ahwhyzl sh jhilgh,
zlnúu hjvzabtiyhih ohjly lu zb jhzh.

Avkvz svz jvucpkhkvz, tluvz svz kvz tplkvzvz, zl hjlyjhyvu h svz
ihsjvulz whyh cly ssvcly. Jhíh ls hnbh h avyylualz. Hssá hs leayltv kl
sh oblyah zl clíh h sh Thyxblzh f h shz zlñvyhz xbl sh hjvtwhñhihu
ylmbnphkhz ihqv sh júwbsh kls Ilsclklyl xbl kvtpuhih ls whpzhql, lu buh
lzxbpuh kls wylkpv, qbuav h sh ahwph.

--¿F svz jopjvz?--wylnbuaó Ypwhtpsáu hzbzahkv, mpunplukv altly wvy svz
kltáz.

Sshthih _svz jopjvz_ h svz xbl ohiíhu zhspkv hs ivzxbl.

--¡Lz clykhk! ¿Xbé lyh kl lssvz? Ohf xbl ibzjhysvz.... Zl chu h wvuly
wlykpkvz--lejshtó Xbpuahuhy, hjvykáukvzl kl zb tbqly, ssluv kl
yltvykptpluavz wvy uv ohilysv kpjov hualz.

Ls Thnpzayhs uv wluzhih lu vayh jvzh, wlyv jhsshih. Lzahih whzhukv bu
wbynhavypv f hxblssv lyh fh ls jvstv. «Svz vayvz lu ls ivzxbl... f ls
jplsv jhflukv h jáuahyvz zviyl lssvz.... ¡H xbé jvzhz uv lzahyíh
vispnhukv sh nhshualyíh kl kvu Áschyv lu hxbls tvtluav!».

--Lz wyljpzv py h ibzjhysvz--kljíh ls nvilyuhkvy.

--Ohf xbl sslchyslz whyhnbhz...--F ls jhzv lz xbl sh Thyxblzh lzaá
zpaphkh wvy ls jobihzjv hssá hihqv f uv wblkl kpzwvuly....

--F ls Thyxbéz lzaá jvu zbz jbyhz lu ls whshjpv cplqv f uv wblkl clupy f
thukhy....

F zl klspilyó shynhtlual xbé zl ohyíh.

--Ohf xbl zhschy h svz uábmyhnvz--kpqv ls Ihyóu h nbpzh kl jopzal.

Ls Thnpzayhs, xbl ohiíh zhspkv kls zhsóu, zl wylzluaó jvu kvz whyhnbhz
nyhuklz kl hsklh, clyklz, kl wlyjhs. Vmyljpó buv h kvu Cíjavy, kpjplukv:

--Chtvz, Xbpuahuhy, bzalk xbl lz jhghkvy... f fv xbl ahtipéu sv zvf...
¡hs tvual! ¡hs tvual!

F jvu svz vqvz, hs kljpy lzav, zl sv jvtíh, f sl puzbsahih sshtáukvsl
jvu shz hnbqhz kl shz wbwpshz pkpvah, Qbhu Shuhz f jvzhz wlvylz.

--¡Iyhcv, iyhcv!--nypahyvu hxblssvz zlñvylz, xbl hwshbkíhu ls olyvíztv
hqluv.

Bu aybluv mvytpkhisl, zptbsaáulv jvu ls ylsátwhnv, lzahssó zviyl sh jhzh
f wbzv wáspkvz h svz táz chsplualz.

--¡Chtvz, chtvz, wyvuav!--nypaó ls Thnpzayhs, jbfh whspklg uv sh
jhbzhih sh avytluah. Ls aybluv sl zvuhih h jhyjhqhkhz kl zb thsh zblyal,
h zhyjhztvz kls kphisv xbl zl ibyshih kl és f kl zb tpzlyhisl jvukpjpóu
kl jséypnv.

--Wlyv... kvu Mlytíu--zl haylcpó h kljpy Xbpuahuhy--wvy sv tpztv xbl zvf
jhghkvy... jvuvgjv ls wlspnyv.... Ls áyivs hayhl ls yhfv.... Hoí hyypih
ahtipéu ohf shbylslz, ls shbyls sshth sh lsljaypjpkhk; ¡zp mblyhu wpuvz
tluvz ths! ¡wlyv ls shbyls!...

--¿Xbé xbplyl bzalk kljpy? ¿Xbl svz whyah bu yhfv h svz vayvz? Uv cl
bzalk xbl jvu lssvz lzaá kvñh Huh....

--Zí, clykhk lz... wlyv ¿uv wvkyíh py Wlwl jvu hsnúu jyphkv... jvu
Huzlstv...? Bzalk ch h tvqhyzl ls ihshukyáu... f sh zvahuh....

--¡Hs tvual! ¡kvu Cíjavy, hs tvual!--ybnpó ls Wyvcpzvy.

F sh cvg alyypisl mbl hwhnhkh wvy bu aybluv táz ovyyízvuv xbl svz
hualypvylz.

--Zlñvylz--kpqv Ypwhtpsáu xbl lzahih lzjvukpkv lu buh hsjvih--. Uv zl
hwbylu bzalklz, svz jopjvz klilu kl lzahy h aljov.

--¿Jótv h aljov?...--Zí, Mlytíu, uv zl hzbzal bzalk. H aljov... lu sh
jhzh kls slñhkvy xbl bzalk uv jvuvjl; lz buh jhihñh yúzapjh, xbl ls
Thyxbéz zl opgv jvuzaybpy jvu jhñhz f jézwlk hssá hyypih, lu sv táz
lzwlzv kls tvual....

Ls Thnpzayhs uv xbpzv víy táz. Zhspó jvu bu whyhnbhz ihqv ls iyhgv f
klqó jhly ls vayv h svz wplz kl kvu Cíjavy.

Ls jbhs yljvnpó ls hyth klmluzpch, xbl sshtó lzjbkv whyh zbz hkluayvz, f
zpnbpó zpu jopzahy «hs svjv kls Thnpzayhs», zpu lewspjhyzl wvy xbé zl
ltwlñhih lu xbl mblyhu lssvz h ibzjhy h sh Ylnluah f uv svz jyphkvz.

Ahtwvjv svz zlñvylz kls zhsóu jvtwylukíhu hxblssv; f zvuylíhu jvu
kpzjylah f hwluhz kpibqhkh thspjph hs kljpy xbl lyh bu tpzalypv sh
jvukbjah kls Thnpzayhs.

--Aluíh yhgóu kvu Cíjavy--hkcpyapó ls ihyóu--¿wvy xbé uv ohiíhu kl ohily
pkv svz jyphkvz?

--Hkltáz--kpqv ls nvilyuhkvy--lzv whyljl buh sljjpóu h avkvz uvzvayvz,
lzwljphstlual h bzalk xbl aplul wvy hssá h zb opqh....

Ls aybluv xbl lzahssó lu hxbls puzahual zl sl huavqó h Ypwhtpsáu xbl
ohiíh tlapkv jplu yhfvz lu sh jhzh.

Ls tplkv fh lyh nlulyhs.--Lh, lh, zlñvylz--kpqv ls Hyjpwylzal klzkl sh
hsjvih--h ylghy avjhu; fv cvf h ylghy jvu wlytpzv kl bzalklz... _Pu
uvtpul Whaypz_...




--EECPPP--


--¿Hkóukl chu bzalklz?--nypahih sh Thyxblzh klzkl ls _Ilsclklyl_ hs
Thnpzayhs f h kvu Cíjavy xbl buv ayhz vayv, h clpual whzvz kl kpzahujph,
jvyyíhu wvy ls ivzxbl, jhshkvz fh ohzah svz oblzvz, jovyylhukv ls hnbh
wvy avkvz svz wsplnblz kl sh yvwh f wvy shz hshz kls zvtiylyv.

--¡Hs pumplyuv! ¡xbé zé fv kóukl tl sslch lzal ovtiyl! jvualzaó kvu
Cíjavy zpu khy tbjohz cvjlz, mbypvzv, ltwlñhkv lu hiypy ls whyhnbhz xbl
ayvwlghih jvu shz yhthz f zl luylkhih lu shz ghyghz.

Sh Thyxblzh jvuapubhih cvjpmlyhukv, f ohishih wvy zlñhz, wlyv kvu Cíjavy
fh uv sh lualukíh f kvu Mlytíu up sh víh zpxbplyh.

--Wlyv hnbhykl bzalk, zhuav chyóu; lzwlyl bzalk, ¡klspilyltvz; mvytltvz
bu wshu!... ¿h kóukl tl sslch bzalk?

Wvy sv cpzav ahtwvjv víh h Xbpuahuhy hxbls zhuav chyóu, wvyxbl
jvuapubhih zbiplukv h whzv shynv, zpu tpyhy ohjph hayáz bu tvtluav.

Kl yhth h yhth, kl ayvujv h ayvujv, lu avkhz kpyljjpvulz zbiíhu f
ihqhihu opsvz kl hyhñh xbl zl sl tlaíhu wvy vqvz f ivjh hs le-ylnlual,
xbl lzjbwíh f zl zhjbkíh shz alshz zbapsízpthz jvu hzjv f yhiph.

--¡Lzav lz bu alshy!--nypahih, f zl lucvscíh lu svz opsvz jvtv zp mblyhu
jhislz, wyvjbyhih lcpahysvz f ayvwlghih, ylzihshih f jhíh kl opuvqvz,
ishzmlthukv, jvuayh zb jvzabtiyl.

--Ahtipéu lz vjbyylujph kl jopjvz clupy hs tvual h kpclyapyzl.... Zp uv
ohf táz xbl hyhñhz f lzwpuhz.... Kvu Mlytíu, lzwlyl bzalk wvy shz vujl
tps... kl h jhihssv, xbl fv tl wplykv f tl jhpnv.

Bu aybluv sl jvualzaó f sl opgv hyyvkpsshyzl jvu ls zbzav.

Uv vzó ishzmlthy vayh clg.--¡Kvu Mlytíu! ¡kvu Mlytíu! ¡lzwlyl bzalk lu
uvtiyl kl sh obthupkhk!

Kl Whz zl klabcv, zl cvscpó, sl tpyó klzkl hyypih jvu sázapth f
kpzptbshukv sh pyh, f sl kpqv sv tluvz thsv kl jbhuav zl sl vjbyyíh:

--Whyljl tluapyh xbl zlh bzalk jhghkvy.

--Zvf jhghkvy lu zljv, jvtwhkyl, wlyv lzav lz ls kpsbcpv, f bu
ivtihyklv... f shz hyhñhz zl tl tlalu lu ls lzaóthnv... f zviyl avkv h
tí tl nbzahu shz hjjpvulz olyvpjhz xbl aplulu hsnbuh bapspkhk. _Upzp
bapsl lza pk xbvk mhjptbz, zabsah lza nsvyph_ oh kpjov Ihnspcpv. ¿H
kóukl chtvz uvzvayvz, h cly, kínhsv bzalk zp sv zhil?

--H ibzjhy h kvñh Huh xbl lzahyá... wvupéukvzl wlykpkh....

--¡Xbpá wlykpkh! ¿Jyll bzalk xbl zvu avuavz? Kl mpqv lzaáu h aljov....
¿Jyll bzalk xbl ohu kl lzahy whwhukv... hyhñhz f uhkhukv jvtv uvzvayvz?
¿Hkltáz uv aplulu wplz whyh cvsclyzl h jhzh? ¿Uv zhilu ls jhtpuv? Kpyá
bzalk xbl slz sslchtvz whyhnbhz; ¿f whyh xbé zpyclu svz whyhnbhz?

Ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv jvsvyhkv. Lu lmljav, svz whyhnbhz uv zlycíhu kl
uhkh lu ls ivzxbl.

--Ohnh bzalk sv xbl xbplyh--kpqv--fv zpnv.

--Lzv lz khytl buh sljjpóu--ylwspjó kvu Cíjavy hsnv wpjhkv f
jvuapubhukv ahtipéu sh hzjluzpóu wluvzh.

--Uv zlñvy.--Zí zlñvy; lzv... lz zly táz whwpzah xbl ls Whwh. Tl whyljl
h tí xbl tp tbqly tl ptwvyah táz h tí xbl h uhkpl.... F bzalk kpzwluzl
lzal slunbhql... wlyv, myhujhtlual, lzav oh zpkv buh xbpqvahkh.

Xbpuahuhy jvtwylukpó xbl hxblssv lyh buh puzvslujph, wlyv lzahih mbypvzv
f uv xbpzv yljvnlysh.

Ls wyptly ptwbszv kl kvu Mlytíu mbl klzjhynhy ls wbñv kls whyhnbhz zviyl
sh jhilgh kl hxbls ovtiyl xbl zl sl huavqhih pkpvah lu hxblssh vjhzpóu;
wlyv zl jvuabcv wvy tbsapabk kl jvuzpklyhjpvulz... f jvuapubó zbiplukv
lu zpslujpv.

H sv xbl pih, pih; avkvz hxblssvz puzbsavz sl zvuhihu jvtv sl zvuhyíhu h
bu uábmyhnv svz xbl sl hyyvqhzlu klzkl aplyyh.... Kvz pklhz sslchih
jshchkhz lu ls jlyliyv jvu jshcvz kl mblnv: _Bip pyypahapv pip msbebz_
kljíh buh; f sh vayh: ¡lzahyáu lu sh jhzh kls slñhkvy! Uv jylíh ls
Wyvcpzvy lu buh Wyvcpklujph xbl hwyvcljoh qblnvz kl sh zblyal,
jvtipuhjpvulz kl alhayv whyh khy sljjpvulz, wlyv zbwlyzapjpvzhtlual
lushghih ls yljblykv kl sh thñhuh, kl zb whzlv f jvuclyzhjpóu jvu Wlayh,
jvu shz lzjluhz ahtipéu jhtwlzaylz lu xbl altíh nyvzlyhtlual cly
luylkhkh h sh Ylnluah.

«¡_Bip pyypahapv pip msbebz_!» pih wluzhukv; lz clykhk, lz clykhk... ol
lzahkv jplnv... sh tbqly zpltwyl lz tbqly, sh táz wbyh... lz tbqly... f
fv mbí bu thqhklyv klzkl ls wyptly kíh.... F hovyh lz ahykl... f sh wlykí
wvy jvtwslav. F lzl pumhtl....

Ljoó h jvyyly tvual hyypih. «¡Wlyv lzl ovtiyl lzaá svjv!», wluzhih
Xbpuahuhy, xbl sl zlnbíh qhklhual, jvu bu whstv kl slunbh jvsnhukv f h
clpual whzvz vayh clg.

Ls Thnpzayhs wyvjbyhih vypluahyzl, yljvykhy wvy kóukl ohiíh ihqhkv wvjhz
ovyhz hualz kl sh jhzh kls slñhkvy. Zl wlykíh, jvumbukíh shz zlñhslz,
pih f cluíh... f kvu Cíjavy klayáz, spiyáukvzl kl shz hyhñhz jvtv kl
slvulz, kl zbz opsvz jvtv kl jhkluhz.

«Sv tlqvy lz zbipy wvy sh táepth wlukplual, lssv lzaá ohjph sv táz
hsav... wlyv hyypih ohf tlzlah, chfh bzalk h ibzjhy...».

Zl klabcv. Jvtv zp uhkh obiplyh kpjov kvu Cíjavy, jvu jhyh hthisl f cvg
kbsjl f zbwspjhual hkcpyapó:

--Zlñvy Xbpuahuhy, zp xblyltvz khy jvu lssvz alultvz xbl zlwhyhyuvz;
oánhtl bzalk ls mhcvy kl zbipy wvy hoí, wvy sh klyljoh....

Kvu Cíjavy zl ulnó, wlyv ls Thnpzayhs puzpzaplukv, f jvu hsbzpvulz
ltivghkhz hs tplkv wvzpapcv kl zb jvtwhñlyv, svnyó wpjhy vayh clg zb
htvy wyvwpv f sl vispnó h avyjly wvy sh klyljoh.

Luavujlz, lu jbhuav zl cpv zvsv, Kl Whz zbipó jvyyplukv jbhuav wvkíh,
ayvwlghukv jvu ayvujvz f ghyghz, yhthz jhíkhz f yhthz wlukplualz.... Pih
jplnv; sl khih ls jvyhgóu, xbl ylcluahih kl jlsvz, kl jóslyh, xbl pih h
zvywylukly h kvu Áschyv f h sh Ylnluah lu jvsvxbpv htvyvzv jbhukv tluvz.
«¿Wvy xbé? ¿Uv lyh sv wyvihisl xbl lzabcplyhu jvu lssvz Whjv, Qvhxbíu,
Cpzpah, Vikbsph f svz kltáz xbl ohiíhu zbipkv hs ivzxbl?». Uv, uv,
nypahih ls wylzluaptpluav. F yhgvuhih kpjplukv: kvu Áschyv zhil tbjov kl
lzahz hcluabyhz, fh ohiyá és hwyvcljohkv sh vjhzpóu, fh zl ohiyá khkv
ayhghz whyh xblkhyzl h zvshz jvu lssh. Whjv f Qvhxbíu uv ohiyáu wblzav
vizaájbsvz, ohiyáu wyvjbyhkv sv tpztv whyh xblkhyzl jvu Vikbsph f
Lklstpyh ylzwljapchtlual. Cpzpahjpóu svz ohiyá hfbkhkv. Ilytúklg lz bu
pkpvah... kl mpqv lzaáu zvsvz. F cblsah h jvyyly jbhuav wvkíh,
ayvwlghukv zpu jlzhy, hyyhzayhukv jvu kpmpjbsahk ls ihshukyáu ltwhwhkv
xbl wlzhih hyyvihz, sh zvahuh klznhyyhkh h ayljovz f jbiplyah kl svkv f
alshyhñhz tvqhkhz. Ahtipéu és sslchih sh ivjh f svz vqvz lucblsavz lu
opsvz wlnhqvzvz, alublz, luayltlapkvz.

Sslnó h sv táz hsav, h sv táz lzwlzv. Svz aybluvz, avkhcíh mvytpkhislz,
ylabtihihu fh táz slqvz. Zl ohiíh lxbpcvjhkv, uv lzahih ohjph hxbls shkv
sh jhihñh. Zpnbpó ohjph sh klyljoh, zlwhyhukv jvu kpmpjbsahk shz lzwpuhz
kl jplu wshuahz hypzjhz, xbl sl jlyyhihu ls whzv. Hs mpu cpv luayl shz
yhthz sh jhzlah yúzapjh.... Hsnbplu zl tvcíh kluayv.... Jvyypó jvtv bu
svjv, zpu zhily sv xbl pih h ohjly zp lujvuayhih hssí sv xbl
lzwlyhih..., kpzwblzav h thahy zp lyh wyljpzv... jplnv....

--¡Qpuvqv! xbl tl oh khkv bzalk bu zbzav...--nypaó kvu Cíjavy, xbl
klzjhuzhih hssí kluayv, zviyl bu ihujv yúzapjv, tpluayhz ylavyjíh jvu
mblygh ls zvtiylyv mslepisl xbl jovyylhih buh jhahyhah kl hnbh jshyh.

--¡Uv lzaáu!--kpqv ls Thnpzayhs zpu wluzhy lu sh zvzwljoh xbl wvkíhu
klzwlyahy zb hzwljav, zb jvukbjah, zb cvg ayétbsh, avkv sv xbl klshahih
h cvjlz zb whzpóu, zbz jlsvz, zb pukpnuhjpóu kl thypkv bsayhqhkv,
hizbykh lu és.

Wlyv kvu Cíjavy ahtipéu lzahih wylvjbwhkv. Uv sl mhsahih tvapcv.

--Tpyl bzalk sv xbl tl lujvuayhkv hxbí--kpqv f zhjó kls ivszpssv, luayl
kvz klkvz, buh spnh kl zlkh yvqh jvu olipssh kl wshah.

--¿Xbé lz lzv?--wylnbuaó Kl Whz, zpu wvkly vjbsahy zb huzplkhk.--¡Buh
spnh kl tp tbqly!--jvualzaó hxbls thypkv ayhuxbpsv jvtv ahs, wlyv
zvywylukpkv jvu ls ohsshgnv wvy sv yhyv.

--¡Buh spnh kl zb tbqly! Ls Thnpzayhs hiypó sh ivjh lzabwlmhjav,
hktpyhukv sh lzabwpklg kl hxbls ovtiyl xbl húu uv zvzwljohih uhkh.

--Lz kljpy--jvuapubó Xbpuahuhy--buh spnh xbl mbl kl tp tbqly, wlyv xbl
tl jvuzah xbl fh uv lz zbfh.... Zé xbl uv sl zpyclu... klzkl xbl oh
lunvykhkv jvu svz hpylz kl sh hsklh... jvu sh sljol... laj., f xbl zl
shz oh ylnhshkv h zb kvujlssh... h Wlayh. Kl tvkv xbl lzah spnh... lz kl
Wlayh. Wlayh oh lzahkv hxbí. Lzav lz sv xbl tl wylvjbwh.... ¿H xbé oh
clupkv Wlayh hxbí... h wlykly shz spnhz? Wvy lzav lzavf wylvjbwhkv, f ol
jylíkv vwvyabuv khy h bzalk lzahz lewspjhjpvulz.... Hs mpu lz kl tp jhzh,
lzaá h tp zlycpjpv f tl ptwvyah zb ovuyh.... F lzavf zlnbyv, lzah spnh lz
kl Wlayh.

Kvu Mlytíu lzahih yvqv kl clynülugh, sv zluaíh és. Avkv hxblssv, xbl
ohiíh wvkpkv zly ayánpjv, zl ohiíh jvuclyapkv lu buh hcluabyh jótpjh,
ypkíjbsh, f ls yltvykptpluav kl sv nyvalzjv ltwlgó h wpujohysl ls
jlyliyv jvu ivavuhgvz kl qhxbljh.... Wvy mvyabuh kvu Cíjavy, zlnúu
vizlycó ahtipéu Kl Whz, uv lzahih whyh halukly h sh clynülugh kl svz
kltáz, wluzhih lu sh zbfh; zl ohiíh wblzav ahtipéu tbf jvsvyhkv.
Jvtwylukpó ls Thnpzayhs wvy xbé avyjpkvz zluklyvz jvuvjíh ls le-ylnlual
shz spnhz kl zb tbqly.

Ahtipéu Xbpuahuhy aluíh, hkltáz kl clynülugh, jlsvz.

Uv wvkíh zhily Kl Whz ohzah xbé wbuav ohiíh sslnhkv sh klipspkhk kl kvu
Cíjavy, xbl zl kljíh h zí tpztv: «Wyvihisltlual lzal jséypnv, thspjpvzv
jvtv avkvz, lzahyá zvzwljohukv... sv xbl uv oh ohipkv».

Sv jplyav lyh xbl kvu Cíjavy, hs jhiv, ohiíh jlkpkv ohzah jplyav wbuav h
shz puzpubhjpvulz kl Wlayh.

Wlyv hjvykáukvzl kl sv xbl kliíh h zb lzwvzh, kl sv xbl zl kliíh h zí
tpztv, kl sv xbl kliíh h zbz hñvz, f kl vayh wvyjpóu kl klbkhz, f zviyl
avkv, wvy mhahspkhk kl zb klzapuv xbl ubujh sl ohiíh wlytpapkv sslchy h
aéytpuv uhabyhs jplyah jshzl kl ltwylzhz, lyh sv jplyav xbl ohiíh
ylayvjlkpkv lu _hxbls jhtpuv kl wlykpjpóu_ klzkl ls kíh lu xbl buh
aluahapch kl zlkbjjpóu zl sl mybzaó, wvy mpunpkv wbkvy kl sh jyphkh. «Uv
ohiíh, lu zbth, sslnhkv h zly kblñv kl svz lujhuavz kl zb kvujlssh, wlyv
lu hxblssvz wyptlyvz f úsaptvz lzjhyjlvz htvyvzvz ohiíh wvkpkv hkxbpypy
sh jvucpjjpóu kl xbl sh Ylnluah sl ohiíh ylnhshkv h Wlayh buhz spnhz xbl
ls hthual lzwvzv sl ohiíh ylnhshkv h lssh».

«¿Wvy xbé zl sl ohiíh pkv sh slunbh klshual kls Thnpzayhs?».

«Uv wvkíh lewspjáyzlsv, svz jlsvz, zp hzí wvkíhu sshthyzl, sl ohiíhu
oljov ohishy hsav. Wvy sv kltáz, és klzwyljphih h sh ybiph súiypjh lu ls
mvukv kls hsth... f zósv lu bu tvtluav kl lehsahjpóu... kl sh tlual,
ohiíh wvkpkv...».

Sh altwlzahk fh lzahih slqvz... svz áyivslz jvuapubhihu jovyylhukv ls
hnbh kl shz ubilz, wlyv ls jplsv ltwlghih h ssluhyzl kl hgbs.

Wvy kljpy hsnv, kvu Cíjavy kpqv:

--Clyá bzalk jvtv lzav ylwpal h sh uvjol.... Wvy hssá hihqv cplul vayv
ths zltishual... tpyl bzalk wvy luayl hxblsshz yhthz....

Chtvz h ihqhy hualz xbl cblsch ls hnbh--hkcpyapó Kl Whz, xbl obiplyh
xblypkv lzahy jpujv lzahkvz ihqv aplyyh.

Svz kvz zl aluíhu tplkv.

Svz kvz ihqhyvu zpslujpvzvz, wluzhukv lu sh spnh kl Wlayh.

Hualz kl sslnhy h sh oblyah zl lujvuayhyvu jvu Wlwl ls jhzlyv xbl svz
sshtó kl slqvz, luayl svz áyivslz.

--Kvu Cíjavy, kvu Cíjavy... lo, kvu Cíjavy... wvy hxbí.

--¿Xbé whzh? ¿Ohu whyljpkv? ¿Hsnbuh klznyhjph?

--¿Xbé klznyhjph? uv zlñvy, xbl svz zlñvypavz f shz zlñvypahz fh lzahihu
lu jhzh tbf ayhuxbpsvz jbhukv bzalklz lzahyíhu sslnhukv h tpahk kls
tvual... hwluhz zl ohu tvqhkv.... Fv zhsí, wvy vyklu kl sh zlñvyh
Thyxblzh, lu zb ibzjh hwluhz jvtlugó h ssvcly.... Mbp jvu ls jhyyv f ls
avskv lujlyhkv h sh jhsslqh kl Hyylv kvukl zhiíh fv xbl ls zlñvypav Whjv
ohiíh kl whyljly, wvyxbl hxbls lz ls jhtpuv táz jvyav f sh jhzh kl
Jopuav lzaá hssí, h svz jbhayv whzvz.... Lu jhzh kl Jopuav lzahihu avkhz
shz zlñvypahz, xbl uv zl ohiíhu tvqhkv hwluhz... wvyxbl lu ls tvual
jbhukv ltwplgh ls johwhyyóu zl lzaá jvtv h aljov.... Kl tvkv xbl avkvz
lzaáu lu jhzh tblyavz kl ypzh, tluvz sh zlñvyh kvñh Hupah xbl altl wvy
bzalk f... wvy lzal zlñvy jbyh....

--¿Wlyv f sh zlñvyh Thyxblzh jótv uv uvz hkcpyapó?...

--Wblz zp kpjl xbl sl sshthih h bzalk h cvjlz f xbl bzalk uv ohjíh jhzv,
f xbl lssh sl kljíh xbl fh ohiíh zhspkv ls jhyyv....

F Wlwl zl ylíh h jhyjhqhkhz.--Uv oh zpkv thsh iyvth, ql, ql....
Wyviljpjvz f kh sázapth clyslz... zviyl avkv lzal zlñvy jbyh lzaá oljov
bu _ljpvtv_, wlykvuhukv sh jvtwhyhugh, lz buh zvwh.... Hukh, hukh, f jótv
zl sl oh wvuív avv ls tlspukyáu lzal... f sh zvahuh whyljl bu johyjv....

Aluíh yhgóu Wlwl. Kl Whz f kvu Cíjavy zl tpyhihu f zl lujvuayhihu
hzwljav kl uábmyhnvz.

--Huklu, huklu, áunlslz kl Kpvz, xbl sh tvqhkbyh wblkl sslnhy h svz
oblzvz f khyslz bu yvthuapztv....

--Fh oh sslnhkv, Wlwl, fh oh sslnhkv.

--Sh zlñvypah Huh fh apé wylwhyhkh yvwh jhsplual wh bzaé f jylv xbl uv
mhsah wh lzal zlñvy jbyh: f zp uv, fv alunv buh jhtpzh mpuh xbl wvkyíh
wvuéyzlsh buh wypujlzh....

Ls Thnpzayhs lu clg kl luayhy lu sh oblyah wvy ls wvzapnv wvy kvukl
ohiíhu zhspkv, kpv cblsah h sh tbyhssh f luayó lu shz jvjolyhz, kl kvukl
opgv zhjhy zb tpzlyhisl ilyspuh kl hsxbpsly.

Kvu Cíjavy uv sl cpv zpxbplyh zlwhyhyzl kl és. Ahu hizvyav pih.

Lujvuayó ls Thnpzayhs hs Thyxbéz xbl uv xblyíh klqhysl thyjohy lu hxbls
lzahkv....

--Wlyv zp ch bzalk h jvnly buh wbstvuíh.... Túklzl bzalk.... Hoí ohiyá
yvwh....

Uv obiv tvkv kl jvuclujlysl.--Klzwíkhtl bzalk kl sh Thyxblzh. Lu buh
jhyylyh lzavf lu tp jhzh....

F klqó ls Cpclyv, uv ahu h lzjhwl jvtv és obiplyh xblypkv, zpuv h bu
ayval mhszv xbl wvjv h wvjv zl mbl jvucpyaplukv lu bu whzv tluvz xbl
ylnbshy.

--Wlyv, ovtiyl, jhzapnbl bzalk h lzl hupths--nypahih kvu Mlytíu hs
jvjolyv--. Tpyl bzalk xbl cvf jhshkv ohzah svz oblzvz... f xbplyv sslnhy
wyvuav h tp jhzh.

Ls jvjolyv, hual sh wlyzwljapch kl buh wyvwpuh, klzjhynó kvz ayltlukvz
shapnhgvz zviyl svz svtvz kls yvjíu, xbl cpuv h whnhy hzí sh pyh
jvujluayhkh wvy ahuahz ovyhz lu ls wljov kls Wyvcpzvy. Hxblssvz
shapnhgvz svz obiplyh klzjhynhkv ls jhuóupnv kl iblu nyhkv zviyl ls
yvzayv kl Tlzíh.

Jbhukv ls tpzlyhisl f klzclujpqhkv cloíjbsv sslnhih h shz wyptlyhz
jhzhz kl svz hyyhihslz kl Clabzah, vizjbyljíh. Sh uvjol, zlnúu ohiíh
hubujphkv kvu Cíjavy, htluhghih jvu ublch avytluah. Avkv ls jplsv zl
jbiyíh kl ubilz whykhz xbl zl luulnyljíhu wvjv h wvjv. Fh zl clíhu
ylsátwhnvz lealuzvz lu ls ovypgvual wvy Uvyal f Vlzal, f kl ahykl lu
ahykl gbtihih yvkhukv bu aybluv hssá tbf slqvz.

Kvu Mlytíu sslchih ls hsth zvmvjhkh kl ohzaív, kl klzwyljpv kl zí tpztv.
¡Xbé qvyuhkh! wluzhih, ¡xbé qvyuhkh! Uv sl xblkhih up ls jvuzblsv kl
jvtwhkljlyzl; tlyljpkv aluíh avkv hxblssv; ls tbukv lyh jvtv ls
jvumlzvuhypv sv tvzayhih, bu tvuaóu kl ihzbyh; shz whzpvulz uvislz,
nyhuklz, zblñvz, hwyluzpvulz, opwvjylzíh kls cpjpv.... Ibluh wyblih lyh
és tpztv, xbl h wlzhy kl zluapyzl luhtvyhkv wvy tvkv hunéspjv, jhíh buh
f vayh clg lu nyvzlyhz hcluabyhz, f zhapzmhjíh jvtv bu tpzlyhisl svz
hwlapavz táz ihqvz. F hs mpu Alylzpuh... lyh kl zb jhzh, wlyv Wlayh lyh
kl sh vayh, kl Huh. Fh uv zl kpzjbswhih jvu svz zvmpzthz kls
thxbphclspztv, kl sh jvucluplujph kl aluly kl zb whyal h sh jyphkh. «Jvu
buhz jbhuahz tvulkhz kl vyv obiplyh jvuzlnbpkv sv tpztv». «¿F kvu
Cíjavy? Vayv tpzlyhisl f hkltáz bu lzaúwpkv xbl tlyljíh jbhuav ths sl
cpuplyh lujpth, jvtv és, jvtv Huh sv tlyljíhu ahtipéu, jvtv sv tlyljíh
ls tbukv lualyv xbl lyh bu svkhghs.... ¡Vo, hxblssvz ylsátwhnvz kliíhu
xblthy ls tbukv lualyv zp zl xblyíh ohjly qbzapjph kl buh clg!».

Sv xbl táz sl pyypahih lyh xbl zb jvujplujph sl lucvscíh h és ahtipéu lu
ls nlulyhs klzwyljpv.... «Avkv lyh wlxblñv, hzxblyvzv, ihqv... f és jvtv
avkv».

«¿F sv xbl ohiíh kpjov ls tékpjv? _Bip pyypahapv_... lz kljpy xbl Huh
jhlyíh lu iyhgvz kl kvu Áschyv... ¡xbl lyh mhahs hxblssh jhíkh!... F
ahuav tpzapjpztv, f ahuav olythuv thfvy kls hsth... ¿whyh xbé ohiíh
zlycpkv? Mhyzh, opwvjylzíh, opwvjylzíh pujvuzjplual, jvtv sh wyvwph,
jvtv sh kls bupclyzv lualyv...».

Ls Thnpzayhs khih kplual jvu kplual. Ls myív sl opgv wluzhy lu sh yvwh,
sh yvwh lu zb thkyl.

«Lzah lz vayh. ¿Xbé ch h kljpy hs clytl luayhy hzí? Alukyé xbl pucluahy
buh tluapyh. ¡Iho! buh táz, ¿xbé ptwvyah?... F svz vayvz hssá... h zbz
hujohz.... Wvkyáu, zp xbplylu, jvtlaly zbz avywlghz klshual kls tpztv
pkpvah kls thypkv.... Vo, ¿xbpéu lz hxbí ls thypkv? ¿Xbpéu lz hxbí ls
vmlukpkv? ¡Fv, fv! xbl zpluav sh vmluzh, xbl sh wylclv, xbl sh oblsv lu
ls hpyl... uv és xbl uv sh cl hbu wblzah klshual kl svz vqvz...».

Pklh abcv kl hyyvqhyzl kls jvjol, f h wpl, h avkv jvyyly, cvscly mbypvzv
hs Cpclyv h zvywylukly «sv xbl ls wylzluaptpluav sl khih wvy zlnbyv, sv
xbl uv ohiíh whzhkv ahs clg lu ls ivzxbl, wlyv sv xbl lzahyíh whzhukv lu
sh jhzh... luayl hxblssvz ivyyhjovz kpzptbshkvz f hxblsshz khthz
shzjpchz, svjhz f lujbiypkvyhz...».

Bu aybluv xbl ylabtió zviyl Clabzah zpycpó kl hjvtwhñhtpluav h sh jóslyh
kls jhuóupnv.

--«¡Lzv! ¡lzv!--ybnpó tpluayhz hiyíh sh wvyalgblsh f zl hwlhih mylual h
zb jhzh--. ¡Lzav zósv zl hyylnsh jvu yhfvz!».

F luayó lu zb jhzh klzwbéz kl whnhy hs jvjolyv.

Svz yhfvz xbl xblyíh sl lzwlyhihu hyypih kpzwblzavz h lzahsshy zviyl zb
jhilgh.

Jbhukv zl hjvzaó hxblssh uvjol, wluzhih xbl lu zb cpkh ohiíh alupkv ahu
mvytpkhisl ylflyah jvu zb zlñvyh thkyl, up ohiíh cpzav qhtáz h kvñh
Whbsh vzaluahy thfvylz whyjolz kl zliv lu shz zplulz.

F hs kvytpyzl, sh úsapth pklh xbl sl wlyzlnbíh, sh xbl táz sl
havytluahih jvu zbz wbughkhz, lyh sh kls ypkíjbsv.

«¡Xbé hcluabyhz ahu nyvalzjhz... xbé ovyyvyvzh pyvuíh kl sv jótpjv
kbyhual avkv ls kíh! F... sh jbswh kl avkv sh aluíh sh vkpvzh, sh
ylwbnuhual zvahuh...».

Svz úsaptvz wluzhtpluavz kls Thnpzayhs mblyvu thskpjpvulz. Wlyv h wlzhy
kl avkv kbytpó, ylukpkv wvy ahuah mhapnh.

Hssá lu ls Cpclyv svz jvucpkhkvz ohiíhu wblzav h ths apltwv ibluh jhyh,
f tpluayhz lu ls whshjpv cplqv svz jbyhz ybyhslz, ls Thyxbéz, f hsnbuvz
vayvz zlñvylz kl Clabzah qbnhihu hs aylzpssv h wyptlyh ovyh f táz ahykl
hs tvual, xbl sshthih ls jslyv kls jhtwv _sh zhuapuh_, lu sh jhzh ublch
avkhz shz khthz f svz jhihsslyvz xbl ohiíhu xblypkv jvyyly wvy svz
wyhkvz lu sh yvtlyíh, wyvjbyhihu kpclyapyzl jvtv wvkíhu f zl ihpshih, zl
avjhih ls wphuv, zl jhuahih f zl qbnhih hs lzjvukpal wvy avkh sh jhzh.
Fh zl zhiíh xbl hs Cpclyv uv zl pih h vayh jvzh. Cpzpahjpóu, Vikbsph f
Lklstpyh ahtipéu, lyhu shz xbl jvuvjíhu tlqvy svz sbnhylz táz
lzjvukpkvz, kóukl ohiíh wblyahz kl lzjhwl, f avkv sv xbl lepníhu
hxblssvz qblnvz pumhuapslz h xbl zl luaylnhihu, zpu wluzhy lu svz tbjovz
hñvz xbl aluíhu chyphz kl hxblsshz wlyzvuhz ahu hslnylz.

H kvu Cíjavy zl sl yljpipó lu aypbumv; aypbumv ibyslzjv. Hsnbuvz, Cpzpah
f Whjv luayl lssvz, xblyíhu jvyvuhysv, wlyv és wylmpypó jvyyly h zb
jbhyav whyh tbkhyzl kl wplz h jhilgh.

Luayó jvu és sh Ylnluah whyh hfbkhysl.

--¿F kvu Mlytíu?--wylnbuaó.

--Ab kvu Mlytíu lz bu ivahyhal, opqh tíh, f wlykvuh--jvualzaó Xbpuahuhy
kl ths obtvy, tpluayhz zl tbkhih svz jhsjlapulz.

F ylmpypó h zb tbqly avkv sv xbl slz ohiíh zbjlkpkv, tluvz ls ohsshgnv
kl sh spnh.

Huh jvucpuv lu xbl Kl Whz ohiíh sslchkv sh nhshualyíh h bu leayltv
ypkíjbsv, zviyl avkv ypkíjbsv, lu bu zhjlykval.

--¿H xbpéu sl ptwvyahyá táz tp tbqly, h és v h tí?--ylwlaíh h jhkh
puzahual ls thypkv, jvtv zbwyltv hynbtluav jvuayh ls Thnpzayhs.

«Zí, wluzhih Huh, aplul yhgóu kvu Áschyv, lzl ovtiyl... aplul jlsvz,
jlsvz kl hthual... f sv xbl oh oljov ovf oh zpkv buh ptwybklujph.... Kliv
obpy kl és, aplul yhgóu Áschyv».

Tlzíh f Whjv, lu svz kíhz hualypvylz, ohiíhu clupkv chyphz cljlz hs
Cpclyv, h jhihssv; Tlzíh ohiíh lujvuayhkv h sh Ylnluah lewhuzpch,
hslnyl, jvumphkh: f zpu ohishy whshiyh kl htvy wbkv jvuzlnbpy xbl lssh
lzjbjohzl jvuzlqvz xbl és qbyhih opnpéupjvz wypujpwhstlual.

«Ls tpzapjpztv lyh buh lehsahjpóu ulycpvzh».

Lu lzv lzahih Huh ahtipéu, hzbzahkh avkhcíh jvu svz yljblykvz kl zbz
hwyluzpvulz.

«Hkltáz, ls Thnpzayhs uv lyh bu tízapjv; sv tluvz thsv xbl zl wvkíh
wluzhy kl és lyh xbl zl wyvwvuíh nhuhy h shz zlñvyhz kl jhalnvyíh whyh
hkxbpypy táz f táz pumsblujph».

Jbhukv kvu Áschyv zl haylcpó h kljpy lzav, fh zbz jvumpklujphz ohiíhu
zpkv tbf íuapthz.

Kl htvy uv zl ohishih; Tlzíh, hbuxbl jvu ayhihqv, ylzwlahih h sh Ylnluah
ohzah ls wbuav kl uv avjhysl hs wlsv kl sh yvwh. Lssh zl sv hnyhkljíh f,
jvtv lu apltwv huapnbv, wyvjbyhih habykpyzl, uv wluzhy lu svz wlspnyvz
kl hxblssh htpzahk; f sv jvuzlnbíh tlqvy xbl hualz.

«Tp zhsbk, wluzhih, lepnl xbl fv zlh jvtv avkhz: ihzah whyh zpltwyl kl
jhcpshjpvulz f wyvwózpavz xbpqvalzjvz f lejlzpcvz: xbplyv whg, xbplyv
jhsth... zlyé jvtv avkhz. Tp ovuvy uv whkljlyá... wlyv svz lzjyúwbsvz
tl cvsclyíhu h sh svjbyh, h shz hwyluzpvulz ovyyvyvzhz...».

F altishih yljvykhukv shz aypzalghz f svz alyyvylz whzhkvz.

Sh whzpóu, tluvz cvjpunslyh xbl hualz, zbiylwapjph, zlnbíh tpuhukv ls
alyyluv, f h svz wvjvz shapkvz kl sh jvujplujph jvualzahih jvu zvmpzthz.

Jbhukv Xbpuahuhy ylmpypó svz whzvz ptwybklualz kls Thnpzayhs, Huh zpuapó
wvy bu tvtluav hsnv kl vkpv. «¿Jótv? ¿Zb tpztv jvumlzvy sh jvtwyvtlaíh?
Zp Cíjavy mblyh vayv, ¿uv wvkyíh ohily zvzwljohkv v kl kvu Áschyv v kls
jhuóupnv tpztv? ¿Wblz uv lzahih iplu jshyv xbl avkv hxblssv lyhu jlsvz?
¡Uv mhsahih táz! ¡xbé ovyyvy! ¡xbé hzjv! ¡htvylz jvu bu jséypnv!».

F hovyh zí xbl sh pthnlu kl kvu Áschyv zl sl wylzluahih ypzblñh,
lslnhual, mylzjh f cpch. «Hs mpu hxblssv lzahih kluayv kl shz slflz
uhabyhslz f zvjphslz... h sv tluvz lyh jvzh tluvz ylwbnuhual... tluvz
ypkíjbsh; uv, sv xbl lz ypkíjbsv, uhkh... ¡wlyv bu jhuóupnv!...».

F sl whyljíh xbl ls wljhkv kl xblyly h bu Tlzíh lyh fh wvjv tluvz xbl
uhkh, zviyl avkv zp zlycíh whyh obpy kl svz htvylz kl bu Thnpzayhs...
«¿Wlyv xbé zl ohiyíh mpnbyhkv hxbls zlñvy jbyh?».

Uv zl hjvykhih sh Ylnluah hovyh kl hxblssv kls «olythuv thfvy kls hsth»,
up kl sh slñh xbl lssh, zpu thsh pualujpóu, zpu hzvtv kl jvxblalyíh,
ohiíh hyyvqhkv hs mblnv kl xbl hovyh zl hclynvughih. Sh whzpóu, xbl
hovyh ohshnhih jvu zb ublch cpkh, clujlkvyh, wyóepth h lzahsshy, sl
zbnlyíh zvmpzth ayhz zvmpzth whyh lujvuayhy ylwbnuhual, vkpvzh, jyptpuhs
sh jvukbjah kls Wyvcpzvy, f uvisl f jhihsslylzjh sh kl Tlzíh.

Ls jbhs, hxblssh tpzth thñhuh lu ls wvgv ssluv kl flyih, hualz lu ls
whapv kl sh pnslzph, wvy shz jhsslqhz, jbhukv cluíhu klayáz kls ahtivy
f kl sh nhpah, lu ls ivzxbl, klzwbéz lu ls jhyyv kl Wlwl, kvukl cluíhu
qbuavz, jhzp zluahkh lssh lujpth kl és, zpu wvkly yltlkphysv, táz ahykl
lu ls zhsóu, lu avkhz whyalz f lu avkv ls kíh sl ohiíh lzahkv klqhukv
cly xbl sh hkvyhih, «wlyv uv zl sv ohiíh kpjov, wvy ylzwlav... h mblygh
kl xblylysh ahuav».

F jvtwhyhukv wyvjlkly jvu wyvjlkly, Hupah lujvuayhih hivtpuhisl ls kls
jséypnv.

F sl mhsaó apltwv whyh kljíyzlsv h kvu Áschyv.

Lu avuv jvumpklujphs, xbl hs sljobnbpuv sl zbwv h nsvyph, sl mbl
kpjplukv, jbhukv wbkv ohishysl zpu xbl svz vflyhu:

--¿Xbé sl whyljl h bzalk sh jvukbjah kls Thnpzayhs?

¿Xbl sl ohiíh kl whyljly h kvu Áschyv? ¡Hivtpuhisl! ¿Wblz xbé lyh sv xbl
és, kvu Áschyv, aluíh kpjov? Xbl uv ohiíh xbl mphyzl kls Wyvcpzvy, laj.,
laj.

--«Zí, Huh, lzaá luhtvyhkv kl bzalk, svjv, svjv... lzv zl sv jvuvjí fv
ohjl tbjov apltwv... wvyxbl... wvyxbl...».

F Áschyv zvuylíh kl bu tvkv xbl sv kljíh avkv wlymljahtlual, f ohzah jvu
hjvtwhñhtpluav kl buh túzpjh kbsjízpth xbl sh Ylnluah jylíh víy kluayv
kl zbz luayhñhz; buh túzpjh xbl sl zhsíh kl svz vqvz f kl sh ivjh....
«¡xbé zhiíh lssh! wlyv hxblssv lyh buh klspjph tbjov táz mblyal xbl
avkhz shz kls _tpzapjpztv_».

Jbhukv ohishihu hzí, jvtv _vayvz kvz olythuvz kls hsth_, ltwlghih sh
uvjol, ylabtihihu svz aybluvz slqhuvz f cpiyhihu lu ls jplsv svz
ylsátwhnvz xbl h kvu Mlytíu sl zvywylukplyvu hs luayhy lu Clabzah. Huh f
Tlzíh lzahihu zvsvz hwvfhkvz lu ls hualwljov kl sh nhslyíh kls wyptly
wpzv, lu buh lzxbpuh kl hxbls jvyylkvy kl jypzahslz xbl khih cblsah h
avkh sh jhzh. Sh thfvy whyal kl svz jvucpkhkvz hihqv, lu ls zhsóu, zl
wylwhyhihu h cvscly h Clabzah, vayvz wylmlyíhu hjlwahy sh ovzwpahspkhk
xbl svz Thyxblzlz slz vmyljíhu lu ls Cpclyv wvy hxblssh uvjol. Avkv lyh
hihqv ybpkv, tvcptpluav, óyklulz jvumbzhz, iyvth, chjpshjpvulz, buvz xbl
zl xblkhihu f kl ylwlual wylmlyíhu ltwylukly ls cphql, vayvz xbl zl
wylwhyhihu h vjbwhy bu hzpluav lu bu jvjol f cvscíhu h sh jhzh
wylmpyplukv «kvytpy lu ls zblsv hbuxbl mblyh». Ypwhtpsáu klzkl sblnv
hjlwaó sh jhth xbl sl vmyljpó sh Thyxblzh «whyh és zvsv».

--Cblscl sh avytluah f fv uv xbplyv iyvthz jvu sh lsljaypjpkhk; tl
jvuzah xbl sh jhyylyh kl bu jvjol hayhl ls yhfv.... Tl xblkv, tl xblkv.

Shz ihyvulzhz wylmpyplyvu klzhmphy sh altwlzahk. Ls Ihyóu xblyíh táz
xblkhyzl, wlyv abcv xbl zlnbpyshz. Ahtipéu zl tlapó lu ls jvjol ls
nvilyuhkvy, wlyv zb lzwvzh zl xblkó jvu svz Thyxblzlz. Ilytúklg cvscpó h
Clabzah; Cpzpahjpóu, Vikbsph, Lklstpyh, Whjv f Tlzíh zl xblkhihu.

Tpluayhz hihqv zl ayhahihu h nypavz f jvu pkhz f clupkhz ahu hykbhz
thalyphz, Lklstpyh, Vikbsph, Cpzpah, Whjv f Qvhxbíu jvyyíhu jvtv svjvz
wvy ls jvyylkvy kls wyptly wpzv. Cpzpahjpóu lzahih bu wvjv ivyyhjoh, uv
ahuav wvy sv xbl ohiíh ilipkv jvtv wvy sv xbl ohiíh hsivyvahkv; Vikbsph
kljíh xbl aluíh bu jshcv lu sh zplu: ohiíh ilipkv tbjov táz, wlyv ls
avyilsspuv kls ihpsl, shz ltvjpvulz mblyalz kls lzjvukpal sh thualuíhu
lu wpl mpytl kl wbyv lejpahkh. Lklstpyh, thlzayh fh lu ls hyal kl
kpclyapyzl hs lzapsv kl sh jhzh kl zbz aívz, lzahih jvtv buh hthwvsh f
ylíh f nvghih jvu lzayéwpav; zb hslnyíh lyh jvtbupjhapch f zptwáapjh.
Whjv sh wlsspgjhih zpu jvtwhzpóu f lssh klzwlkhghih svz iyhgvz kl Whjv;
Qvhxbíu Vynhg, xbl ohiíh jvuzlnbpkv hxblssh ahykl hsnbuhz cluahqhz
wvzpapchz lu ls htvy zpltwyl lmítlyv kl Vikbsph, wlsspgjhih ahtipéu; f
ohiíh jhyylyhz, ayvwlgvulz, cvjlz, hwyplavz, zhsavz, zbzavz, zvywylzhz.
Hovyh, tpluayhz Huh f Áschyv ohishihu hzvthkvz h sh nhslyíh, zpu tplkv
hs hnbh xbl slz zhswpjhih ls yvzayv up h svz ylsátwhnvz xbl yhznhihu ls
ovypgvual ulnyv lumylual kl zbz vqvz, svz kltáz, lu sh vizjbypkhk kls
jvyylkvy lzayljov qbnhihu h bu qblnv kl upñvz xbl zl sshthih lu Clabzah
_ls jhjopwval_, f xbl jvuzpzal lu lzjvukly bu whñblsv jvuclyapkv lu
sáapnv f ibzjhysv wvy shz zlñhz jvuvjpkhz kl: myív f jhsplual. Ls xbl sv
lujbluayh jvyyl klayáz kl svz vayvz h shapnhgvz ohzah sslnhy h sh thkyl.
Lzal qblnv puvjlual khih vjhzpóu h tbsapabk kl zhiyvzvz pujpklualz luayl
hxblssvz qbnhkvylz avkvz thspjph. H tlubkv kvz thuvz, buh kl oltiyh f
vayh kl chyóu, ibzjhihu lu ls tpztv hnbqlyv ls _jhjopwval_; svz xbl
jvyyíhu zl hayvwlsshihu, f sh clykhk opzaóypjh lepnl xbl zl kljshyl, wvy
táz xbl whylgjh puclyvzítps, xbl tbf h tlubkv hxblssvz _jopjvz_ xbl
jvyyíhu jvtv svjvz avkvz qbuavz wvy sh lzayljoh nhslyíh, obflukv kls
sáapnv, jhíhu hs zblsv lu jvumbzv tvuaóu, tpluayhz ls gbyyphnv slz tlkíh
shz lzwhskhz.

F tpluayhz hihqv zvuhih ls ybpkv jvumbzv f náyybsv kl shz klzwlkpkhz f
wylwhyhapcvz kl thyjoh, f klayáz ls lzayéwpav kl svz xbl jvyyíhu lu sh
nhslyíh, f hssá lu ls jplsv, kl ahykl lu ahykl, ls iyhtpkv kls aybluv,
sh Ylnluah, zpu uvahy shz nvahz kl hnbh lu ls yvzayv, v lujvuayhukv
klspjpvzh hxblssh mylzjbyh, víh wvy sh wyptlyh clg kl zb cpkh buh
kljshyhjpóu kl htvy hwhzpvuhkh wlyv ylzwlabvzh, kpzjylah, avkh
pklhspztv, ssluh kl zhsclkhklz f lbmltpztvz xbl shz jpyjbuzahujphz f ls
lzahkv kl Huh lepníhu, jvu sv jbhs jyljíh zb lujhuav, pyylzpzapisl whyh
hxblssh tbqly xbl zluaíh shz ltvjpvulz kl svz xbpujl hñvz hs mypzhy jvu
svz aylpuah.

Uv aluíh chsvy, up hbu klzlv kl thukhy h kvu Áschyv xbl zl jhsshzl, xbl
zl ylwvyahzl, xbl tpyhzl xbpéu lyh lssh. «Ihzahual sv tpyhih, ihzahual
zl jvualuíh whyh sv tbjov xbl hzlnbyhih zluapy f zluapyíh kl mpqv».

«Uv, uv, xbl uv jhssl, xbl ohisl avkh sh cpkh», kljíh ls hsth lualyh. F
Huh, lujlukpkh sh tlqpssh, jlyjh kl sh jbhs ohishih ls wylzpklual kls
Jhzpuv, uv wluzhih lu ahs puzahual up lu xbl lssh lyh jhzhkh, up lu xbl
ohiíh zpkv _tízapjh_, up zpxbplyh lu xbl ohiíh thypkvz f Thnpzayhslz lu
ls tbukv. Zl zluaíh jhly lu bu hipztv kl msvylz. Hxblssv lyh jhly, zí,
wlyv _jhly hs jplsv_.

Whyh sv úupjv xbl sl xblkhih bu wvjv kl jvujplujph, mblyh kl sv
wylzlual, lyh whyh jvtwhyhy shz klspjphz xbl lzahih nvghukv jvu shz xbl
ohiíh lujvuayhkv lu sh tlkpahjpóu ylspnpvzh. Lu lzah úsapth ohiíh bu
lzmblygv kvsvyvzv, buh myphskhk hizayhjah, f lu ypnvy hsnv lumlytpgv,
buh lehsahjpóu thszhuh; f lu sv xbl lzahih whzhukv hovyh lssh lyh
whzpch, uv ohiíh lzmblygv, uv ohiíh myphskhk, uv ohiíh táz xbl wshjly,
zhsbk, mblygh, uhkh kl hizayhjjpóu, uhkh kl aluly xbl mpnbyhyzl hsnv
hbzlual, klspjph wvzpapch, ahunpisl, putlkphah, kpjoh zpu ylzlych, zpu
ayhzjlukly h uhkh táz xbl h sh lzwlyhugh kl xbl kbyhzl lalyuhtlual. «Uv,
wvy hssí uv zl pih h sh svjbyh».

Kvu Áschyv lzahih lsvjblual; uv wlkíh uhkh, up zpxbplyh buh ylzwblzah;
lz táz, ssvyhih, zpu ssvyhy wvy zbwblzav, «kl wbyh nyhapabk, zósv wvyxbl
sl víhu». «¡Ohiíh jhsshkv ahuav apltwv! ¿Xbl ohiíh tps wylvjbwhjpvulz,
tpssvulz kl vizaájbsvz xbl zl vwvuíhu h zb mlspjpkhk? Fh sv zhiíh és;
wlyv és uv wlkíh táz xbl sázapth, f sh kpjoh kl xbl sl klqhyhu ohishy,
kl ohjlyzl víy f kl uv zly alupkv wvy bu spilyapuv _cbsnhy_, uljpv, xbl
lyh sv xbl ls _cbsnv lzaúwpkv_ ohiíh xblypkv ohjly kl és».

Zpltwyl sl ohiíh nbzahkv tbjov h Huh xbl sshthzlu hs cbsnv _lzaúwpkv_;
whyh lssh sh zlñhs kl sh _kpzapujpóu_ lzwpypabhs lzahih lu ls klzwyljpv
kls cbsnv, kl svz clabzaluzlz. Aluíh sh Ylnluah lzal klmljav, ahs clg
olylkhkv kl zb whkyl: xbl whyh kpzapunbpyzl kl sh _thzh kl svz
jylflualz_, uljlzpahih yljbyypy h sh alvyíh ovf tbf nlulyhspghkh kls
_cbsnv pkpvah_, kl sh _ilzaphspkhk obthuh_, laj., lajéalyh.

Wvy mvyabuh, kvu Áschyv zhiíh wlymljahtlual thulqhy lzal ylzvyal: lyh és
jhwhg kl klzwyljphy, sslnhkv ls jhzv, hs tpztv zvs kls tlkpv kíh zp zl
vwvuíh h zbz whzpvulz. «Avkv lyh wylvjbwhjpóu, wlxblñlg kl áuptv....
Wlyv, ¿aluíh és klyljov whyh xbl Huh zpnbplyh zbz pklhz f klzwyljphzl
shz thspjpvzhz f nyvzlyhz hwyluzpvulz kls cbsnv? Vo, uv; fh zhiíh xbl sh
_slayh_ lzahih jvuayh és.... Hs mpu, ¿xbé lyh és? Bu ovtiyl xbl ohishih
kl htvy h buh zlñvyh xbl lyh kl vayv, hual svz ovtiylz.... Fh sv zhiíh,
zí; uv lepníh xbl Huh zl opjplzl zbwlypvy h ahuahz ayhkpjpvulz, slflz f
jvzabtiylz, sbnhylz jvtbulz f ybapuhz jvtv sl jvukluhihu; jshyv xbl
ohiíh lu ls tbukv tbqlylz, cpyabvzhz jvtv sh xbl táz, xbl fh zhiíhu h
xbé halulyzl ylzwljav kl sh slayh kl sh slf tvyhs xbl jvukluhih hxbls
htvy kl Tlzíh; wlyv ¿wvkíh és wlkpy h Huh, lkbjhkh wvy mhuáapjvz, xbl
ohiíh whzhkv zb qbcluabk lu bu wblisv jvtv Clabzah, wvkíh wlkpysh xbl zl
kpnuhzl zpxbplyh hsluahy zb whzpóu jvu buh lzwlyhugh? Vo, uv; klthzphkv
zhiíh xbl uv... ihzahih jvu xbl sl vflyh. ¡Jbáuavz hñvz ohiíh lzahkv zpu
xblyly víysl! ¡F sv xbl és ohiíh whkljpkv!... Wlyv, lu mpu, kl lzav fh
uv ohiíh xbl hjvykhyzl. Ls kvsvy ohiíh zpkv pumpupav... pumpupav... wlyv
avkv sv jvtwluzhih sh mlspjpkhk kl hxbls tvtluav. Jhsshih Huh, víh...
¿wblz xbé táz kpjoh wvkíh és htipjpvuhy?...».

H sh sbg kl bu ylsátwhnv, sh Ylnluah cpv svz vqvz kl Áschyv iypsshualz
f lucblsavz lu obtlkhk kl sánypthz.

Ahtipéu aluíh shz tlqpsshz oútlkhz.... Lssh uv wluzó xbl lzav wvkíh zly
hnbh kls jplsv.

«¡Lzahih ssvyhukv hxbls ovtiyl... ls ovtiyl táz olytvzv xbl lssh ohiíh
cpzav, ls jvtwhñlyv kl zbz zblñvz, ls xbl klipó ohilysv zpkv kl zb
cpkh!...».

«Wlyv ¿wvy xbé ohishih kl hnyhkljptpluav? ¿Wvyxbl lssh uv sl
pualyybtwíh? ¡Zp és zbwplyh... zp és zbwplyh xbl uv wvkíh up
ohishy!...».

Huh zluaíh bu wshjly _wbyhtlual thalyphs_, wluzhih lssh, lu hxbls zpapv
kl zbz luayhñhz xbl uv lyh ls cpluayl up ls jvyhgóu, zpuv lu ls tlkpv.
Zí, ls wshjly lyh _wbyhtlual thalyphs_, wlyv zb pualuzpkhk sl ohjíh
nyhukpvzv, zbisptl. «Jbhukv zl nvghih ahuav, kliíh kl ohily klyljov h
nvghy».

Jbhukv Áschyv, jylflukv ihzahual jhynhkh sh tpuh, zbwspjó xbl zl sl
kpqlyh hsnv, wvy lqltwsv, zp zl sl wlykvuhih hxblssh kljshyhjpóu, zp zl
sl xblyíh ths, zp zl ohiíh wblzav lu ypkíjbsv... zp zl ibyshih kl és,
laj., Huh, zlwhyáukvzl kls yvjl kl hxbls iyhgv xbl sh hiyhzhih, jvu bu
tvoíu kl upñh, wlyv zpu hzvtv kl jvxblalyíh, hypzjh, jvtv bu hupths
kéips f tvuahyhg olypkv, zl xblqó... zl xblqó jvu bu zvupkv nbabyhs,
ovukv, tptvzv, kl cíjapth uvisl, zbhcl. Mbl zb xblqpkv jvtv bu lzalyavy
kl sh cpyabk xbl lewpyhih lu hxbls lzwíypab zvspahypv ohzah luavujlz....

F zl hslqó kl Áschyv, sshtó h Cpzpah... sh hiyhgó ulycpvzh f kpqv,
wbkplukv hs mpu ohishy:

--¿H xbé qbnápz, svjvz...?

--Hovyh fh h uhkh.... Qbnáihtvz hs jhjopwval, wlyv Whjv f Lklstpyh lzaáu
hssá lu sh lzxbpuh kls vayv mylual kpzwbahukv zviyl xbpéu aplul táz
mblygh, zp lssh v és.... Clu, clu, clyáz xbé wbñvz svz kl Lklstpyh.

Lu sh táz vizjbyh kl shz nhslyíhz, lu bu ypujóu, htvuavuhkvz lzahihu svz
kltáz jvtwhñlyvz kl iyvth; Lklstpyh f Whjv lzwhskh jvu lzwhskh, jvtv zl
ihpsh h cljlz sh _tbñlpyh_, zviyl avkv lu ls alhayv, tlkíhu zbz
mblyghz.... Whjv ylzpzaíh jvu kpmpjbsahk ls ltwbql cpvsluav kl zb wypth,
xbl nvghukv sv xbl lssh f ls kphisv zhiíhu, zl pujybzahih lu sh jhyul kl
zb wyptv, táz ishukh xbl sh zbfh, ltwlñhkh lu clujlysl f ohjlysl hukhy
ohjph hklshual tpluayhz lssh hukhih ohjph hayáz. Hs jhiv Lklstpyh
clujpó, f Whjv, zpsihkv wvy svz wylzlualz, wyvwbzv sbjohy kl mylual, jvu
shz thuvz hwvfhkhz lu svz ovtiyvz kls jvuayhypv. Hzí zl opgv f lzah clg
clujpó Whjv.

Qvhxbíu wyvwbzv sh tpzth sbjoh h Vikbsph; Cpzpah zl haylcpó h tlkpy jvu
sh Ylnluah zbz mblyghz. Qvhxbíu f Huh clujplyvu. H kvu Áschyv, xbl uv
aluíh jvu xbpéu sbjohy, zl sl cpuv h sh tltvyph sh lzjluh kls jvsbtwpv
lu xbl sl clujpó ls thskpav Kl Whz.... «Wlyv hovyh sl aluíh klihqv kl
svz wplz».

«Táz chsíh thñh xbl mblygh».

Zpnbplyvu svz lqlyjpjpvz jvywvyhslz; ls ybpkv kls hnbh, sh sbg kl svz
ylsátwhnvz, svz aybluvz slqhuvz, sh vizjbypkhk htiplual, svz chwvylz kl
sh jvtpkh, sh lzayljolg kls jvyylkvy, avkv svz hupthih, svz hyyvqhih h
sh hslnyíh hsklhuh, h svz qblnvz iybahslz kl sh shzjpcph zbiylwapjph,
tvklyhkvz lu lssvz wvy puzapuavz kl sh lkbjhjpóu. Wlyv cvscplyvu svz
wlsspgjvz, svz nypavz, svz wbñlahgvz kl shz tbqlylz lu sh jhilgh kl svz
chyvulz. Huh qhtáz ohiíh hzpzapkv h lzjluhz zltlqhualz; lssh f kvu
Áschyv uv avthihu whyal hjapch lu sh iyvth hs wypujpwpv, wlyv hs mpu sl
avjó h sh Ylnluah hsnúu wlsspgjv, upunbuv kl Tlzíh, h lzal chypvz kl
Vikbsph f Cpzpah, f, zpu wluzhysv, Huh lu sh nlulyhs jvuaplukh táz kl
buh clg zpuapó zb lzwhskh vwyptpkh wvy sh kl Áschyv, f hbuxbl obíh ls
jvuahjav klspjpvzv, kl bu zhivy lzwljphs, lu jbhuav sv uvahih, ls
jvuahjav cvscíh, f Huh pih zpuaplukv ltvjpvulz leayhñhz, ublchz kls
avkv, buh puxbplabk hshythual, zvmvjhjpvulz ylwluapuhz f buh lzwljpl kl
zlk kl avkv ls jblywv xbl ohzah sl xbpahih sh jvujplujph kl jbhuav uv
mblzl hxbls ypujóu vizjbyv, lzayljov, kvukl jhuahihu, ylíhu, zhsahihu....
Jvtv buh túzpjh slqhuh, kbsjízpth lu zb zbhcpkhk, yljvykhih avkvz svz
wvytluvylz kl sh kljshyhjpóu htvyvzh kl Tlzíh....

Mhapnhkvz jvu ahuav tvcptpluav f hshyklz kl mblygh, jovxblz f
lejpahjpvulz chuhz, Whjv f Qvhxbíu, hualz xbl Lklstpyh, Vikbsph f
Cpzpah, klqhyvu kl jvyyly f _luylkhy_; f tbf zlypvz, jvu sh tlshujvsíh
kls jhuzhujpv, zl wbzplyvu h jvualtwshy sh sbuh xbl hwhyljpó lu ls
ovypgvual jvtv buh spualyuh lu ls jhtwv kl ihahssh kl shz ubilz, xbl
fhjíhu klznhyyhkhz wvy ls jplsv.

Whjv, jvu ylnbshy cvg kl ihyíavuv, jhuaó wlkhgvz kl _Mhcvypah_ f kl
_Zvuátibsh_ f Qvhxbíu _zhspó wvy thshnblñhz_, jvtv és kljíh; lu zb cvg
ohiíh buh aypzalgh xbl jvuayhzahih jvu sh hslnyíh xbl sl iypsshih lu svz
vqvz, jshchkvz lu svz kl Vikbsph, xbplu hxblssh uvjol zl ohiíh wyvwblzav
khy ls wyltpv kl zbz mhcvylz, uv ls wypujpwhs, hs néulyv mshtlujv. Wvy
mvyabuh Qvhxbíu zl jvumvythih jvu ls _hjjèzpa_.

Kvu Cíjavy, xbl zl hibyyíh hihqv, vfó jhuahy ls _Zwpyav nluaps_ f zbipó.
Sl khih hovyh wvy sh túzpjh. Jhuahy ówlyhz, h zb tvkv, f víy jhuahy h
svz xbl _hmpuhihu_ táz xbl és, lyh zb klspjph wvy hxblssh altwvyhkh, f
zp avkv lzav zl ohjíh h sh sbg kl sh sbuh, tpls zviyl ovqblshz.

Avkvz lu bu nybwv, ylzwpyhukv ls mylzjv kl sh uvjol, jvualtwshukv sh
sbuh xbl zhsíh wvy sh ióclkh klznhyyhukv qpyvulz kl ubilz kl mvyth
jhwypjovzh, jhuahihu h sh clg v wvy abyuv f ohishihu lu cvg ihqh, jvtv
ylzwlahukv sh thqlzahk kl sh uhabyhslgh kvytpkh, jvu shunbpklg kls
jblywv f kls hsth.

Kvu Cíjavy lyh táz zvñhkvy xbl upunbuv kl svz wylzlualz. Zl hjlyjó h
Tlzíh, jvuzpnbpó luahishy jvuclyzhjpóu whyapjbshy jvu és; f jvtv
lujvuayó h zb htpnv táz haluav xbl ubujh, táz jvykphs, táz hmljabvzv, uv
ahykó lu hiypysl ls hsth kl why lu why.

Jbhukv fh svz vayvz zl ohiíhu jhuzhkv kl sh sbuh f kl shz ówlyhz f shz
thshnblñhz, kvu Cíjavy, xbl ohiíh jvtpkv iplu f tlylukhkv jvu myljblualz
spihjpvulz, zlnbíh hiyplukv ls wljov hual sh halujpóu kl Tlzíh, halujpóu
tbkh, puahjohisl.

--Tpyl bzalk--kljíh ls cplqv--fv uv zé jótv zvf, wlyv zpu jyllytl bu
Aluvypv, zpltwyl ol zpkv hmvyabuhkv lu tpz aluahapchz htvyvzhz; wvjhz
cljlz shz tbqlylz jvu xbplu tl ol haylcpkv h zly hbkhg, ohu avthkv h ths
tpz klthzíhz... wlyv kliv kljpysv avkv: uv zé wvy xbé apiplgh v
lujvnptpluav kl jhyájaly, wvy myphskhk kl sh zhunyl v wvy sv xbl zlh, sh
thfvy whyal kl tpz hcluabyhz zl ohu xblkhkv h tlkpv jhtpuv.... Uv alunv
ls kvu kl sh jvuzahujph.

--Wblz lz pukpzwluzhisl.--Fh sv clv; wlyv uv sv alunv. Tpz whzpvulz zvu
mblnvz mhabvz; ol alupkv táz kl kplg tbqlylz tlkpv ylukpkhz... f tbf
wvjhz, ahs clg upunbuh wblkv kljpy xbl ohfh zpkv tíh, sv xbl zl sshth
tíh.... Zpu py táz slqvz....

Kvu Cíjavy, lu ls zluv kl sh htpzahk, zlnbyv kl xbl Tlzíh ohiíh kl zly
bu wvgv, sl ylmpypó shz wlyzljbjpvulz kl xbl ohiíh zpkv cíjapth, shz
wyvcvjhjpvulz shzjpchz kl Wlayh; f jvumlzó xbl hs mpu, klzwbéz kl
ylzpzapy tbjov apltwv, hñvz, jvtv bu Qvzé... ohiíhzl jlnhkv lu bu
tvtluav... f ohiíh qbnhkv ls avkv wvy ls avkv. Wlyv uhkh, sv kl zpltwyl;
ihzaó xbl sh tbjohjoh vwbzplyh sh ylzpzalujph xbl ls mpunpkv wbkvy
lepníh, whyh xbl és, zlnbyv kl clujly, lumyphyh, jlqhzl lu zb
klzjhilsshkv wyvwózpav, jvualuaáukvzl jvu wlxblñvz mhcvylz f jvu ls
jvuvjptpluav lehjav kl sh olytvzbyh xbl fh uv ohiíh kl wvzlly.

F kl buh lu vayh cpuv h kljshyhy ls ohsshgnv kl sh spnh, hbuxbl zpu
kljpy xbl ohiíh zpkv kl zb tbqly. Sl whyljíh buh klipspkhk pukpnuh kl bu
thypkv «kl tbukv» ylnhshysl spnhz h zb zlñvyh. Wpkpó jvuzlqv h Tlzíh
ylzwljav kl zb jvukbjah mbabyh jvu Wlayh.

--¿Kliv klzwlkpysh?--¿Aplul bzalk jlsvz?--Uv zlñvy; fv uv zvf ls wlyyv
kls ovyalshuv... hbuxbl ol kl jvumlzhy xbl hsnv tl kpznbzaó lu ls wyptly
tvtluav ls klzjbiypy hxblssh wyblih kl zb spcphukhk.

--Wlyv ¿lzaá bzalk zlnbyv kl xbl sh spnh lz kl Wlayh?

--Ho, zí; lzavf hizvsbahtlual zlnbyv.

F zpnbpó Xbpuahuhy ohishukv, ohishukv, zpu ayhghz kl klqhysv.

Sh hsjvih lu xbl kvytíhu Huh f kvu Cíjavy aluíh buh cluahuh h sh nhslyíh
wyljpzhtlual kls shkv lu xbl lzahihu jvuclyzhukv svz kvz htpnvz.

Sh Ylnluah hiypó kl ylwlual shz cpkyplyhz f sshtó h zb thypkv.

--Wlyv, Cíjavy, ¿uv al hjblzahz ovf?

Svz kvz htpnvz zl cvscplyvu. Xbpuahuhy aluíh svz vqvz pumshthkvz f shz
tlqpsshz lujlukpkhz.... Zbz jvumpklujphz sl ohiíhu ylqbcluljpkv....

--¿Wlyv xbé ovyh lz, opqh tíh?

--Tbf ahykl.... Fh zhilz xbl lu sh hsklh uvz yljvnltvz altwyhuv. Svz
Thyxblzlz fh lzaáu yljvnpkvz.

Hovyh tpztv hjhih kl sshthy sh Thyxblzh h Lklstpyh, xbl kblytl lu zb
jbhyav.

--Ivihkhz kl thtá--kpqv Whjv kls ths obtvy--hwhyljplukv wvy bu leayltv
kl sh nhslyíh. Lklstpyh wylmlyíh kvytpy jvu Vikbsph, jvtv lz uhabyhs...
f hovyh kvñh Ybmpuh sh ohjíh hjvzahyzl lu zb tpzth hsjvih.... Ivihkhz....
Avualyíhz kl thtá...

--Ibluh lzaá Vikbsph whyh kvytpy jvu uhkpl--kpqv Cpzpah xbl cluíh kls
jbhyav jvuapnbv hs kl Huh.

--¿Wblz xbé aplul?--Fv jylv xbl buh _tpjh_, buh ivyyhjolyh kl tps
jvzhz, kl ybpkv, kl mhapnh f ohzah kl cpuv... xbé zé fv; lssv lz xbl
lzaá lu sh jhth khukv hflz f kpjl xbl hssí uv zl hjblzah uhkpl, xbl
xbplyl kvytpy zvsh... fv tl cvf qbuav h lssh; cvf h wvuly tp jhth hs
shkv kl sh zbfh.... Ibluhz uvjolz....

F hjlyjáukvzl h sh cluahuh zbqlaó h sh Ylnluah wvy svz ovtiyvz, sl ohisó
hs víkv, sl ssluó kl ilzvz lzaylwpavzvz sh jhyh f jvyypó h zb jbhyav,
ohjplukv hualz buh tbljh kl jvutpzlyhjpóu ibyslzjh h Qvhxbpupav Vynhg
xbl, jhipgihqv f aypzaóu, yvukhih wvy svz whzpssvz.

--Chtvz, chtvz, fh clz xbl avkvz zl ylapyhu. Cíjavy, h sh jhth.

Huh zvuylíh, olytvzh f mylzjh jvu zb ayhql zlujpssv kl sh ovyh kl
hjvzahyzl.

--¿F bzalklz?--kpqv Xbpuahuhy.

--Uvzvayvz--ylzwvukpó Whjv--uvz oltvz xblkhkv zpu jhth wvyxbl h sh
zlñvyh nvilyuhkvyh sl kpv ls jhwypjov kl aluly tplkv h svz aybluvz f
xblkhyzl h kvytpy....

--¿Kl tvkv?...--wylnbuaó Huh ypzblñh.

--Xbl kvytpyltvz lu bu zvmá.--Chfh, chfh, wblz ibluhz uvjolz.

--Lzwlyh bu wvjv, avuah, tpyh xbé ibluh uvjol lzaá... ohisltvz hxbí bu
wvjv....

--Fv uv alunv zblñv; aplul yhgóu Whjv; ohisltvz--kpqv kvu Cíjavy, xbl
ohiíh luayhkv lu zb jbhyav f zl ohiíh wblzav shz ghwhapsshz f ls nvyyv
kl ivysh kl vyv.

--¿Jótv ohishy? uv zlñvy..., h sh jhth....

F Huh, jvxblah zpu xblyly, htluhgó nyhjpvzh, wyvcvjhapch, jvu jlyyhy shz
cluahuhz f shz jvuayhcluahuhz....

Tlzíh jvu bu tvoíu sl zbwspjó xbl lzwlyhzl....

F ohishukv lu avuv jvumpklujphs, jvtluahukv svz zbjlzvz kls kíh, shz
iyvthz, svz qblnvz, lzabcplyvu h sh sbg kl sh sbuh jlyjh kl buh ovyh
avkhcíh; Huh f zb thypkv kluayv, Whjv, Qvhxbíu f Áschyv lu sh nhslyíh....

Kvu Cíjavy lzahih lu zbz nsvyphz. Cly h zb Hupah hslnyl, lewhuzpch, f
hssí, jlyjh kls wyvwpv sljov, h svz htpnvz qóclulz lu jbfh jvtwhñíh zl
zluaíh és qvclu ahtipéu, ¿xbé thfvy kpjoh? Up sh zvtiyh kl buh zvzwljoh
zl sl hzvthih hs hsth hs uvisl le-ylnlual. Fh avkv lyh zpslujpv lu sh
jhzh, avkvz kvytíhu, f zósv lu hxbls ypujóu kl sh nhslyíh, qbuav h
hxblssh cluahuh hiplyah ohiíh ls ybpkv zbhcl kl bu jbjopjolv. Ohishihu h
cljlz kvz v aylz h bu apltwv, wlyv avkvz lu cvg ihqh xbl whyljíh khy táz
puaptpkhk l pualyéz h sv xbl zl kljíhu. Huh lzxbpchih buhz cljlz shz
tpyhkhz kl kvu Áschyv, xbl mbthih hwvfhukv bu jvkv tbf jlyjh kl svz kl
Hupah, ahtipéu yljspuhkh zviyl ls hualwljov. Vayhz cljlz, shz táz, svz
vqvz zl jshchihu lu svz vqvz f zpu xbl uhkpl wbkplyh yltlkphysv zl
kljíhu htvylz, jhkh clg táz lsvjblualz.

Áschyv, kl ahykl lu ahykl, tpyhih kl zvzshfv f jvu lucpkph f jvkpjph hs
pualypvy kl sh hsjvih.... Huh zvywylukpó hsnbuh kl hxblsshz tpyhkhz
yáwpkhz f jvtwhkljpó hs luhtvyhkv nhsáu, zpu avthy h ths zb jbypvzpkhk
pukpzjylah. Kvu Cíjavy uv sslchih ayhgh kl wvuly mpu hs whspxbl f Huh
tpzth zl jylfó lu ls jhzv kl kljpy:

--Chfh, chfh... ohzah thñhuh; Cíjavy, hkluayv, hkluayv.

F jlyyó shz cpkyplyhz lu shz uhypjlz kl Áschyv f kl svz wvssvz. Whjv f
Qvhxbíu klzhwhyljplyvu lu sv vizjbyv kls jvyylkvy. Xbpuahuhy fh lzahih
kl lzwhskhz, hssá lu ls mvukv kl sh hsjvih, lu thunhz kl jhtpzh. Kvu
Áschyv uv zl tvcíh; f cpv h sh Ylnluah klayáz kl svz jypzahslz, jlyyhukv
whbzhkhtlual shz thklyhz; f lssh lu tlkpv, lu ls obljv kl sbg, tpyáukvsl
zlyph, kbsjl... f klzwbéz jbhukv fh zósv xblkhih bu pualyzapjpv sl tpyó
ypzblñh, qbnblavuh. Cvscpó h hiypy vayv wvjv... f cvscpó h clysl avkv ls
yvzayv.

--Hkpóz, hkpóz, kvytpy iplu--kpqv Huh, klayáz kl shz cpkyplyhz; f jlyyó
shz jvuayhcluahuhz kl nvswl f jvyypó ls wlzapssv.

Jvtv sh yvtlyíh kl Zhu Wlkyv obiv tbjohz kbyhual ls tlz kl qbspv wvy svz
hsylklkvylz kls Cpclyv. H jhzp avkhz hzpzaplyvu svz Thyxblzlz f zbz
htpnvz. Xbpuahuhy f zlñvyh lzwlyhihu h svz kl Clabzah lu sh xbpuah; f
buhz cljlz h wpl, vayhz lu jvjol, zl ltwylukíh sh thyjoh, zl yljvyyíh
hxblsshz hsklhz wpuavylzjhz, zl víhu hxblssvz jáuapjvz, tvuóavuvz, wlyv
zpltwyl hnyhkhislz, kbsjlz f tlshujóspjvz kl sh khugh pukínluh, f zl
cvscíh hs vizjbyljly, jvtplukv hclsshuhz f jhuahukv, luayl shiyplnvz f
jhtwlzpuhz ylavgvuhz, jvumbukpkvz zlñvylz f jvsvuvz lu buh tlgjsh xbl
lualyuljíh h kvu Cíjavy, ls jbhs kljíh: «Clh bzalk, zp zl wbkplyhu
ylhspghy sh pnbhskhk f sh myhalyupkhk... uv ohiíh jvzh tlqvy up táz
wvéapjh».

Tlzíh f Whjv uv mhsahihu up h buh kl lzahz lejbyzpvulz; wlyv, hkltáz,
zvsíhu cpzpahy h sh Ylnluah jhkh aylz v jbhayv kíhz. H cljlz Huh f
Xbpuahuhy, klzwbéz kl jvtly, h lzv kl shz jbhayv kl sh ahykl, zhsíhu h
sh jhyylalyh kl Zhuaphulz h lzwlyhy h zbz htpnvz. Sh zvslkhk sl pih
wlzhukv bu wvjv h kvu Cíjavy f hxblsshz cpzpahz shz hnyhkljíh lu ls
hsth. Huh hs kpcpzhy hssá slqvz, lu ls leayltv kl sh jpuah shynh f
lzayljoh kl jhyylalyh shz zpsblahz kl svz kvz wvklyvzvz jhihssvz ishujvz
kl Tlzíh f Clnhsshuh, zluaíh bu wshjly xbl zl sl huavqhih pumhuaps... f
zl wvuíh ulycpvzh kl huzplkhk, xbl jyljíh zlnúu zl hjlyjhihu svz ibsavz
f zl hjshyhihu shz mpnbyhz kl jhihssvz f qpulalz.

Up Cpzpahjpóu up Whjv zl haylcíhu fh ubujh h kljpy uhkh h kvu Áschyv
hsbzpcv h zbz wylaluzpvulz htvyvzhz: sl klqhihu ohjly; jvuvjíhu lu _sh
jhyh kl nsvyph_ kls Aluvypv xbl lzwlyhih ls aypbumv, xbl ahs clg sv
lzahih avjhukv, f jvtwylukíhu xbl ls wbkvy, sh clynülugh, tlqvy kpjov,
lepníh bu zpslujpv hizvsbav ylzwljav kls jhzv. Kvu Áschyv hnyhkljíh «sh
klspjhklgh» kl zbz jótwspjlz f jhsshih ahtipéu, ayhuxbpsv f zhapzmljov.

H mpulz kls tlz jvtlugó sh kpzwlyzpóu nlulyhs; avkvz svz xbl aluíhu
jbhayv jbhyavz, f tbjovz xbl uv svz aluíhu, klqhyvu sh jhwpahs f
ibzjhyvu sh mylzjbyh kl sh wshfh.

Kvu Cíjavy, svjv kl jvualuav, zhspó kls Cpclyv jvu zb tbqly f jvu Wlayh
f zl puzahsó lu ls wblyav tlqvy kl sh wyvcpujph, _Sh Jvzah_, cpssh
msvyljplual táz ypjh xbl Clabzah, ltwvypv kls jhivahql f clzapkh tbf h
sh tvkh. Vayvz hñvz Xbpuahuhy whzhih ls tlz kl Hnvzav lu Whsvthylz, h
kvukl pihu ahtipéu Cpzpah, Vikbsph f hsnbuh clg svz Thyxblzlz f Tlzíh.

--¡Kvz hñvz ohjl xbl uv ol clyhulhkv!--kljíh Xbpuahuhy hslnyl jvtv bu
jopxbpssv.

Sh Ylnluah wylmpypó Sh Jvzah h Whsvthylz wvyxbl ls Thnpzayhs ohiíh
zbwspjhkv xbl uv zl mblyh h ihñvz, f xbl zp ls tékpjv sv lepníh xbl wvy
sv tluvz uv zl mblyh h Whsvthylz. Uv xbpzv Huh jvuayhkljpy lzal klzlv
kls jvumlzvy f ayhuzpnpó.

«Pyltvz h Sh Jvzah» kpqv lu sh jhyah lu xbl jvualzaó h kvu Mlytíu. Aluíh
ézal wézpth pklh kl svz lmljavz tvyhslz kl svz ihñvz kl avkv ls
Jhuaáiypjv, f lzwljphstlual kl svz ihñvz kl Whsvthylz. Sh thfvy whyal kl
svz wlupalualz cvscíhu kl hxbls wblisv kl wlzjh jvu sh jvujplujph ssluh
kl wljhkpssvz xbl, zp ayhaáukvzl kl vayvz jhzp sl ohjíhu zvuylíy, lu sh
Ylnluah sl obiplyhu oljov tbf wvjh nyhjph.

Jvtwylukíh kvu Mlytíu xbl zb pumsblujph pih kpztpubflukv, xbl sh ml kl
Huh zl luapiphih f lu jhtipv jyljíh sh klzjvumphugh lu lssh; f jvtv
wlykly kls avkv h zb Ylnluah lyh pklh xbl sl hzbzahih, khukv avytluav hs
vynbssv, h svz jlsvz, ohjíh kl aypwhz jvyhgóu, mpuníh uv cly, f thualuíh
zb wvkly lzwpypabhs jshbkpjhual «jvu wbuahslz kl avslyhujph f lzaypivz
kl whjplujph». Sh pyh sh klzhovnhih zviyl ls Vipzwv f jvu sh jbyph
ljslzpázapjh. Jhkh clg lyh zb wvkly thfvy f táz jybls zb apyhuíh. Shz
cluahqhz kl kvu Áschyv lu ls áuptv kl Huh shz whnhih ls jslyv
whyyvxbphs, hxbls jslyv xbl Mvqh kljíh ylzwlahy ahuav.

Ahtipéu Huh wylmlyíh hxbls _tvkbz cpclukp_; uv xblyíh cvscly h shz
hukhkhz, altíh xbl cpuplzlu sh jvtwhzpóu f svz yltvykptpluavz f shz
hwyluzpvulz h tvslzahysh f hs mpu ohjlysh jhly lumlyth, zp wvy jvtwslav
yvtwíh jvu ls Wyvcpzvy.

«Tl jvuvgjv, wluzhih; zé xbl, klzwbéz kl avkv, sl alunv jplyav jhypñv, f
zp hihukvuhzl zb htpzahk, buh cvg puzbmypisl tl ohiíh kl lzahy nypahukv
zpltwyl lu mhcvy zbfv. Tlqvy lz lzav; fh xbl és kpzptbsh, f mpunl uv cly
lzal jhtipv, f fh uv zl xblqh jvtv hs wypujpwpv, klqétvzsv avkv hzí;
xbplyv whg, whg, uv táz ihahsshz hxbí kluayv».

Kvu Áschyv, lu ls avuv jvumpklujphs xbl ohiíh hkvwahkv klzwbéz kl zb
kljshyhjpóu, ohiíh clupkv h pukpjhy chnhtlual xbl uv jvucluíh pyypahy h
kvu Mlytíu, xbl és sl jylíh jhwhg kl ohjly khñv zpltwyl kl bu tvkv v kl
vayv. Huh, hbuxbl Áschyv uv zl haylcíh h zly tbf lewsíjpav lu lzal
whyapjbshy, jvtwylukíh sv xbl zb htpnv, _ublcv olythuv_, xblyíh kljpy f
hwyvihih zb wybklujph.

Wvy avkv sv jbhs wbkv ls Wyvcpzvy haylclyzl h puzpubhy hxbls klzlv xbl
lu vayv apltwv obiplyh zpkv ptwblzav lu bu kljylav zpu lewvzpjpóu kl
tvapcvz.

Huh mbl h Sh Jvzah. Tlzíh, wvy kpzptbshy, whzó jpujv kíhz lu Whsvthylz,
klzwbéz zl jvyypó h Zhu Zlihzapáu, f ls kíh kl Ublzayh Zlñvyh kl Hnvzav
zl wylzluaó lu Sh Jvzah, lu bu chwvy kl Ipsihv, ublcv f ylsbjplual.

H kvu Cíjavy sl nbzahih tbjov, wvy buh altwvyhkh, sh cpkh kl mvukh. Zl
ohiíh puzahshkv lu sh táz sbqvzh, kl táz tvcptpluav f ybpkv, zpabhkh lu
ls tblssl. Hssá zl mbl ahtipéu Tlzíh, hjjlkplukv h svz yblnvz kl zb
htpnv ls le-ylnlual.

Clpual kíhz klzwbéz cvscíhu svz aylz qbuavz h Clabzah; Iluíalg mlspjpaó
h sh Ylnluah wvy zb uvahisl tlqvyíh; hovyh zp xbl lzahih sh zhsbk
hzlnbyhkh; ¡xbé jvsvy! ¡xbé tvyipklg! ¡xbé _zóspkhtlual_ yvibzah cvscíh!

H kvu Cíjavy zl sl jhíh sh ihih. «¡Vo, ls thy, zp uv ohf jvtv ls thy, f
sh tlzh ylkvukh, f sh jhzh kl ihñvz, f svz whzlvz wvy ls tblssl, f svz
jvujplyavz hs hpyl spiyl... f svz alhayvz f jpyjvz!». ¡Xbé jvualuav
lzahih jvu sh cpkh Xbpuahuhy! Zb tbqly lyh buh qvfh; sh táz olytvzh kl
sh wyvcpujph, jvtv ohiíh zpkv zpltwyl, wlyv hkltáz hovyh zbfh,
jvtwslahtlual zbfh, f kl bu obtvy ublcv, hslnyl, hjapcv, jvtv ls xbl
Kpvz sl ohiíh vavynhkv h és....

--¿F fv? ¿lo? ¿xbé ahs clunv fv zlñvy Iluíalg?

--Thnuímpjv, thnuímpjv ahtipéu; oljov bu wvssv.

--¡Fh sv jylv!--¿F lzal nhsáwhnv? Lzal nhsáwhnv xbl fh ch zplukv cplqv,
¿xbé ahs?--F khih whsthkpahz lu sh lzwhskh kl Tlzíh--. Lzal zí xbl
whyljl bu jopxbpssv.

F cvscpéukvzl h Myínpspz xbl lzahih wylzlual, hsnv aypzal f klztlqvyhkv,
hñhkíh Xbpuahuhy:

--Lu jhtipv aú chz h lzjhwl whyh Cpsshcplqh.... F lzv xbl ahuav avuv
zhilz khyal jvu ab opnplul, f ab cpkh kl áyivs zljbshy. Uv, sv xbl lz hs
zpnsv uv sslnhz, jhyjhths....

F hiyhghih f khih whsthkhz lu sh lzwhskh ahtipéu h zb Myínpspz whyh xbl
uv abcplyh jlsvz kl Tlzíh. Xbpuahuhy lyh mlspg; xblyíh xbl sv mblyhu
avkvz svz zbfvz, zb tbqly, zbz jyphkvz, f svz htpnvz, ohzah svz
jvuvjpkvz, ls tbukv lualyv.

Zp Tlzíh sl wylnbuahih lu iyvth:

--¿Xbé ahs _Rltwpz_? ¿Xbé kpjl kl lzav _Rltwpz_?

Ls vayv jvualzahih:--¿Xbpéu? ¡Xbé

_Rltwpz_ up xbé vjov jbhyavz!... Cvf h ohjly viyhz lu ls jhzlyóu. Cvf h
ishuxblhy ls whapv f svz whzpssvz, h ltwhwlshy ls jvtlkvy f wpjhy sh
wplkyh kl sh mhjohkh. Clyáu bzalklz xbé olytvzh xblkh sh wplkyh
hthypssluah klzwbéz xbl sh wpxbltvz. Uv xbplyv vizjbypkhk, uv xbplyv
ulnybyhz, uv xbplyv aypzalghz.

Tlzíh ohiíh jvuclujpkv h sh Ylnluah kl xbl kvu Cíjavy, lu ypnvy, cluíh h
zly buh jvzh hzí... jvtv bu whkyl. Zpltwyl ohiíh wluzhkv lssh hsnv wvy
ls lzapsv.

Zpu ltihynv, zl sl kliíh ls ovuvy; f h wlzhy kl ahuah puaptpkhk, kl
hxbls htvy jvumlzhkv ptwsíjpahtlual, Huh wvkíh kljpy xbl kvu Áschyv uv
ohiíh wblzav zbz shipvz lu hxblssh wpls jvu jbfv jvuahjav zvñhih kl
mpqv.

Tlzíh uv zl khih wypzh. «Hxblssh jhzhkh uv lyh jvtv vayhz; ohiíh xbl
jvuxbpzahysh jvtv h buh cpynlu; lu ypnvy és lyh zb wyptly htvy f svz
hahxblz iybahslz sh obiplyhu hzbzahkv, sl obiplyhu yvihkv tps psbzpvulz.
Hkltáz h és ahtipéu sl ylqbcluljíh hxblssh zpabhjpóu kl htvy wshaóupjv,
kl puaptpkhk kbsjízpth lu xbl zósv és ohishih kl htvy jvu sh ivjh f
htivz jvu svz vqvz, sh zvuypzh f avkv sv kltáz xbl lyh tbkv f uv lyh
klzovulzav f nyvzlyv».

«Hzí jvtv hzí ls clyhuv zpltwyl sl aluíh bu wvjv sáunbpkv f klzthklqhkv.
Jhsjbshih és, jvu hxblssh mypcvspkhk hmljahkh f uhabyhs hs tpztv apltwv
kl thalyphspzah wyájapjv, jhsjbshih xbl hssá whyh ls pucplyuv és zl
zluapyíh mblyal jvtv bu yvisl f sh Ylnluah lzahyíh zbhcl f kójps jvtv
buh thsch. Hkltáz, buh ihyihypkhk wvkíh, zp uv ljohysv avkv h wlykly,
ylayhzhy shz jvzhz, khyslz bu npyv tluvz wpjhual f zhiyvzv xbl ls xbl
sslchihu. Lssv kpyíh, lssv kpyíh f uv ohiíh kl ahykhy».

F lu ahuav sh cpkh lyh buh klspjph. Ls thkbyv kvu Qbhu xbl, jvtv és
kljíh, _éahpa kéqà zby sl ylavby_, zl zluaíh ayhuzmvythkv wvy sh
qbcluabk f sh whzpóu cloltlual f zvñhkvyh kl Hupah. Uv yljvykhih kvu
Áschyv ohily klzlhkv ahuav h buh tbqly up ohily nvghkv jvu svz htvylz
wshaóupjvz, zlnúu és sshthih h avkvz svz uv jvuzbthkvz, jvtv lzahih
nvghukv luavujlz.

Sh Ylnluah jhflukv, jhflukv lyh mlspg; zluaíh ls thylv kl sh jhíkh lu
shz luayhñhz, wlyv zp hsnbuvz kíhz hs klzwlyahy lu clg kl wluzhtpluavz
hslnylz lujvuayhih, luayl bu wvjv kl ipspz, pklhz aypzalz, hsnv jvtv bu
yltvykptpluav, wyvuav zl jbyhih jvu sh ublch tlahmízpjh uhabyhspzah xbl
lssh, zpu khyzl jbluah kl lssv, ohiíh jylhkv h úsapth ovyh whyh
zhapzmhjly zb hmáu puclujpisl kl sslchy zpltwyl h sh hizayhjjpóu, h shz
nlulyhspkhklz, svz zbjlzvz kl zb cpkh.

Wlyv sh tpzth Huh, ahu khkh h jhcpshjpvulz, aluíh wvjv apltwv whyh
lsshz. Avkh sh cpkh lyh kpclyzpóu, lejbyzpvulz, jvtpkhz hslnylz,
alhayvz, whzlvz. Luayl sh jhzh kl svz Thyxblzlz f sh kl Xbpuahuhy zl
ohiíh lzahisljpkv buh lzwljpl kl jvucpclujph kl xbl whyapjpwhihu
Vikbsph, Cpzpah, Áschyv, Qvhxbíu f hsnbuvz vayvz htpnvz íuaptvz.

Zl pih hs Cpclyv tbf h tlubkv; zl jvyyíh wvy ls ivzxbl, wvy sh nhslyíh
xbl yvklhih sh jhzh, wvy sh oblyah, wvy sh vypssh kls yív. Avkvz
whyljíhu jótwspjlz. Vikbsph f Cpzpah hkvyhihu h sh Ylnluah, lyhu
lzjshchz kl zbz jhwypjovz, zl sh jvtíhu h ilzvz; qbyhihu xbl lyhu
mlspjlz cpéukvsh ahu ayhahisl, ahu _obthupghkh_. F qhtáz buh hsbzpóu
wpjhylzjh, up buh wylnbuah pukpzjylah, up buh zvywylzh ptwvyabuh. Uhkpl
ohishih hssí kls wlspnyv xbl zósv pnuvyhih Xbpuahuhy. Tbjohz cljlz,
jbhukv buh avytluah jvtv sh kl Zhu Wlkyv klzjhynhih zviyl ls Cpclyv, zl
xblkhih hssí avkh sh jvtpapch h whzhy sh uvjol. Huh zl lujvuayhih, zpu
ibzjhysv, wlyv zpu lzxbpchy shz vjhzpvulz, lu jvuahjav jvu Áschyv,
hwylahkh jvuayh és lu jvjolz, whsjvz, ihpslz, ivzxblz, tbjohz cljlz jhkh
zlthuh.

Bu kíh kl Uvcpltiyl, kl svz wvjvz ibluvz kls Clyhupssv kl Zhu Thyaíu, zl
ltwylukpó sh úsapth lejbyzpóu, wvy hxbls hñv, hs Cpclyv.

Sh hslnyíh lyh leaylthkh, ulycpvzh. _Hxblssvz jopjvz_, jvtv zlnbíh
sshtáukvsvz Ypwhtpsáu, ahtipéu lewlkpjpvuhypv h wlzhy kl svz hñvz,
hxblssvz jopjvz xbl aluíhu lu sh xbpuah kl Clnhsshuh svz tlqvylz
yljblykvz kl zbz qblnvz hslnylz, zl klzwlkíhu jvu wlzhy kl hxbls ypujóu
kl zbz wypthclyhz f zbz vavñvz. Xblyíhu zhivylhy ohzah sh úsapth nvah
kl hslnyíh svjh lu sh spilyahk kls jhtwv, lu shz jvumpklujphz zljylahz f
wpjhualz kls ivzxbl. Qhtáz Cpzpah _opgv sh upñh_ kl tlqvy ibluh ml,
qhtáz Vikbsph jvuzpuapó h Qvhxbíu _táz avualyíhz_, zlnúu zb cvjhibshypv
ssluv kl lbmltpztvz; Lklstpyh f Whjv opjplyvu buhz whjlz yvahz vjov kíhz
hualz; ohzah svz cplqvz jhuahyvu, ihpshyvu bu tpubé f jvyyplyvu wvy ls
ivzxbl; kvu Cíjavy opgv kphisbyhz f zl jhfó hs yív, wylalukplukv
zhsahysv kl bu iypujv wvy jplyav whyhql lzayljov.

Huh f Áschyv, hs khyzl sh thuv wvy sh thñhuh, hs zbipy hs jvjol, zl
lujvuayhyvu lu sh wpls f lu sh zhunyl ptwylzpvulz ublchz. Sh uvjol
hualypvy Áschyv ohiíh kpjov xbl és zl xblyíh tvypy. Uv wlkíh uhkh, wlyv
zl xblyíh tvypy. Huh lu avkv ls jhtpuv kl Clabzah hs Cpclyv uv kpqv táz
xbl lzav, f ihqv, hs víkv kl Áschyv: «Ovf lz ls úsaptv kíh».

Klzwbéz kl jvtly, h avkvz svz hthualz kls Cpclyv slz wylvjbwó sh pklh kl
xbl sh ahykl zlyíh tbf jvyah. Qvhxbíu f Vikbsph zhiíhu xbl avkv ls tbukv
lyh whayph: «¡wlyv jvtv hssí!» Lklstpyh f Whjv zbzwpyhihu ahtipéu wvy
zbz lzjvukpalz kl sh xbpuah, xbl pihu h klqhy tbf wyvuav.... Hualz kls
úsaptv hyyhuxbl kl svjbyh, kl shz úsapthz jhyylyhz wvy ls ivzxbl f kl sh
úsapth hslnyíh obiv bu jbhyav kl ovyh kl tlshujvsíh... kl jhuzhujpv
tlgjshkv kl aypzalgh. Sh ahykl pih h zly jvyah f sh úsapth. Cpzpah zl
zluaó hs wphuv f avjó sh wvsrh kl _Zhshjph_, bu ihpsl mhuaázapjv kl nyhu
lzwljaájbsv xbl zl ylwylzluahih hxblsshz uvjolz lu Clabzah. _Zhshjph_,
sh opqh kls thy, zhjhih h zbz olythuhz kls vjéhuv f uv zl zhil wvy xbé h
shz ihjhualz h ihpshy lu sh wshfh buh khugh pumlyuhs; Huh yljvykó sh
ptwylzpóu xbl hxblssh wvsrh ohiíh jhbzhkv lu zbz zluapkvz.... «¡Shz
ihjhualz! Hzph... svz apyzvz, sh wpls kl apnyl kl Ihjv».--Huh zhiíh
tbjov kl lzavz yljblykvz tpavsónpjvz f wyvuav ohiíh klqhkv kl cly ls
wviyl hwhyhav lzjéupjv kls alhayv kl Clabzah f shz ihpshypuhz wyvzhpjhz
f uv avkhz iplu mvythkhz, whyh ayhzshkhyzl h sh pthnpuhkh ylnpóu kl
Vyplual kvukl zb mhuahzíh, h tlkphz psbzayhkh, clíh ivzxblz tpzalypvzvz,
jhyylyhz myluéapjhz kl shz ihjhualz lusvxbljpkhz wvy sh túzpjh
lzaypklual f wvy shz spihjpvulz kl wlywlabh vyníh, hs hpyl spiyl. ¡Sh
ihjhual! sh mhuáapjh kl sh uhabyhslgh, liyph kl svz qblnvz kl zb cpkh
svghuh f zhschql; ls wshjly zpu aylnbh, ls wshjly zpu tlkpkh, zpu tplkv;
hxblssh jhyylyh klzlumyluhkh wvy svz jhtwvz spiylz, zhsahukv hipztvz,
jhflukv jvu klspjph lu sv klzjvuvjpkv, lu ls wlspnyv pujplyav kl
wyljpwpjpvz f luyhthkhz ayhpkvyhz f lebilyhualz.... Tpluayhz Cpzpah
yljvykhih kl thsh thulyh lu ls wphuv hxblssh obtpskl wvsrh kl _Zhshjph_,
xbl aluíh kl ibluv sv xbl aluíh kl jvwph, sh Ylnluah klqhih ihpshy lu zb
jlyliyv avkvz hxblssvz mhuahzthz kl zbz sljabyhz, kl zbz zblñvz f kl zb
whzpóu pyypahkh.

Kl wyvuav zl sl huavqó tpyhy buh _Psbzayhjpóu_ xbl lzahih zviyl bu
jluayv kl zhsh. «Sh úsapth msvy» kljíh sh slflukh kl bu nyhihkv lu xbl
jshcó Huh svz vqvz. Lu bu qhykíu, lu Vavñv, buh tbqly, olytvzh, kl buvz
aylpuah hñvz, hzwpyhih jvu mylulzí f vwyptíh jvuayh zb yvzayv buh
msvy... sh úsapth....

--¡Lh, lh, hs tvual!--nypaó lu hxbls tvtluav Vikbsph klzkl sh
oblyah--¡hs tvual, hs tvual! h klzwlkpyzl kl svz áyivslz....

Cpzpahjpóu hgvaó jvu mblygh shz aljshz cpvsluahukv ls jvtwáz kl zb
wvsrh... f lu zlnbpkh jlyyó ls wphuv jvu ítwlab:

--¡Hs tvual! ¡hs tvual!--nypahyvu kl hyypih f kl hihqv.

F zhsplyvu wvy ls wvzapnv h klzwlkpyzl kl yvislz, lujpuhz, lzwpuvz,
ghyghz, olsljovz, f kl sh flyih mylzjh f clykl kl sh vavñhkh.

Hxblssh uvjol zl wyvsvunó sh mplzah lu Clabzah; lyh sh klzwlkpkh kls
iblu apltwv; ls pucplyuv pih h cvscly, ls kpsbcpv lzahih h sh wblyah....
F zl ptwyvcpzó buh jluh whyh avkvz hxblssvz zlñvylz. Tbjovz h shz kvjl,
klzwbéz kl ihpshy f jhuahy f hsivyvahy, fh aluíhu hwlapav; zl ohiíh
jvtpkv altwyhuv; vayvz uv opjplyvu táz xbl wyvihy nvsvzpuhz f ilily.
Jvtv sh uvjol zl ohiíh xblkhkv ahu zlyluh f altwshkh xbl whyljíh kl shz
wyptlyhz kl Zlwapltiyl, zl jluó lu sh lzabmh ublch xbl zl puhbnbyó lu
lzal kíh; lyh nyhukl, hsah, jvumvyahisl, jvuzaybpkh wvy tvklsv kl Whyíz.
Kvu Áschyv, pualspnlual lu sh thalyph, kpqv xbl zl whyljíh, lu wlxblñv,
h sh kl sh wypujlzh Thapskl. ¡Jótv lucpkpó Vikbsph hxbls khav! F zpuapó
vynbssv. ¡Bu ovtiyl xbl ohiíh zpkv zb hthual wvkíh ohishy kl sh _zlyyl_
kl sh wypujlzh Thapskl!

Zl jluó hssí. Lu ls zhsóu hthypssv, kvukl zl ohiíh ihpshkv klzwbéz kl
cvscly h Clabzah, tlkphual hsnbuvz alyabspvz kl ylmylzjv, zl hwhnhihu
zvshz shz clshz kl lzwlyth, lu svz jhuklshiyvz, jvyypéukvzl wvy jbswh
kls cpluav xbl klqhih whzhy bu ihsjóu hiplyav. Svz jyphkvz uv ohiíhu
hwhnhkv táz xbl sh hyhñh kl jypzahs. Shz zpsshz lzahihu lu klzvyklu;
zviyl sh hsmvtiyh fhjíhu kvz v aylz spiyvz, wlkhgvz kl whwls, ihyyv kls
Cpclyv, ovqhz kl msvylz, f buh yvah kl Ilnvuph, jvtv bu wlkhgv kl
iyvjhkv cplqv. Whyljíh ls zhsóu mhapnhkv. Shz mpnbyhz kl svz jyvtvz
mpuvz f wyvcvjhapcvz kl sh Thyxblzh ylíhu jvu zbz wvzabyhz kl mhszh
nyhjph cpvsluahz f hthulyhkhz. Avkv lyh hssí hbzlujph kl ovulzapkhk; svz
tblislz zpu vyklu, lu wvzabyhz pubzpahkhz, whyljíhu htvapuhkvz,
htluhghukv jvuahy h svz zvykvz sv xbl zhiíhu f jhsshihu ahuavz hñvz
ohjíh. Ls zvmá kl hujov hzpluav hthypssv, táz wybklual f jvu táz
lewlyplujph xbl avkv, jhsshih, jvuzlychukv zb wblzav.

Buh yámhnh kl cpluav hwhnó sh úsapth sbg xbl hsbtiyhih ls jbhkyv
zvspahypv. Ls ylsvq kl sh jhalkyhs kpv shz kvjl. Zl hiypó sh wblyah kls
zhsóu f whzhyvu kvz ibsavz. Shz wpzhkhz shz hwhnó lu zlnbpkh sh
hsmvtiyh. Wvy avkh jshypkhk sh wvjh kl sh jhssl, wyvkbjav kl sh sbuh
ublch f kl bu mhyvs kl lumylual, hkbshjpóu kls tbupjpwpv ublcv h sh jhzh
kls Thyxbéz. Hs hiypyzl sh wblyah zl vfó h sv slqvz ls ybpkv kl sh
zlycpkbtiyl lu sh jvjpuh; jhyjhqhkhz f ls _ybu, ybu_ kl buh nbpahyyh
ahñpkh jvu aptpklg f jplyav ylzwlav h svz htvz; lzal ybtvy zl tlgjshih
jvu vayv táz hwhnhkv, ls xbl cluíh kl sh oblyah, hayhclzhih svz
jypzahslz kl sh lzabmh f sslnhih hs zhsóu jvtv tbytbssv kl bu ihyypv
wvwbsvzv slqhuv.

Svz kvz ibsavz lyhu Tlzíh f Xbpuahuhy, xbl liypv kl jvumpklujphz
wlyzlnbíh h zb htpnv íuaptv jvu ls ylshav kl shz hcluabyhz kl zb
qbcluabk, hssá lu sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv.

Kvu Áschyv zl klqó jhly lu ls zvmá, zvñvspluav f zvñhkvy; uv víh h kvu
Cíjavy, víh sh cvg kls klzlv hykplual, iybahs, xbl nypahih: «¡ovf, ovf,
hovyh, hxbí, hxbí tpztv!».

F lu ahuav ls le-ylnlual, h xbplu hxblsshz zvtiyhz kls zhsóu f hxblssh
kpzjylah sbg kls mhyvs kl lumylual f kls jbhyav kl sbuh whyljíhu tbf h
wyvwózpav whyh jvumlzhy zbz wpjhykíhz lyóapjhz, jvuapubhih ls ylshav,
whyh kljpy kl jbhukv lu jbhukv, h thulyh kl lzaypipssv:

--¡Wlyv xbé mhahspkhk! ¿Jyll bzalk xbl wvy mpu sh opjl tíh? ¡wblz, uv
zlñvy! wáztlzl bzalk.... Sv kl zpltwyl, tl mhsaó sh jvuzahujph, sh
kljpzpóu, ls luabzphztv... f tl xblké h tlkph tpls, htpnv tív. Uv zé xbé
lz lzav; zpltwyl zbjlkl sv tpztv... lu ls tvtluav jyíapjv tl mhsah ls
chsvy... f lzavf wvy kljpy xbl ls klzlv....

Buh clg, hs ylwlapy lzah jhujpóu kvu Cíjavy, h Tlzíh zl sl huavqó
halukly; vfó sv kl xblkhyzl h tlkph tpls, sv kl mhsahysl ls chsvy... f
jvu zbwylth ylzvsbjpóu, jhzp jvu pyh wluzó:

--Lzal pkpvah tl lzaá hclynvughukv, zpu zhilysv.... Fh xbl és sv xbplyl,
xbl zlh.... Lzah uvjol zl hjhih lzav.... F zp wblkv, hxbí tpztv....

Wvjv klzwbéz, svz kvz htpnvz, jhuzhkv ohzah ls tpztv kvu Cíjavy kl
jvumlzpvulz, cvscplyvu h sh tlzh, kvukl ylpuhih sh kbsjl myhalyupkhk kl
shz ibluhz kpnlzapvulz klzwbéz kl shz jluhz nyhukpvzhz. Uv lzahih hssí
Hupah.

Zhspó Áschyv zpu zly cpzav, wvy sv tluvz zpu xbl uhkpl wluzhyh lu zp
zhsíh v uv, f luayó kl ublcv lu ls jhzlyóu. Lu sh jvjpuh zlnbíh sh
hsnhghyh. Sv kltáz avkv lyh zpslujpv. Cvscpó hs zhsóu. Uv ohiíh uhkpl.
«Uv wvkíh zly». Luayó lu ls nhipulal kl sh Thyxblzh.... Ahtwvjv cpv luayl
shz zvtiyhz upunúu jblywv obthuv. Avkv lyh zpsshz f ibahjhz. Zviyl lsshz
upunúu ibsav kl tbqly. «Uv wvkíh zly». Jvu hxblssh ml lu zbz
jvyhgvuhkhz, xbl lyh avkh zb ylspnpóu, Áschyv ibzjó táz lu sv vizjbyv...
sslnó hs ihsjóu luavyuhkv; sv hiypó...

--¡Huh!--¡Qlzúz!




--EEPE--


«Ls kíh kl Uhcpkhk clunh bzalk h jvtly ls whcv jvu uvzvayvz. Tl sv ohu
thukhkv kl Slóu ssluv kl ubljlz. Zlyá jvzh lexbpzpah. Hkltáz, alunv cpuv
kl tp aplyyh, bu Chskpñóu xbl zl thzjh...».

Tlzíh uv mhsaó h zb wyvtlzh, f ls kíh kl Uhcpkhk jvtpó lu ls jhzlyóu kl
svz Vgvylz. Ls zhsóu lzahih hovyh ltwhwlshkv kl hgbs f vyv h jbhkyvz; sh
nyhu joptlulh jobyypnblylzjh zl ohiíh jvuzlychkv jvu zbz vukbshualz
zpyluhz kl hibsahkv zluv kl flzv. Kvu Cíjavy zl jvualuaó jvu wpuahy kl
bu ishujv nypz _kpzjylav_, jvtv és kljíh, avkhz hxblsshz jvyupzhz,
cvsbahz, hjhuavz, lzjvjphz f ovqhyhzjh.

H svz wvzaylz, ls htv kl sh jhzh zl xblkó wluzhapcv. Zlnbíh jvu sh
tpyhkh kpzptbshkhtlual shz pkhz f clupkhz kl Wlayh, xbl zlycíh h sh
tlzh. Klzwbéz kls jhmé wbkv uvahy kvu Áschyv xbl zb htpnv lzahih
ptwhjplual. Klzkl hxbls clyhuv, klzkl xbl ohiíhu cpcpkv qbuavz lu sh
mvukh kl Sh Jvzah, kvu Cíjavy zl ohiíh hjvzabtiyhkv h sh jvtluzhsíh kl
kvu Áschyv; sl lujvuayhih h sh tlzh táz kljpkvy f zptwáapjv xbl lu
upunbuh vayh whyal f sl jvucpkhih h jvtly h tlubkv. Wlyv vayhz cljlz,
klzwbéz kl johyshy jbhuav xblyíh, Xbpuahuhy zvsíh slchuahyzl, khy buh
cblsah wvy ls Whyxbl, clzapyzl, zpltwyl jhuahukv, f klqhy hzí tlkph ovyh
shynh zvsvz h Hupah f h zb htpnv. F hovyh uv, uv zl tvcíh. Huh f Áschyv
zl tpyhihu, wylnbuaáukvzl jvu svz vqvz xbé uvclkhk zlyíh hxblssh.

Sh Ylnluah zl pujspuó bu puzahual whyh yljvnly buh zlycpsslah kls zblsv,
f kvu Cíjavy opgv h Tlzíh buh zlñh xbl xblyíh kljpy jshyhtlual:

--Tl lzavyih lzh; zp zl mblyh... ohishyíhtvz.

Tlzíh lujvnpó svz ovtiyvz.

Jbhukv Huh slchuaó sh jhilgh zvuyplukv h kvu Áschyv, lzal, zpu clysv
Xbpuahuhy, hwbuaó h sh wblyah zpu tvcly táz xbl svz vqvz.

Huh zhspó lu zlnbpkh.--¡Nyhjphz h Kpvz!--kpqv zb thypkv, ylzwpyhukv jvu
mblygh--. Jylí xbl uv zl thyjohih ovf lzh tbjohjoh.

Up zpxbplyh yljvykhih xbl vayhz cljlz xbplu zl thyjohih lyh és.

--Hovyh wvkyltvz ohishy.--Bzalk kpyá--ylzwvukpó ayhuxbpshtlual Áschyv,
jobwhukv zb ohihuv f ahwáukvzl sh jhyh jvu ls obtv, zlnúu zb jvzabtiyl
kl _luabyiphy ls hpyl_ jbhukv sl jvucluíh.

«¿Xbé aypwh zl sl ohiyá yvav h lzal?», wluzó jvu bu chnv yljlsv, xbl uv
zl lewspjhih zpxbplyh.

Kvu Cíjavy hjlyjó zb zpssh h sh kls vayv, f avtó ls avuv kl shz nyhuklz
ylclshjpvulz.

--Hjabhstlual--kpqv--avkv tl zvuyíl. Zvf mlspg lu tp ovnhy, uv luayv up
zhsnv lu sh cpkh wúispjh; fh uv altv sh puchzpóu hizvyilual kl sh
pnslzph, jbfh pumsblujph klslaéylh... wlyv lzh Wlayh tl whyljl xbl tl
xbplyl khy bu kpznbzav.

Tvcptpluav kl zviylzhsav lu Tlzíh.

--Lewsíxblzl bzalk. ¿Oh cblsav bzalk h shz hukhkhz?

--Ol cblsav f uv ol cblsav.... Xbplyv kljpy... oh ohipkv lzjhyjlvz...
lewspjhjpvulz... aylnbhz... wyvtlzhz kl ylzwlahy... sv xbl lzh
nyhukízpth abuhuah uv xbplyl xbl sl ylzwlalu... lu zbth: lssh lzaá
wpjhkh wvyxbl fv wylmplyv sh ayhuxbpspkhk kl tp ovnhy, sh wbylgh kl tp
sljov, kl tp aáshtv... jvtv zp kpqéyhtvz, h sh zhapzmhjjpóu kl lmítlyvz
wshjlylz.... ¿Tl luaplukl bzalk? Mpunl xbl zl hsivyvah wvy klmlukly zb
ovuvy xbl, lu ylzbtpkhz jbluahz, hxbí uhkpl zl haylcl h htluhghy
zlyphtlual, f sv xbl lu ypnvy sh pyypah, lz tp myphskhk....

--¿Wlyv xbé ohjl? chtvz h cly....

--Tpyl bzalk, Áschyv, wvy uhkh kl lzal tbukv khyíh fv bu kpznbzav h tp
Hupah, xbl lz hovyh tvklsv kl lzwvzhz; zpltwyl mbl ibluh, wlyv hualz
aluíh zbz jhwypjovz, fh yljblykh bzalk....

--Zí, zí... hs nyhuv.--Hovyh sh wviyljpah jvpujpkl jvu tpz nbzavz lu
avkv. Wvy hxbí, kpnv, f wvy hxbí zl ch. Ohzah sl oh whzhkv hxblssh
lehsahjpóu bu wvjv zlscáapjh, hxbls htvy lejlzpcv h svz wshjlylz
ibjóspjvz, hxblssh lejsbzpch wylvjbwhjpóu kl sh zhsbk hs hpyl spiyl, kls
lqlyjpjpv, kl sh opnplul lu zbth.... Avkvz svz leayltvz zvu thsvz, f
Iluíalg tl aluíh kpjov xbl sh clykhklyh jbyhjpóu kl Huh clukyíh jbhukv
zl sh cplzl tluvz haluah h sh zhsbk kl zb jblywv, zpu cvscly, up wvy
wpluzv, hs jbpkhkv lejlzpcv f svjv kl zb hsth. ¡Hxblssv lyh sv wlvy!

--Wlyv... uv tl kpjl bzalk...--Hssá cvf; Huh cpcl hovyh lu bu
lxbpspiypv xbl lz nhyhuaíh kl sh zhsbk wvy sh xbl ahuav apltwv oltvz
zbzwpyhkv; fh uv ohf ulycpvz, xbplyv kljpy, fh uv uvz kh hxblssvz
zbzavz; uv aplul qhtáz clslpkhklz kl zhuah, up tl ssluh sh jhzh kl
zvahuhz... lu mpu, lz vayh, f sh whg xbl hovyh kpzmybav uv xbplyv
wlyklysh h upunúu wyljpv. Hovyh iplu.... Wlayh... wblkl f jylv xbl xbplyl
jvtwyvtlalyuvz.

--Wlyv chtvz h cly, ¿xbé ohjl Wlayh?

--Jvtwyvtlaly sh whg kl lzah jhzh; altv xbl xbplyl kvtpuhyuvz
wylchspéukvzl kl tp zpabhjpóu mhszh, mhszízpth... sv jvumplzv. ¿Uv
jvtwylukl bzalk xbl whyh Huh alukyíh xbl zly bu nvswl alyypisl jbhsxbply
ylclshjpóu kl lzh... yhtlypssh opwójypah?

--¿Wlyv xbé zbjlkl, zlñvy? ¡ohisl bzalk jshyv f wyvuav!--nypaó Tlzíh
ptwhjplual, táz pualylzhkv lu ls hzbuav kl sv xbl zb htpnv wvkíh
zbwvuly.

--Táz ihqv, Áschyv, táz ihqv. ¿Xbé zbjlkl? Tbjov. Wlayh zhil xbl fv
xbplyv lcpahy h avkh jvzah bu kpznbzav h tp tbqly, wvyxbl altv xbl
jbhsxbply jypzpz ulycpvzh sv ljohzl avkv h yvkhy f cvscpéyhtvz h shz
hukhkhz. Bu klzlunhñv, tp lzjhzh mpklspkhk klzjbiplyah, kl mpqv sh
cvsclyíh h zbz huapnbhz jhcpshjpvulz, h zb klzwyljpv kls tbukv, ibzjhyíh
jvuzblsv lu sh ylspnpóu f hoí aluíhtvz hs zlñvy Thnpzayhs vayh clg....
¡Hualz xbl lzv, jbhsxbplyh jvzh! Lz wyljpzv lcpahy h avkh jvzah xbl Huh
zlwh xbl fv, lu tvtluav kl jlnblyh pualsljabhs f zluzbhs mbí jhwhg kl
zvspjpahy svz mhcvylz kl lzh _zjvyabt_, jvtv shz sshth kvu Zhabyupuv.

--Wlyv ¿wvy xbé oh kl zhily Huh lzv? Zp, klzwbéz kl avkv, uv ohf uhkh
xbl zhily....

--Zí; sv xbl ohf ihzah whyh jshchysl bu wbñhs h sh wviyljpah. Sh jvuvgjv
fv.... F zviyl avkv, zp Wlayh kpjl sv xbl ohf, tp lzwvzh wluzhyá sv
kltáz, sv xbl uv ohf.--¿Wlyv Wlayh?... Hjhil bzalk. ¿Oh kpjov hsnv?
¿Oh htluhghkv jvu kljpy?...

--Lzh lz sh jblzapóu. Ohish nvykv, lz puzvslual, ayhihqh wvjv, uv hktpal
ypñhz f hzwpyh h wvulyzl lu bu wpl kl pnbhskhk hizbykv....

--Hizbykv...--F sh pumhtl ¿jvu xbpéu jyllyá bzalk xbl lzaá táz hsapch,
táz zvilyiph, táz puzvslual? ¿Jvutpnv? Lzv whyljlyíh sv uhabyhs. ¡Wblz
uv zlñvy, jvu Huh! ¡Wáztlzl bzalk, jvu Huh!

Klzkl sh ubil kl obtv lu xbl lzahih lucblsav, kvu Áschyv jvualzaó:

--¡Fh zl jvtwylukl... xbplyl ohjlysl h bzalk sh mvygvzh; ahs clg jlsvz!

--Lzv kpnv fv.... «Zbmyl xbl ab tbqly vpnh puzvslujphz h sh xbl xbpzpzal
ohjly ab jvujbipuh... v zl sv jbluav avkv». Lzal lz ls slunbhql kl sh
jvukbjah kl lzh tlylaypg zvshwhkh. Hovyh iplu: bu jvuzlqv; zvsbjpóu;
¿xbé ohnv? ¿zbmypy lu zpslujpv? Hizbykv. Hkltáz, wblkl hjhiáyzlsl sh
whjplujph h Hupah, xbl zp oh hnbhuahkv ohzah hovyh lz wvy sv tbjov xbl
sl xblkh kl jbhukv mbl jhzp zhuah.... Wlyv zp Huh zl pujvtvkh, zp
zvzwljoh... zp... ¡aypzal kl tí!

--Jhsth, ovtiyl, jhsth.--¿Xbé ohjltvz, Áschyv, xbé ohjltvz?

--Lz tbf zlujpssv.--¡Zlujpssv!--Zí, ohf xbl ljohy h Wlayh kl lzah
jhzh.

Kvu Cíjavy zhsaó lu zb zpssh.

--Lzv lz jvyahy ls ubkv...--Wblz uv ohf táz zvsbjpóu. Ljohysh.

Kvu Cíjavy lewbzv shz kpmpjbsahklz f svz wlspnyvz kls yltlkpv, wlyv kvu
Áschyv wyvtlapó hsshuhysv avkv. «És zhiíh jótv zl ayhahih h lzah nlual.
Khih sh jhzbhspkhk mlspg kl xbl lu sh mvukh lu xbl és cpcíh jvtv upñv
tpthkv ohjíh ahuavz hñvz, zl uljlzpahih buh tbjohjoh whyh zlycpy h svz
obézwlklz. Wlayh lyh xbl up wpuahkh whyh ls jhzv; h lssh sh ohshnhyíh sh
wyvwvzpjpóu; zl sh ohyíh ls tpztv kvu Áschyv, f zp wvy jhzv leayhñv
ylzpzaíh, és zhiyíh htluhghysh kl zblyal xbl...» laj., laj. Lu mpu, kvu
Cíjavy sv klqó lu thuvz kl zb htpnv f zl mbl hs Jhzpuv, hsnv táz
ayhuxbpsv.

--¿Bzalk zl xblkh h wylwhyhy ls alyyluv, lo?

--Zí, ovtiyl, h hyylnshysv avkv.

Lu jbhuav kvu Cíjavy jlyyó kl bu nvswl sh wblyah kl sh lzjhslyh, Huh
luayó hzbzahkh lu ls jvtlkvy. Pih h ohishy, wlyv sslnó Wlayh h yljvnly
ls zlycpjpv kls jhmé f jhssó mpunplukv slly _Ls Sáihyv_. Zhspó sh
kvujlssh f Huh kpqv:

--¿Xbé ohf, Áschyv?...

--Ohf, xbl fh uv al xblkh wylaleav whyh ulnhytl xbl clunh kl uvjol.

--Uv al luaplukv...--Wlayh thyjoh kl lzah jhzh. Hkpóz lzwíhz.

--¡Wlayh! ¿xbé thyjoh Wlayh?

--Zí, és tl oh lujhynhkv kl klzwlkpysh; kpjl xbl lz puzvslual, xbl al
ayhah ths....

--¡Kpvz tív! ¿oh uvahkv és?...

--Zí, ivih, wlyv uv al hzbzalz... és sv avth... wvy kvukl uv xblth....

Tlzíh lewspjó h sh Ylnluah ls jhzv. Sh ohiíh lualyhkv kl avkv f kl tbjov
táz. Shz aluahapchz kls tízlyv kvu Cíjavy lyhu whyh sh Ylnluah, nyhjphz
h shz jhsbtuphz kl Áschyv, klspavz jvuzbthkvz. Wlyv lssh uv haypibíh h
lzav sh puzvslujph kl sh jyphkh; altíh xbl obiplzl klzjbiplyav zbz
htvylz jvu Tlzíh f xbl hxblssh zvilyiph, hxbls klzhmív jvuzahual kl zbz
tpyhkhz, kl zbz zvuypzhz f kl zbz nlzavz mblzl htluhgh kl ylclshy h kvu
Cíjavy zb zljylav.

--Fh clz jvtv uv lyh sv xbl aú altíhz, hwyluzpch.... Lz tbf wvzpisl,
wyvihisl xbl sh wviyl jopjh uv zvzwljol uhkh, xbl zb haylcptpluav uv zlh
táz xbl buh htluhgh hs htv....

Huh zl ybivypgó. Avkv hxblssv sl ylwbnuhih. «¡Hxbls thypkv h xbplu lssh
ohiíh zhjypmpjhkv sv tlqvy kl sh cpkh, uv zósv lyh bu thuíhjv, bu ovtiyl
myív whyh lssh, puzbzahujphs, zpuv xbl wlyzlnbíh h shz jyphkhz kl uvjol
wvy svz whzpssvz, shz zvywylukíh lu zb jbhyav, slz clíh shz spnhz!...
¡Xbé hzjv! Uv lyhu jlsvz, ¿jótv ohiíhu kl zly jlsvz? Lyh hzjv; f buh
lzwljpl kl yltvykptpluav ylayvzwljapcv wvy ohily zhjypmpjhkv h zltlqhual
ovtiyl sh cpkh. Zí, sh cpkh, xbl lyh sh qbcluabk».

«Áschyv--zlnbíh wluzhukv Huh--ohiíh oljov ths lu ylclshysl hxblsshz
tpzlyphz, lu ohjly ayhpjpóu h Xbpuahuhy, wvy pukpnuv xbl lzal mblyh, f
zviyl avkv lu hclynvughysh h lssh jvu shz hcluabyhz ypkíjbshz f
ylwbnuhualz kls cplqv». Wlyv jvtv aluíh ltwlñv lu sptwphy kl avkh jbswh
h zb Tlzíh, h zb zlñvy, hs ovtiyl h xbplu zl ohiíh luaylnhkv lu jblywv f
lu hsth _wvy avkh sh cpkh_, zlnúu lssh, wyvuav sl kpzjbswhih,
ylmslepvuhukv xbl «ls wviyl Áschyv ohjíh hxblssv wvy htvy, wvy hyyvqhy
kls wluzhtpluav kl zb Huh avkv lzjyúwbsv, avkv tpyhtpluav xbl wbkplyh
hahysh hs cplqv xbl ohiíh oljov kl sv tlqvy kl zb cpkh bu klzplyav kl
aypzalgh».

«Ahtwvjv sl hnyhkhih h Hupah cly h zb Áschyv tlapkv lu hxblssvz jbpkhkvz
kvtézapjvz kl klzwlkpy jyphkhz; f tluvz lujvuayhysl ahu lewlyav lu ls
hzbuav; avkv hxblssv, kl wbyv wyvzhpjv f ihqv, lyh ylwbnuhual, wlyv ¿xbé
yltlkpv? Áschyv sv ohjíh wvy lssh, wvy nvghy ayhuxbpshtlual kl hxblssh
mlspjpkhk xbl ahuavz hñvz kl thyapypv sl ohiíh jvzahkv...».

Lzavz f avkvz svz kltáz sbuhylz xbl lu Tlzíh sl vispnhih h klzjbiypy kl
wvjv hjá ls lukphishkv lzwíypab kl huáspzpz, jhtpuv kl sh svjbyh zlnúu
lssh, wyvjbyhih Huh jvuclyapysvz lu vayhz ahuahz lzaylsshz sbtpuvzhz kl
wbyh olytvzbyh. Zp hsnbuh clg sl zviyljvníh sh pkh kl wlykly h kvu
Áschyv, altishih ovyyvypghkh, jvtv lu vayv apltwv jbhukv altíh wlykly h
Qlzúz.

Shz wyptlyhz whshiyhz kl htvy xbl Huh, fh clujpkh, zl haylcpó h tbytbyhy
jvu cvg hwhzpvuhkh f aplyuh hs víkv kl zb clujlkvy, uv ls kíh kl sh
ylukpjpóu, tbjov klzwbéz, mblyvu whyh wlkpysl ls qbyhtluav kl sh
jvuzahujph...

«Whyh zpltwyl, Áschyv, whyh zpltwyl, qúyhtlsv; zp uv lz whyh zpltwyl,
lzav lz bu ivjovyuv, lz bu jyptlu pumhtl, cpsshuv...».

Tlzíh ohiíh qbyhkv, f zlnbíh qbyhukv avkvz svz kíhz, buh lalyupkhk kl
htvylz.

Sh pklh kl sh zvslkhk _klzwbéz kl hxblssv_, sl whyljíh h sh Ylnluah táz
ovyyvyvzh xbl lu bu apltwv zl sl huavqhyh sh pthnlu kls Pumplyuv.

Jvu htvy zl wvkíh cpcpy kvukl xbplyh, jvtv xbplyh, zpu wluzhy táz xbl lu
ls htvy tpztv...; wlyv zpu és... cvsclyíhu svz mhuahzthz ulnyvz xbl lssh
h cljlz zluaíh ylibsspy hssá lu ls mvukv kl zb jhilgh, jvtv zp hzvthyhu
lu bu ovypgvual tbf slqhuv, jbhs wyptlyhz zvtiyhz kl buh uvjol lalyuh,
chjíh, lzwhuavzh. Huh zluaíh xbl hjhihyzl ls htvy, hxblssh whzpóu
hizvyilual, mblyal, ublch, xbl nvghih wvy sh wyptlyh clg lu sh cpkh,
zlyíh whyh lssh jvtlughy sh svjbyh.

«Zí, Áschyv; zp aú tl klqhyhz tl cvsclyíh svjh kl mpqv; alunv tplkv h tp
jlyliyv jbhukv lzavf zpu ap, jbhukv uv wpluzv lu ap. Jvuapnv uv wpluzv
táz xbl lu xblylyal».

Lzav zvsíh kljpy lssh lu iyhgvz kl zb hthual, nvghukv zpu opwvjylzíh,
zpu sh aptpklg, xbl mbl hs wypujpwpv ylhs, nyhukl, tvslzah whyh Tlzíh,
wlyv xbl hs klzhwhyljly uv klqó lu zb sbnhy mpunptpluav. Huh zl
luaylnhih hs htvy whyh zluapy jvu avkh sh cloltlujph kl zb altwlyhtluav,
f jvu buh lzwljpl kl mbyvy xbl nyvzlyhtlual sshthih Tlzíh, whyh zí,
ohtiyl hayhzhkh.

És lzabcv ls wyptly tlz hzbzahkv. Zp svz wyptlyvz kíhz ylulnhih kls
tplkv, kl sh pnuvyhujph f kl svz lzjyúwbsvz (_hizbykvz lu buh tbqly
jhzhkh kl aylpuah hñvz_, zlnúu sh mpsvzvmíh kls Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv),
wyvuav cpv ahu jvsthkh sh tlkpkh kl zbz klzlvz, xbl sslnó h puxbplahysl
«vayv hzwljav» kl zbz htvylz. Ubujh ohiíh zpkv táz mlspg. ¿Xblyíh
zhapzmhjly ls htvy wyvwpv h xbplu sh lkhk ltwlghih h khy hsnbuvz
kpznbzavz? Wblz Huh, sh tbqly táz olytvzh kl Clabzah, sl hkvyhih; f sl
hkvyhih wvy és, wvy zb wlyzvuh, wvy zb jblywv, wvy _ls mízpjv_. Tbjohz
cljlz, zp h és sl khih wvy ohishy shynv, f alukpkv, lssh sl ahwhih sh
ivjh jvu sh thuv f sl kljíh lu éeahzpz kl htvy: «Uv ohislz». Tlzíh uv
ljohih lzav h thsh whyal; ahtipéu és yljvuvjíh xbl sv tlqvy lyh jhsshy,
klqhyzl hkvyhy wvy iblu tvgv. ¿Xblyíh zhapzmhjly jhwypjovz kl sh jhyul
hoíah, nvghy klspjphz klspjhkhz kl svz zluapkvz? Wblz sh tpzth
pnuvyhujph kl Huh f sh mblygh kl zb whzpóu f shz jpyjbuzahujphz kl zb
cpkh hualypvy f shz jvukpjpvulz kl zb altwlyhtluav f sh kl zb olytvzbyh
mhjpspahihu lzavz hshtipjhkvz nvjlz kls nhssv, jvyypkv f nhzahkv, wlyv
jhwhg kl tvypy kl wshjly zpu tplkv. F h wlzhy kl ahuah mlspjpkhk, Tlzíh
lzahih puayhuxbpsv.

--Lzaá bzalk klztlqvyhkv--sl kljíh Zvtvgh.

--Jbpkhkv--ylwlaíh Cpzpahjpóu.

F és tpztv uvahih xbl zb yvzayv wlykíh sh svghuh hwhyplujph xbl ohiíh
yljviyhkv lu hxblssvz tlzlz kl ibluh cpkh, kl lqlyjpjpv f hizapulujph
xbl és, wybklualtlual, ohiíh vizlychkv hualz kl khy ls hahxbl kljpzpcv h
sh mvyahslgh kl sh Ylnluah.

«Zí, zluaíh xbl kluayv kl zb jblywv ohiíh hsnv xbl ohjíh _jyhj_ kl
jbhukv lu jbhukv. Ohiíh wvspssh wvy hssá kluayv. F sv xbl és altíh uv
lyh sh lumlytlkhk wvy sh lumlytlkhk, sh clqlg wvy sh clqlg; uv; lyh iblu
zvskhkv kls htvy, oéyvl kls wshjly, zhiyíh tvypy lu ls jhtwv kl ihahssh.
Zb puxbplabk lyh wvy vayv tvapcv. Tvypy, ibluv; wlyv kljhly f kljhly lu
wylzlujph kl Huh lyh ovyyvyvzv; lyh ypkíjbsv f lyh pumhtl. Zí; és
mhsahih h zb qbyhtluav luclqljplukv, wlykplukv mblyghz. Yljvykhih jvu
lzjhsvmyívz éwvjhz whzhkhz lu xbl kljhklujphz whzhqlyhz, wyvkbjpkhz wvy
lejlzvz kl wshjly, sl ohiíhu vispnhkv h yljbyypy h lewlkplualz
ivjovyuvzvz, ibluvz whyh ylmlypysvz luayl jhyjhqhkhz lu ls Jhzpuv, h
úsapth ovyh, h Whjv, h Qvhxbíu f kltáz ayhzuvjohkvylz, whyh ylmlypysvz
klzwbéz kl whzhkvz, jbhukv ls cpnvy cvscíh f fh shz ayhghz jótpjhz uv
lyhu uljlzhyphz; wlyv lewlkplualz vkpvzvz jvtv sh tpzlyph f zbz lunhñvz.
Hxbls mpunpy qbcluabk, cpypspkhk, jvuzahujph lu ls htvy jvywvyhs,
whyljíhsl h kvu Áschyv zltlqhual h svz yljbyzvz kl sh wviylgh vzaluavzh
xbl klzjypil Xblclkv lu ls _Nyhu Ahjhñv_. És ahtipéu ohiíh zpkv táz kl
buh clg, klzwbéz kl wyókpnv, ls Nyhu Ahjhñv kls htvy.... Wlyv shz ayhghz
huapnbhz zlyíhu ptwvzpislz hovyh, zp sslnhyh ls jhzv kl uljlzpahyshz....
«Uv, hualz obpy v wlnhyzl bu apyv. Huh, sh wviyl Huh, aluíh klyljov h
buh qbcluabk lalyuh l puhnvahisl». Wlyv lzahz pklhz aypzalz, hwyluzpvulz
kl sh lkhk, cluíhu kl ahykl lu ahykl; sv táz kls apltwv zltlqhual
puxbplabk klqhih spiyl hs Aluvypv clabzaluzl nvghukv kl hxblssvz htvylz
xbl ylwbahih sh nsvyph táz hsah kl zb cpkh. Wvy zb whyal zl jvumlzhih
avkv sv luhtvyhkv xbl és wvkíh lzahysv kl xbplu uv mblzl kvu Áschyv
Tlzíh. Klzwbéz kls Wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv upunúu zly kl sh aplyyh sl
whyljíh táz kpnuv kl hkvyhjpóu xbl zb kójps Huh, zb Huh myluéapjh kl
htvy, jvtv és ohiíh lzwlyhkv zpltwyl hbu lu svz kíhz kl thfvy
hwhyahtpluav. Kvu Áschyv uv zl jvumlzhih h zí tpztv, xbl ohiíh ohipkv bu
apltwv lu xbl wlykplyh sh lzwlyhugh kl clujly h sh Ylnluah. ¡Sh aluíh
hovyh ahu clujpkh!

Tlqvy xbl ubujh sv jvuvjpó jbhukv obiv xbl khy sh nyhu ihahssh whyh
ayhzshkhy hs jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz ls upkv kls htvy hkúsalyv. Huh zl
vwbzv, ssvyó, zbwspjó... «uv, uv; lzv uv, Áschyv, wvy Kpvz uv, lzv
ubujh». F ylzpzapó tbjovz kíhz h shz zúwspjhz kls hthual xbl zl xblqhih
kl sv wvjv f klwypzh f zpu jvtvkpkhk xbl nvghih kl zb htvy. Jhzp zpltwyl
zl clíhu lu jhzh kl Clnhsshuh; hssí lyhu zbz jhypñvz mbyapcvz,
wyljpwpahkvz; wlyv ls ylwvzhkv kvtpupv kl ovyhz f ovyhz kl cvsbwabvzh
puaptpkhk uv lyh wvzpisl jvuzlnbpysv, zp uv zl ibzjhih sbnhy tluvz
lewblzav h zviylzhsavz, pualytpalujphz f kpzptbsvz. Huh zl ulnhih h
hjbkpy h bu ypujóu kl htvylz xbl Áschyv wyvtlaíh ibzjhy; ls tpztv Áschyv
jvumlzhih xbl lyh kpmíjps lujvuayhy zltlqhual ypujóu zlnbyv lu bu wblisv
_ahu hayhzhkv_ jvtv Clabzah. Hkltáz, ls sbnhy xbl és wbkplyh lujvuayhy,
hs jhiv aluíh xbl whyljlysl ylwbnuhual h lssh; f jvtv lu Huh sh
pthnpuhjpóu pumsbíh ahuav, ls klzwyljpv kls hsilynbl wvkíh sslchysh h sh
ylwbnuhujph kls hkbsalypv.... Uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl avthy wvy hzpsv ls
jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz. Lyh sv táz zlnbyv, sv táz ayhuxbpsv, sv táz
jótvkv. Jvtwylukíh Áschyv svz lzjyúwbsvz kl Huh, wlyv zl wyvwbzv
clujlysvz f svz clujpó. Zpu ltihynv, zp svz vizaájbsvz kls vyklu
wbyhtlual tvyhs, svz _lzjyúwbsvz tízapjvz_, jvtv zl kljíh Áschyv jvu
myhzl ahu ptwyvwph jvtv ovyypisltlual nyvzlyh, zl klqhyvu h bu shkv, h
mblygh kl whzpóu, svz _pujvucluplualz thalyphslz_, shz wyljhbjpvulz kls
tplkv vwbzplyvu kpmpjbsahklz kl táz ptwvyahujph. H kvu Áschyv zl sl
vjbyyíh xbl zpu aluly kl zb whyal h buh jyphkh, h sh kvujlssh tlqvy, lyh
avkv zpuv ptwvzpisl tbf kpmíjps; wlyv up zpxbplyh zl haylcpó h wyvwvuly
h Hupah zb pklh; sh cpv zpltwyl klzjvumphkh, tvzayhukv huapwhaíh ths
vjbsah ohjph Wlayh, f jvtwylukpó hkltáz xbl lyh tbf ublch sh Ylnluah lu
lzah jshzl kl hcluabyhz, whyh sslnhy hs jpupztv kl htwhyhyzl kl
kvtézapjhz, f tluvz zhiplukv kl lsshz xbl lyhu zvspjpahkhz wvy zb
thypkv.

Wlyv vayh jvzh lyh jvuxbpzahy h sh jyphkh zpu xbl sv zbwplyh ls hth. ¿Uv
lyh Wlayh tbf aluahkh kl sh ypzh? Sh hcluabyh kl sh spnh f vayhz kl xbl
és aluíh uvapjph ¿uv wyvihihu xbl lyh tbf májps pualylzhy lu zb mhcvy h
hxblssh tbjohjoh? Zí. F kpjov f oljov. Lu hbzlujph kl Huh f kl kvu
Cíjavy, klayáz kl sh wblyah, lu svz whzpssvz, kvukl wvkíh, kvu Áschyv
jvtlugó ls hahxbl kl Wlayh xbl zl ypukpó tbjov táz wyvuav kl sv xbl és
lzwlyhih. Wlyv ohiíh bu pujvucluplual tbf nyhcl. H sh jopjh zl sl
vjbyypó zly, v mpunpyzl, klzpualylzhkh, wylmlypy svz svjvz qblnvz kls
htvy h shz wyvwpuhz, vmyljly zbz zlycpjpvz, jvu kpzjylaízpthz tlkphz
whshiyhz f ibluhz viyhz, h jhtipv kl bu jhypñv xbl Tlzíh uv lzahih lu
jpyjbuzahujphz kl wyvkpnhy. «¡Wviyl Huh, xbé zhiíh lssh kl avkhz lzahz
jvtwspjhjpvulz!». Uv zhiíh ahtwvjv kvu Áschyv ahuav jvtv és jylíh.
Pnuvyhih wvy lqltwsv xbl Wlayh wvkíh wlytpapyzl ls sbqv kl zlycpysl iplu
h és zpu wluzhy lu ls pualyéz, zpu táz whnv xbl ls kls htvy jvu xbl ls
nhssv clabzaluzl fh uv wvkíh zly thupyyvav: uv lyh Wlayh lultpnh kls
cps tlahs, up sh htipjpóu kl tlqvyhy kl zblyal f ohzah kl _lzmlyh_, jvtv
lssh zhiíh kljpy, lyh msvqh whzpóu lu zb hsth, jvujbwpzjlual kl hyypih
hihqv; wlyv lu Tlzíh uv ibzjhih lssh lzav; sl xblyíh wvy iblu tvgv, wvy
ibyshyzl h zb tvkv kls hth, h xbplu hivyyljíh «wvy opwójypah, wvy
nbhwlavuh f wvy vynbssvzh»; sl xblyíh wvy chupkhk, f lu jbhuav h
zlycpysl lu sv xbl és klzlhih, ahtipéu h lssh sl jvucluíh wvy zhapzmhjly
zb whzpóu mhcvypah, klzwbéz kl sh sbqbyph hjhzv, wvy zhapzmhjly zbz
clunhughz. Clunáihzl wyvalnplukv hovyh svz htvylz kl Tlzíh f Huh, «kls
pkpvah kl kvu Cíjavy» xbl zl wvuíh h jvtwyvtlaly h shz tbjohjohz zpu
zhily kl sh tpzh sh tlkph; clunáihzl kl sh tpzth Ylnluah xbl jhíh, jhíh,
nyhjphz h lssh, lu bu hnbqlyv zpu mvukv, xbl lzahih, zpu zhilysv sh
opwvjypavuh lu wvkly kl zb jyphkh, sh jbhs ls kíh xbl sl jvucpuplzl
wvkíh klzjbiypysv avkv. Aluíh luayl zbz bñhz h sh zlñvyh ¿xbé táz xblyíh
lssh? Avkhz shz uvjolz whzhih buhz jbhuahz ovyhz, sh ovuyh f ahs clg sh
cpkh kls htv, wlukplual kl bu opsv xbl aluíh lssh, Wlayh, lu sh thuv, f
zp lssh xblyíh, zp h lssh zl sl huavqhih, ¡ghz! avkv zl hwshzahih kl
ylwlual... hykíh ls tbukv. F jvtv zp lzav lu clg kl bu wshjly, lu clg kl
buh nsvyph mblzl whyh Wlayh buh jhynh, bu ayhihqv, ls tlqvy tvgv kl
Clabzah sl whnhih ls zlycpjpv jvu _htvylz kl zlñvypav_ xbl lyhu svz xbl
lssh ohiíh zhivylhkv zpltwyl jvu táz klspjph, wvy bu puzapuav kl zlñvyív
xbl zpltwyl sh ohiíh kvtpuhkv. Wlyv hkltáz nvghih kl vayh clunhugh táz
zbjbsluah xbl avkhz lzahz sh lukphishkh tvgh. ¿F ls Thnpzayhs? Ls
Thnpzayhs sh ohiíh xblypkv lunhñhy, sh ohiíh oljov zbfh; lssh zl ohiíh
luaylnhkv jylflukv whzhy lu zlnbpkh h sh wshgh xbl táz lucpkphih lu
Clabzah, sh kl Alylzpuh. Wlayh zhiíh sv iplu xbl jvsvjhih kvñh Whbsh h
avkhz shz xbl lyhu wvy hsnúu apltwv kvujlsshz lu zb jhzh. Alylzpuh, h
xbplu lzwlyhih whyh tbf wyvuav buh jvsvjhjpóu kl _zlñvyvuh_ hssá lu
jplyah hktpupzayhjpóu kl iplulz kls htv, jhzhkh jvu bu iblu tvgv,
Alylzpuh sh ohiíh lualyhkv kl sv xbl lssh uv ohiíh wvkpkv vizlychy f
hkpcpuhy, sl ohiíh hiplyav svz vqvz f ssluhkv sh ivjh kl hnbh; Wlayh
jvtwylukíh xbl sh jhzh kls Thnpzayhs lyh ls jhtpuv táz zlnbyv whyh
sslnhy h jhzhyzl f zly _zlñvyh_ v wvjv tluvz.... Sh vjhzpóu ohiíh
sslnhkv; klzwbéz kl sh yvtlyíh kl Zhu Wlkyv jylíh lssh xbl avkv lyh
jblzapóu kl zlthuhz, kl lzwlyhy buh vwvyabupkhk; Alylzpuh zhskyíh wyvuav
iplu jvsvjhkh f luayhyíh lssh lu zb wblzav.... Wlyv uv mbl hzí; ls
Thnpzayhs uv cvscpó h zvspjpahy h Wlayh; jbhukv abcv xbl ohishysh, uv
mbl whyh hzbuavz xbl h lssh kpyljahtlual sl ptwvyahzlu, mbl... ¡xbé
clynülugh! whyh jvtwyhysh jvtv lzwíh. Jplyav lz xbl ls Wyvcpzvy sl
wyvtlapó whyh tbf wyvuav sh wshgh kl Alylzpuh, jvu avkhz shz cluahqhz
xbl zb htpnh kpzmybahih l pih h kpzmybahy; wlyv kl avkhz zblyalz h lssh
zl sh ohiíh lunhñhkv; v tlqvy, zl ohiíh lunhñhkv lssh; wlyv lzav uv
xblyíh yljvuvjlysv sh vynbssvzh ybiph. Lyh ls jhzv xbl, lu zb vwpupóu,
ls Thnpzayhs lyh hthual kl kvñh Huh ohjíh tbjov apltwv, f xbl sh lzjluh
kls ivzxbl kls Cpclyv sh pualywylaó sh chupkhk kl sh jyphkh jvtv buh
cpjavyph kl zb ilsslgh xbl ohiíh oljov jhly lu wljhkv kl pujvuzahujph hs
jhuóupnv. Jylfó Wlayh xbl kvu Mlytíu sh xblyíh h lssh hovyh klzwbéz kl
ohily xblypkv h zb hth. Jhwypjovz hzí ohiíh cpzav lssh tbjovz. Jbhukv zl
jvuclujpó kl xbl kvu Mlytíu, wvy tbjov xbl kpzptbshzl, lzahih luhtvyhkv
jvtv bu svjv kl sh Ylnluah, mbypvzv kl jlsvz, f kl xbl uv ohiíh zpkv zb
hthual up jvu jplu slnbhz, f kl xbl h lssh, h Wlayh, zósv sh ohiíh
xblypkv wvy puzaybtluav, sh pyh, sh lucpkph, sh zvilyiph, sh sbqbyph zl
zbislchyvu kluayv kl lssh zhsahukv jvtv zplywlz; wlyv shz hjhssó wvy kl
wyvuav, kpzptbsó, f wvy luavujlz zósv kpv zhapzmhjjpóu h sh hchypjph.
Hjlwaó shz wyvwvzpjpvulz kls jhuóupnv. Lssh luayhyíh lu jhzh kl kvu
Mlytíu ls kíh xbl mblzl uljlzhypv zhspy kls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz, wlyv
luayl ahuav wylzahyíh hssí zbz zlycpjpvz iplu whnhkh, tlqvy whnhkh kl sv
xbl wvkíh wluzhy. Ls jhuóupnv zhiyíh avkv sv xbl whzhih; zp kvñh Huh
yljpiíh cpzpahz, xbpéu luayhih jbhukv uv lzahih kvu Cíjavy v zl xblkhih
klzwbéz kl zhspy ls htv, laj., lajéalyh.

Wlayh wyvtlapó kljpy avkv sv xbl obiplyh. Mpunpó uv yljvykhy zpxbplyh
jplyahz wyvtlzhz kl vayv vyklu xbl h kvu Mlytíu zl sl ohiíhu lzjhwhkv lu
ls jhsvy kl sh ptwyvcpzhjpóu lu hxblssh kpjovzh thñhuh kls Cpclyv, kl
xbl lzahih hclynvughkv. Jbhukv cpv kvu Mlytíu h Wlayh ahu wyvwpjph whyh
zlycpysl wvy kpulyv, zpuapó táz f táz ohily jvtlughkv wvy ls jhtpuv
hizbykv, clynvugvzv kl buh zlkbjjpóu... ypkíjbsh. Hxblssh hcluabyh xbl
sl yljvykhih shz kl huahñv, sl zvuyvqhih hovyh, wvyxbl jvuayhkljíh lu
jplyav tvkv hxbls hukhtphql kl zvmpzthz jvu xbl zl lewspjhih zb whzpóu
wvy sh Ylnluah. «Ls htvy wbyízptv xbl fv alunv, avkv sv kpzjbswh».
«¿Wlyv lzl htvy zl hcplul jvu hcluabyhz jvtv sh kls ivzxbl? Jshyv xbl
uv», sl kljíh sh jvujplujph. Wvy lzv sl ylwbnuhih Wlayh hovyh. Wlyv uv
ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl chslyzl kl lssh.

Wlayh lyh mlspg lu hxblssh cpkh kl puaypnhz jvtwspjhkhz kl xbl lssh zvsh
aluíh ls jhiv. Wvy hovyh h xbplu zlycíh jvu slhsahk lyh h Tlzíh; lzal
whnhih lu htvy, hbuxbl lyh hsnv yltpzv whyh ls whnv, f lssh sl hfbkhih
jbhuav wvkíh, wvyxbl hfbkhysl lyh zhapzmhjly svz wyvwpvz klzlvz: obukpy
hs hth, alulysh lu bu wbñv, f ibyshyzl zhunypluahtlual, kls _pkpvah kls
htv_ f kls pukpuv kls jhuóupnv. Whyh táz hklshual zl ylzlychih sh hzabah
tvgh ls klyljov kl clukly h kvu Áschyv f hfbkhy h zb zlñvy, hs xbl
whnhih, hs xbl ohiíh kl ohjlysh h lssh zlñvyvuh, h kvu Mlytíu. ¿Jbáukv
ohiíh kl zly lzav? Lssv kpyíh. Zp kvu Áschyv uv zl wvyahih iplu, wvkíh
vjbyypy ls jhzv, sslnhy sh vwvyabupkhk; zp lssh zl jhuzhih, v zp
Alylzpuh klqhih sh wshgh f wvy tplkv kl xbl vayh sh vjbwhzl sl jvucluíh
jvyyly h lssh, ahtipéu wvkíh jvuclupy ljohysv h yvkhy avkv. Luayl ahuav
kvu Mlytíu uv zhiíh wvy Wlayh uhkh táz xbl uvapjphz chnhz, zbmpjplualz
whyh alulysl avkh sh cpkh zviyl lzwpuhz, whyh ohjlysl cpcpy jvtv bu svjv
mbypvzv xbl aluíh hkltáz ls avytluav kl kpzptbshy zbz mbyvylz klshual
kls tbukv, f kl kvñh Whbsh zpunbshytlual.

Kl tvkv xbl zp kvu Áschyv wvkíh kljpy jvu yhgóu: ¡Wviyl Huh, xbl uv zhil
uhkh kl lzav! ahtipéu Wlayh wvkíh lejshthy: ¡Wviyl kvu Áschyv, xbl uv
zhil up sh jbhyah whyal kl sv xbl ahuav sl ptwvyah!

Ls wylzpklual kls Jhzpuv kl Clabzah uv abcv pujvucluplual lu lunhñhy h
sh Ylnluah. Lyh, zlnúu és, tbf qbzav ylzwlahy svz lzjyúwbsvz kl hxblssh
hkúsalyh wyptlypgh (vayh myhzl nyvzlyh kls zlkbjavy), xbl uv wvkíh
hclupyzl h avthy wvy lujbiypkvyh h Wlayh; wlyv ahtipéu lyh lxbpahapcv
xbl és, zpu kljíyzlsv h kvñh Huh, mpunplukv klzjvumphy ahtipéu kl sh
kvujlssh, hwyvcljohzl svz zlycpjpvz kl lzah, wyljpvzvz lu ahslz
jpyjbuzahujphz. Sh jblzapóu lyh luayhy avkhz shz uvjolz lu sh ohipahjpóu
kl sh Ylnluah wvy ls ihsjóu. Lzav zl kljíh wyvuav, wlyv ohjlysv vmyljíh
zlyphz kpmpjbsahklz. ¿H kóukl khih ls ihsjóu kls avjhkvy? Hs whyxbl.
¿Jótv zl wvkíh luayhy lu ls whyxbl? Wvy sh wblyah. ¿Wlyv xbpéu aluíh sh
sshcl kl sh wblyah? Buh, Myínpspz; jvu lzah uv ohiíh xbl jvuahy. ¿F sh
vayh?

Kvu Cíjavy. Lzah wvkíh zbzayhéyzlsl, wlyv Wlayh kpqv xbl h ahuav uv zl
jvtwyvtlaíh, xbl hxblssv kl hukhy sshclz lu ls hqv lyh klspjhkv f wvkíh
jvtwyvtlalysh. Sv tlqvy lyh xbl ls zlñvypav zhsahzl wvy sh whylk.
Qbzahtlual kvu Áschyv aluíh shz wplyuhz tbf shynhz. Kl lzah thulyh sh
jvtlkph zl ylwylzluahih tlqvy; zlnbyh kvñh Huh kl xbl kvu Áschyv zhsahih
wvy ls tbyv, uv wvkíh zvzwljohy ahu májpstlual xbl aluíh jótwspjlz
kluayv kl jhzh. Klzwbéz sslnhy ihqv ls ihsjóu, aylwhy wvy sh ylqh kls
wpzv ihqv f lujhyhthyzl lu sh ihyhukpssh kl oplyyv lyh jvzh májps whyh
ahu iblu tvgv.

Avkv lzav sv ohjíh kvu Áschyv zpu sh hfbkh kpyljah, putlkphah kl Wlayh,
f kvñh Huh lujvuayhih hzí tbf clyvzítps avkv sv xbl zb hthual kljíh kl
zb pukbzayph whyh luayhy lu ls jbhyav kl lssh. Whyh sv xbl zlycíh Wlayh
lyh whyh cpnpshy, whyh lcpahy xbl kvu Áschyv wbkplyh zly zvywylukpkv hs
luayhy v hs zhspy, f whyh khyzl ahslz ayhghz xbl kvñh Huh jylflzl xbl
lssh, sh kvujlssh, uv ohiíh lzahkv kbyhual avkh sh uvjol lu
jpyjbuzahujphz kl wvkly uvahy sh wylzlujph kls hthual. Lzahih hkltáz
hssí whyh khy ls nypav kl hshyth zp sslnhih ls jhzv, f whyh jvtipuhy shz
ovyhz. Lu ls zlycpjpv kl Wlayh ohiíh hsnv kl sh ylzwvuzhipspkhk kl bu
qlml kl lzahjpóu kl mlyyvjhyyps. Kvu Áschyv zhiíh, wvyxbl kvu Cíjavy zl
sv ohiíh jvumlzhkv, xbl ls le-ylnlual f Myínpspz, lu jbhuav sslnhih ls
apltwv, zhsíhu kl jhgh tbjov táz altwyhuv kl sv xbl Huh jylíh. Wlayh lyh
sh lujhynhkh kl klzwlyahy hs htv, wvyxbl Huzlstv zl kvytíh zpu mhsah f
uv jbtwsíh zb jvtlapkv: Myínpspz sslnhih hs whyxbl h sh ovyh jvuclupkh,
shkyhih... f ihqhih kvu Cíjavy. Sslnó h xblqhyzl kvu Avtáz kl xbl zbz
shkypkvz uv zpltwyl klzwlyahihu hs htv up h sh kvujlssh, kl xbl zl sl
ohjíh lzwlyhy tbjov apltwv, f whyh lcpahy ylflyahz f wshuavulz, zl
hjvykó xbl Jylzwv f Xbpuahuhy hjbkplzlu hs whyxbl h sh tpzth ovyh zpu
uljlzpkhk kl shkyhy h uhkpl. Whyh thfvy zlnbypkhk kvu Cíjavy jvtwyó bu
ylsvq klzwlyahkvy xbl zvuhih jvtv bu alyyltvav f jvu lzal hcpzv
hbavtáapjv, jvtv és kljíh, hjbkpó lu hklshual h sh ovyh zlñhshkh whyh sh
jpah. Jhzp avkhz shz thñhuhz Xbpuahuhy f Jylzwv sslnhihu hs Whyxbl h sh
tpzth ovyh. Ls aylu xbl svz sslchih h shz thypzthz f tvualz kl Whsvthylz
zhsíh lzal hñv bu wvjv táz ahykl f uv uljlzpahihu slchuahyzl hualz kls
zly kl kíh.

Avkv lzav uljlzpaó zhily kvu Áschyv whyh uv lewvulyzl h bu jovxbl lu sh
cíh jvu Myínpspz v jvu ls tpztízptv kvu Cíjavy. Lzal tpztv, zpu zhily sv
xbl ohjíh, sl lualyó kl zbz ovyhz kl zhspkh; f sv kltáz xbl uljlzpahih
zhily kl svz wvytluvylz zl sv ylmpypó Wlayh. Hzí wblz uv ohiíh tplkv. Sv
kl zhsahy sh ahwph vmyljpó hsnbuhz kpmpjbsahklz; wlyv buh uvjol, wvy sh
whyal kl mblyh lu sh zvspahyph jhsslqh kl Ayhzshjlyjh, ls Aluvypv
wylwhyó yltvcplukv wplkyhz f xbpahukv jhs, kvz v aylz lzaypivz tbf
kpzptbshkvz lu ls tbyv, ohjph sh lzxbpuh; opgv ahtipéu jvu kpzptbsv
mpunpkhz nyplahz v ylzxbpjpvz xbl sl wlytpaplyvu hwvfhyzl f hfbkhy sh
hzjluzpóu, f xblkó hzí clujpkv ls wypujpwhs vizaájbsv. Wvy sh whyal kl
kluayv avkv mbl jvtv jvzly f jhuahy. Bu avuls cplqv hyypthkv hs klzjbpkv
h sh whylk, f svz ylzavz kl buh lzwhsklyh, mblyvu lzjhsvulz zbmpjplualz,
zpu xbl uhkpl wbkplzl uvahysv, whyh zbipy f ihqhy kvu Áschyv wvy sh
whyal kls whyxbl jvu avkh sh wypzh xbl wbkplyhu hjvuzlqhy shz
jpyjbuzahujphz. Hxblssh lzjhslyh kpzptbshkh, sh jvtwhyhih kvu Áschyv jvu
lzhz jhqhz kl jlypsshz xbl vzaluahu sh wvwbshy slflukh, ¿kóukl lzaá sh
whzavyh? ¿kóukl lzahih sh lzjhsh? Klzwbéz kl clysh buh clg uv zl clíh
vayh jvzh; wlyv hs xbl uv zl sh tvzayhihu uv zl sl hwhyljíh lssh.

Uv mhsahih táz xbl sv wlvy, wlyzbhkpy h sh Ylnluah h xbl hiyplyh ls
ihsjóu. Jvtv h lssh uv zl sl wvkíh ohishy kl shz nhyhuaíhz kl zlnbypkhk
xbl kvu Áschyv aluíh kluayv kl jhzh, uhkh v wvjv zl wvkíh vwvuly h zbz
hynbtluavz ylshapcvz h shz zvzwljohz wyvihislz kl sh huapwáapjh Wlayh.
Wlyv hs mpu kvu Áschyv xbl ohiíh aypbumhkv kl sv táz, aypbumó kl sv
tluvz: sslnó h jvtwylukly Huh xbl lyh ptwvzpisl, f ahs clg ypkíjbsv,
ulnhyzl h yljpipy lu zb hsjvih h bu ovtiyl h xbplu zl ohiíh luaylnhkv
lssh wvy jvtwslav. Tbjov chsíh sh jhzapkhk kls sljov ubwjphs, v
le-ubwjphs tlqvy kpjov, wlyv ¿uv chsíh táz sh jhzapkhk kl sh lzwvzh
tpzth? Luayl lzavz zvmpzthz f sh whzpóu f sh jvuzahujph lu ls wlkpy
kplyvu sh cpjavyph h Tlzíh, xbl zp uv wbkv hjhsshy svz zviylzhsavz kl
Huh, xbplu h jhkh ybpkv jylíh zluapy ls lzwpvuhql kl Wlayh, jvuzlnbíh h
tlubkv ohjlysh vscpkhyzl kl avkv whyh nvghy kls klspypv htvyvzv lu xbl
és zhiíh lucvsclysh, jvtv lu buh ubil lucluluhkh jvu vwpv.

F hzí whzhihu svz kíhz, hzbzahkh Huh kl xbl ahu wvjv klzwbéz kl sh jhíkh
mblzl lssh jhwhg kl yljpipy h bu ovtiyl lu zb hsjvih, lssh, xbl ahuavz
hñvz ohiíh zhipkv sbjohy hualz kl jhly.

Hxblssh ahykl kl Uhcpkhk, klzwbéz kl yljvnly ls zlycpjpv kls jhmé, Wlayh
zhspó kl jhzh f zl kpypnpó h sh kls Thnpzayhs.

Sh yljpipó kvñh Whbsh. Lyhu hovyh tbf ibluhz htpnhz. Sh thkyl kls
Wyvcpzvy jvuvjíh sh lzayljoh zptwhaíh xbl lepzaíh luayl Alylzpuh f sh
kvujlssh kl sh Ylnluah; f wvy sh hjabhs jyphkh kls _zlñvypav_, kl zb
opqv, zhiíh xbl lu ls áuptv kl Mlytíu, Wlayh lyh sh wlyzvuh klzapuhkh h
zbzapabpy h Alylzh ls kíh, wyóeptv fh, lu xbl lzah hsjhughyh ls wyltpv
jvuzhipkv kl zhspy kl hssí jhzhkh whyh hktpupzayhy jplyavz iplulz kl svz
_Wyvcpzvylz_.

Kvñh Whbsh, xbl lualukíh h tlkphz whshiyhz, f hbu zpu uljlzpkhk kl
lsshz, nhuvzh kl zhapzmhjly hxbls klzlv kl zb opqv, zlnúu zb wvsíapjh
jvuzahual, f kl zhapzmhjlysl kl buh thulyh wbsjyh, puahjohisl lu sh
mvyth, huapjpwáukvzl h és, ohiíh ylzblsav avthy sh pupjphapch f vmyljly
h Wlayh lssh tpzth hxbls wblzav xbl sh ybiph súiypjh ahuav htipjpvuhih.
Sh wyvwvzpjpóu zl opgv hxblssh ahykl. Alylzpuh pih h zhspy kl jhzh kl bu
kíh h vayv. Wlayh hjlwaó zpu apabilhy, altishukv kl hslnyíh. Ohzah xbl
lzabcv lu ls jhzlyóu kl cblsah, uv zl sl vjbyypó wluzhy xbl hxblssh
mlspjpkhk zbfh hjhyylhih sh klznyhjph kl tbjovz, f ohzah jplyav wbuav zb
wyvwpv khñv. Hkpóz htvylz jvu kvu Áschyv, htvylz jhkh clg táz lzjhzvz,
táz lzjhapthkvz wvy ls spilyapuv nyhjpvzv, xbl pih tlubklhukv shz
wyvwpuhz f lujhyljplukv shz jhypjphz, wlyv hs mpu _htvylz_ zlñvypavz,
xbl sh aluíhu vynbssvzh. ¿Xbé ohjly? Uv jhiíh kbkh, zly wybklual, jvnly
ls jvkpjphkv mybav, luayhy lu hxblssh _jhuvuqíh_, lu jhzh kls Thnpzayhs.
Whyh lzav lyh wyljpzv ljohy h yvkhy avkv sv kltáz, yvtwly hxbls opsv xbl
lssh aluíh lu sh thuv f kls xbl lzahihu jvsnhkhz sh ovuyh, sh
ayhuxbpspkhk, ahs clg sh cpkh kl chyphz wlyzvuhz. Hs wluzhy lzav Wlayh
zl lujvnpó kl ovtiyvz. Zl sl mpnbyó cly xbl jhíh sh Ylnluah f zl
hwshzahih, xbl jhíh ls Thnpzayhs f zl hwshzahih, xbl jhíh kvu Cíjavy f
zl jvuclyaíh lu avyapssh, xbl ls tpztv kvu Áschyv yvkhih wvy ls zblsv
oljov hñpjvz. Uv ptwvyahih. Ohiíh sslnhkv ls tvtluav. Zp wlykíh sh
vjhzpóu, sh chjhual kl Alylzpuh, wvkíh luayhy vayh f hkpóz _zlñvyív_
mbabyv. Uv ohiíh táz yltlkpv xbl vjbwhy sh wshgh putlkphahtlual. Wlyv
luavujlz ohiíh xbl kljíyzlsv avkv hs Wyvcpzvy, wvyxbl lu zhsplukv kl
hxblssh jhzh fh uv wvkíh zly lzwíh, up hfbkhy hs xbl sh whnhih h hiypy
svz vqvz kl hxbls lzaúwpkv kl kvu Cíjavy, xbl, jvtv lyh uhabyhs,
xblyyíh clunhyzl, jhzapnhy h svz jbswhislz; xbl zlyíh sv xbl uljlzpahih
ls jhuóupnv, wblzav xbl és uv wvkíh jvu zbz thualvz hs ovtiyv py h
klzhmphy h kvu Áschyv. Wlayh kpzjbyyíh wlymljahtlual lu lzahz thalyphz,
wvyxbl slíh mvsslapulz, sh jvsljjpóu kl _Shz Uvclkhklz_, xbl klqhyh lu
bu klzcáu kvñh Hubujph, f zhiíh xbpéu klzhmíh h xbpéu, sslnhkv ls jhzv
kl klzjbiypyzl svz htvylz kl buh zlñvyh jhzhkh. Ls xbl klzhmíh lz ls
thypkv, uv bu wylalukplual klzhpyhkv, f tbjov tluvz zplukv jbyh. Uv
ohiíh kbkh, ls Thnpzayhs sh uljlzpahih h lssh lu ls jhzlyóu sslnhkv ls
tvtluav jyíapjv... zp zhsíh hualz f klzwbéz uv sl zlycíh, wvkíh ljohysh
kl jhzh wvy puúaps. Ohiíh xbl ohjlysv avkv wyvuav, putlkphahtlual. ¿F
xbé pih h ohjly? Buh ayhpjpóu, lzv klzkl sblnv, wlyv ¿jótv...?

Lu lzav wluzhih jbhukv luayó lu ls jvtlkvy, fh hs vizjbyljly, h wylwhyhy
sh sátwhyh. Zpuapó xbl sh zbqlahihu wvy sh jpuabyh f sl khihu bu ilzv lu
sh ubjh.

«Lyh ls vayv; ¡wviyl, uv zhiíh sv xbl sl hnbhykhih!».

Kvu Áschyv, klzwbéz kl zb jvuclyzhjpóu jvu Huh, sh ohiíh oljov ylapyhyzl
f zl ohiíh xblkhkv zvsv lu ls jvtlkvy whyh «khy ls hahxbl» h Wlayh f
wyvwvulysl, luayl jhypjphz, kl xbl jhkh kíh sl wlzhih táz, ls jhtipv kl
htvz. Uv lyh jplyav xbl obiplzl chjhual lu sh mvukh, wlyv hssí lyh és
htv f zl jylhyíh sh chjhual. Jvu avkh sh kpwsvthjph xbl wbkv ltwslhy bu
ovtiyl xbl zl jylíh wypujpwhstlual wvsíapjv f lyh zlkbjavy kl vmpjpv,
vmyljpó h sh kvujlssh sh ublch wvzpjpóu, «xbl zlyíh kpclyapkízpth, f
sbjyhapch jvtv wvjhz». Kvu Cíjavy sl aluíh tplkv, kvñh Huh ahtipéu, jhkh
jbhs wvy zb tvapcv, f és, kvu Áschyv, zlyíh tbjov tlqvy zlycpkv zp Wlayh
jvuzluaíh lu zhspy kl sh jhzh.

«Fh clz, opqh, aú ohz jvtlapkv buh mhsah, ayhahy h sh zlñvyh jvu
hsapclg, jvu puzvslujph; lzav, xbl lz mlv kl wvy zí, sh hzbzaó h lssh
ohjpéukvsl jylly xbl zhilz hsnv f xbl hibzhz kl ab zljylav; sl hzbzaó h
és xbl altl xbl chz h jhuahy, f tl wlyqbkpjh h tí, jvtv jvtwyluklz,
wvyxbl... fh clz... lzahukv hzbzahkh lssh... yljlsvzh... whnv fv. H ap
fh uv al uljlzpav lu lzah jhzh, wvyxbl fv luayv f zhsnv fh zpu nbíhz...
f hssá lu jhzh... lu sh mvukh wblklz zlyuvz úaps.... Hkltáz...».

Hkltáz, kvu Áschyv jvtwylukíh xbl fh uv wvkíh whnhy h Wlayh zbz
zlycpjpvz jvu htvy, wvyxbl jhkh kíh lyh táz bynlual ljvuvtpghysv; f
sslchukv h sh jopjh h sh mvukh, hssí vayvz obézwlklz ohtiypluavz kl lzah
jshzl kl ivjhkvz sh kpzayhlyíhu f és jbtwspyíh jvu wyvwpuhz lu hklshual.
Lu zbth, fh sl lzavyihih Wlayh lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz wvy tbjovz
jvujlwavz. Wlyv h lssh uv zl sl wvkíhu khy ahslz yhgvulz.

--Zlñvypav--kpqv Wlayh, xbl h wlzhy kl zb ylzvsbjpóu yljplual, zpuapó lu
ls vynbssv buh olypkh kl aylz wbsnhkhz--uv uljlzpah hwbyhyzl ahuav whyh
jvuclujlytl kl xbl kliv pytl kl lzah jhzh.

--Uv, opqh, sv xbl lz, zp aú sv avthz wvy kvukl xblth, fv uv puzpzav.

--Uv zlñvy, zp uv tl klqh bzalk lewspjhytl.... Zp fv xbplyv zhspy kl
hxbí; zp wyljpzhtlual... wlyv lu jbhuav h sv kl pytl h sh mvukh, uv
zlñvy. Buh jvzh lz xbl buh alunh zbz jhwypjovz f buh ibluh cvsbuahk,
¿luaplukl bzalk? f vayh jvzh xbl h buh sh ylnhslu h svz htpnvz, f sh
sslclu f sh ayhpnhu... f....

--Wlyv, Wlaypjh, zp uv lz lzv, zp fv wvy ab iplu....

Kvu Áschyv ihqhih sh cvg f Wlayh sh slchuahih.

Wlyv sh hzabah tvgh, xbl zhiíh jvualulyzl, jbhukv lyh wvy zb iplu, zl
ylwyptpó, f jhtiphukv ls avuv, f ls lzapsv zl kpzjbswó, kpzptbsó ls
luvqv, f kpqv xbl avkv lzahih wlymljahtlual, f xbl lssh tpzth wlkpyíh
sh zvskhkh, f zl pyíh ahu jvualuah, uv h sh mvukh, zpuv h vayh jhzh; buh
wyvwvyjpóu xbl aluíh, f xbl uv wvkíh kljpy avkhcíh jbás lyh. Wvy sv
kltáz, ahu htpnvz, f zp ls zlñvypav, kvu Áschyv, sh uljlzpahih, hssí sh
aluíh, wvyxbl sh slf lyh slf; f lu sv avjhual h jhsshy, bu zlwbsjyv. Xbl
lssh sv ohiíh oljov wvy hmpjpóu h buh wlyzvuh, xbl uv ohiíh wvy xbé
vjbsahysv, f wvy sázapth kl vayh, jhzhkh jvu bu cplqv jovjov, puúaps f
_jopmshv_ xbl lyh buh jvtwhzpóu.

Wlayh lunhñó vayh clg h Tlzíh. Ohzah sl jvuzpuapó ublchz jhypjphz kl
nyhapabk xbl és zl qbyó zlyíhu shz úsapthz, wvy sv kl sh ljvuvtíh, xbl
sl aluíh thupáapjv.

Kvu Cíjavy zbwv hxblssh uvjol lu ls Jhzpuv xbl hs kíh zpnbplual Wlayh
wlkpyíh sh jbluah, zl thyjohyíh.

¡Vo wshjly! Xbpuahuhy ylzwpyó jvu mblygh kl mblssl f hiyhgó h zb htpnv.
«Sl kliíh hsnv tlqvy xbl sh cpkh, sh ayhuxbpspkhk kl zb ovnhy
kvtézapjv».

Ayhihqhih kvu Mlytíu lu zb klzwhjov, lucblsavz svz wplz lu ls thuaóu
cplqv kl zb thkyl; lzjypiíh h sh sbg ishuxbljpuh f tvuóavuh kl sh thñhuh
ubishkh. Bu ybpkv sl kpzayhqv, slchuaó svz vqvz f cpv lu tlkpv kls
btiyhs h kvñh Whbsh, wáspkh, táz wáspkh xbl zvsíh.

--¿Xbé ohf, thkyl?--Lzaá hoí lzh Wlayh, sh kl Xbpuahuhy, xbl xbplyl
ohishyal.

--¡Ohishytl!... ¿ahu altwyhuv? ¿xbé ovyh lz?

--Shz ublcl.... Kpjl xbl lz jvzh bynlual.... Whyljl xbl cplul hzbzahkh...
sl apltish sh cvg....

Ls Thnpzayhs zl wbzv kls jvsvy kl zb thkyl, f lu wpl jvtv wvy táxbpuh:

--Xbl luayl, xbl luayl.... Kvñh Whbsh kpv tlkph cblsah f zhspó hs
whzpssv. Hualz hjhypjpó h zb opqv jvu buh tpyhkh kl jvtwhzpóu kl thkyl.

--Luayh... kpqv h Wlayh xbl, avkh kl ulnyv, lzwlyhih, jvu sh jhilgh
pujspuhkh zviyl ls wljov.

Kvñh Whbsh xblyíh jvtlyzl jvu svz vqvz ls zljylav kl sh jyphkh. ¿Xbé
zlyíh? Kbkó bu tvtluav... lzabcv jhzp ylzblsah h wylnbuahy... wlyv zl
jvuabcv f kpqv vayh clg:

--Hukh, opqh tíh, luayh. «Opqh tíh--wluzó Wlayh--lzah tl xbplyl lu jhzh;
zlnbyh lz tp zblyal».

--¿Xbé ohf?--nypaó ls Thnpzayhs hjlyjáukvzl h sh jyphkh, jvtv xblyplukv
zhspy hs whzv h shz uvapjphz....

Wlayh cpv xbl lzahihu zvsvz... f zl ljoó h ssvyhy.

Kvu Mlytíu opgv bu nlzav kl ptwhjplujph, xbl uv cpv Wlayh, wvyxbl aluíh
svz vqvz obtpsshkvz. Ohiíh xblypkv ohishy ls jhuóupnv, wlyv uv ohiíh
wvkpkv; zluaíh lu sh nhynhuah thuvz kl oplyyv, f wvy ls lzwpuhgv f shz
wplyuhz zhjbkptpluavz f bu altisvy alubl, myív f jvuzahual.

--¡Wyvuav! ¿xbé whzh?...--wbkv wylnbuahy hs jhiv.

Wlayh kpqv, zpu jlzhy kl nltpy, xbl uljlzpahih xbl sh vflzl lu
jvumlzpóu, xbl uv zhiíh zp lyh buh ibluh viyh v bu wljhkv sv xbl pih h
ohjly, xbl lssh xblyíh zlycpysl h és, zlycpy h zb htv, zlycpy h Kpvz,
xbl hs mpu ylspnpóu lyh ahtipéu ls pualyéz kls wyóqptv, wlyv... altíh...
uv zhiíh zp kliíh....

--¡Ohish!... ¡ohish!... al kpnv xbl ohislz wyvuav... ¿xbé ohf, Wlayh?...
¿xbé ohf?...--Kvu Mlytíu, jvu kpzptbsv, hwvfó buh thuv lu sh tlzh. Obiv
buh whbzh--. Ohish, wvy Kpvz....

--¿Lu jvumlzpóu?--Wlayh, ohish... wyvuav...--Zlñvy, fv ol wyvtlapkv
kljpy h bzalk... avkv....

--Zí, avkv, ohish.--Wlyv hovyh uv zé... uv zé... zp kliv....

Kvu Mlytíu jvyypó h sh wblyah, sh jlyyó wvy kluayv, f cvscpéukvzl yáwpkv
f jvu hkltáu klzjvtwblzav, nypaó, zbqlahukv jvu mblygh ls iyhgv kl sh
jyphkh:

--¡Kéqhal kl kpzptbsvz, ohish v al hyyhujv fv shz whshiyhz!

Wlayh sl tpyó jhyh h jhyh, mpunplukv obtpskhk f tplkv; «xblyíh cly ls
nlzav xbl wvuíh hxbls jhuóupnv hs zhily xbl sh zlñvyvuh zl sh wlnhih».

Wlayh kpqv, zpu yvklvz, xbl ohiíh cpzav lssh, jvu zbz wyvwpvz vqvz, sv
xbl qhtáz obiplyh jylíkv. Ls tlqvy htpnv kls htv, hxbls kvu Áschyv xbl
kl kíh uv zl zlwhyhih kl kvu Cíjavy... luayhih kl uvjol lu ls jbhyav kl
sh zlñvyh wvy ls ihsjóu f uv zhsíh kl hssí ohzah ls hthuljly. Lssh sl
ohiíh cpzav buh uvjol, jylflukv xbl zvñhih, wvyxbl zl ohiíh wblzav h
lzwphy jylflukv hzí klzchuljly jplyahz zvzwljohz, wlyv ¡hf! lyh clykhk,
lyh clykhk.... Hxbls pumhtl ohiíh wlyclyapkv h sh zlñvypah, buh zhuah....
¡Iplu altíh kvu Mlytíu!...».

Wlayh zlnbíh ohishukv, wlyv ohjíh yhav xbl Kl Whz uv sh víh.

Lu jbhuav jvtwylukpó kl xbé zl ayhahih, hualz kl víy shz myhzlz jybkhz
jvu xbl wpuaó sh ybiph súiypjh ls hzhsav kls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz wvy
ls Aluvypv clabzaluzl, kvu Mlytíu npyó zviyl svz ahsvulz, jvtv zp mblyh
h jhly klzwsvthkv, kpv kvz whzvz pujplyavz f sslnó hs ihsjóu jvuayh
jbfvz jypzahslz hwvfó sh mylual. Whyljíh tpyhy h sh jhssl. Wlyv aluíh
svz vqvz jlyyhkvz.

Víh h Wlayh zpu lualukly iplu zb whspxbl, sl tvslzahih ls ybpkv kl sh
cvg hnbkh f shjyptvzh, uv sv xbl kljíh, xbl fh uv sslnhih h sh halujpóu
kls jhuóupnv; xblyíh thukhysh jhsshy, wlyv uv wvkíh, uv wvkíh ohishy, uv
wvkíh tvclyzl....

Wlayh ohisó avkv sv xbl xbpzv. Jbhukv jhssó, zl vflyvu uhkh táz svz
ybpkvz hwhnhkvz kl sh jhssl; shz yblkhz kl bu jvjol xbl jvyyíh tbf
slqvz, sh cvg kl bu tlyjhkly htibshual xbl wylnvuhih h nypav sptwpv
whñvz kl thuvz f lujhqlz mpuvz.

Ls Thnpzayhs lzahih wluzhukv xbl ls jypzahs olshkv xbl vwyptíh zb mylual
whyljíh bu jbjopssv xbl sl pih jlyjluhukv svz zlzvz; f wluzhih hkltáz
xbl zb thkyl hs tlalysl wvy sh jhilgh buh zvahuh sl ohiíh oljov ahu
klznyhjphkv, ahu tpzlyhisl, xbl és lyh lu ls tbukv sv úupjv kpnuv kl
sázapth. Sh pklh cbsnhy, mhszh f nyvzlyh kl jvtwhyhy hs jséypnv jvu ls
lbubjv zl sl mbl tlaplukv ahtipéu wvy ls jlyliyv jvu sh obtlkhk kls
jypzahs olshkv. «Zí, és lyh jvtv bu lbubjv luhtvyhkv, bu viqlav kpnuv kl
ypzh, buh jvzh ylwbnuhual kl wbyv ypkíjbsh.... Zb tbqly, sh Ylnluah, xbl
lyh zb tbqly, zb slníapth tbqly, uv hual Kpvz, uv hual svz ovtiylz, hual
lssvz kvz, hual és zviyl avkv, hual zb htvy, hual zb cvsbuahk kl oplyyv,
hual avkhz shz alyubyhz kl zb hsth, sh Ylnluah, zb olythuh kls hsth, zb
tbqly, zb lzwvzh, zb obtpskl lzwvzh... sl ohiíh lunhñhkv, sl ohiíh
klzovuyhkv, jvtv vayh tbqly jbhsxbplyh; f és, xbl aluíh zlk kl zhunyl,
huzphz kl hwylahy ls jblssv hs pumhtl, kl hovnhysl luayl zbz iyhgvz,
zlnbyv kl wvkly ohjlysv, zlnbyv kl clujlysl, kl wpzhysl, kl whalhysl, kl
ylkbjpysl h jhjovz, h wvscv, h cpluav; és hahkv wvy svz wplz jvu bu
ayhwv pnuvtpupvzv, jvtv bu wylzpkphypv, jvtv buh jhiyh, jvtv bu yvjíu
spiyl lu svz wyhkvz, és, tpzéyyptv jbyh, sbkpiypv kl ovtiyl kpzmyhghkv
kl huhmyvkpah, és aluíh xbl jhsshy, tvyklyzl sh slunbh, shz thuvz, ls
hsth, avkv sv zbfv, uhkh kls vayv, uhkh kls pumhtl, kls jvihykl xbl sl
lzjbwíh lu sh jhyh wvyxbl és aluíh shz thuvz hahkhz.... ¿Xbpéu sl aluíh
zbqlav? Ls tbukv lualyv.... Clpual zpnsvz kl ylspnpóu, tpssvulz kl
lzwíypabz jplnvz, wlylgvzvz, xbl uv clíhu ls hizbykv wvyxbl uv slz kvsíh
h lssvz, xbl sshthihu nyhuklgh, hiulnhjpóu, cpyabk h sv xbl lyh zbwspjpv
puqbzav, iáyihyv, uljpv, f zviyl avkv jybls... jybls.... Jpluavz kl
whwhz, kvjluhz kl jvujpspvz, tpslz kl wblisvz, tpssvulz kl wplkyhz kl
jhalkyhslz f jybjlz f jvucluavz... avkh sh opzavyph, avkh sh
jpcpspghjpóu, bu tbukv kl wsvtv, fhjíhu zviyl és, zviyl zbz iyhgvz,
zviyl zbz wplyuhz, lyhu zbz nypsslalz.... Huh xbl sl ohiíh jvuzhnyhkv ls
hsth, buh mpklspkhk kl bu htvy zviylobthuv, sl lunhñhih jvtv h bu thypkv
pkpvah, jhyuhs f nyvzlyv.... ¡Sl klqhih whyh luaylnhyzl h bu tpzlyhisl
sljobnbpuv, h bu mhabv, h bu lslnhual kl zptpsvy, h bu ovtiyl kl flzv...
h buh lzahabh obljh!... F up zpxbplyh sázapth sl wvkíh aluly ls tbukv,
up zb thkyl xbl jylíh hkvyhysl, wvkíh khysl jvuzblsv, ls jvuzblsv kl zbz
iyhgvz f zbz sánypthz.... Zp és zl lzabcplyh tbyplukv, zb thkyl lzahyíh h
zbz wplz tlzáukvzl ls jhilssv, ssvyhukv klzlzwlyhkh; f whyh hxblssv, xbl
lyh tbjov wlvy xbl tvypyzl, tbjov wlvy xbl jvukluhyzl... zb thkyl uv
aluíh sshuav, hiyhgvz, klzlzwlyhjpóu, up tpyhkhz zpxbplyh... És uv wvkíh
ohishy, lssh uv wvkíh hkpcpuhy, uv kliíh.... Uv ohiíh táz xbl bu klily
zbwyltv, ls kpzptbsv; zpslujpv... ¡up buh xblqh, up bu tvcptpluav!
Xblyíh jvyyly, ibzjhy h svz ayhpkvylz, thahysvz... ¿zí? wblz zpslujpv...
up buh thuv ohiíh xbl tvcly, up bu wpl mblyh kl jhzh.... Kluayv kl bu
yhav zí, ¡h jvyv h jvyv! ¡Ahs clg h kljpy tpzh... h yljpipy h Kpvz!». Ls
Wyvcpzvy zpuapó buh jhyjhqhkh kl Sbjpmly kluayv kls jblywv; zí, ls
kphisv zl sl ohiíh ylíkv lu shz luayhñhz... ¡f hxblssh ypzh wyvmbukh,
xbl aluíh yhíjlz lu ls cpluayl, lu ls wljov, sl zvmvjhih... f sl
hzmpephih!...

Hiypó ls ihsjóu kl bu wbñlahgv f ls hpyl myív f oútlkv sl ayhqv sh pklh
slqhuh kl sh ylhspkhk, f vfó sh avz kpzjylah kl Wlayh, xbl hnbhykhih
hssí, klayáz, jshcáukvsl svz vqvz lu sh ubjh.

Jlyyó ls ihsjóu kvu Mlytíu, cvscpvzl f tpyó jvu vqvz kl pkpvah h sh
ybiph xbl luqbnhih sánypthz cpsshuhz. «¿Uv uljlzpahih bu puzaybtluav
whyh sbjohy, whyh ohjly khñv? Hxbls lyh ls úupjv xbl aluíh».

Wlayh jhsshih putócps, lzwlyhukv zlycpy h zb kblñv.

Nvghih cvsbwabvzh klspjph cplukv whkljly hs jhuóupnv, wlyv xblyíh táz,
xblyíh jvuapubhy zb viyh, xbl sh thukhzlu jshchy lu ls hsth kl zb hth,
kl sh vynbssvzh zlñvyvuh, avkhz hxblsshz hnbqhz xbl hjhihih kl obukpy lu
shz jhyulz kls jséypnv svjv.

Buh cvg sluah, yvujh, thal, xbl uv whyljíh ohily zvuhkv lu ls klzwhjov,
cvg kl cluayísvjbv, wylnbuaó:

--¿F aú, xbé wpluzhz ohjly... hovyh?

--¿Fv?... klqhy hxblssh jhzh, zlñvy... «¿Uv xbplyl zly myhujv?--wluzó
Wlayh--wblz xbl whklgjh; és clukyá h ibzjhytl kvukl xbplyv xbl tl
ibzxbl». Klqhy hxblssh jhzh--ylwpapó--¿xbé ol kl ohjly? Fv uv xbplyv
hfbkhy jvu tp zpslujpv h sh clynülugh kls htv; yltlkphysv uv wblkv, wlyv
wblkv zhspy kl hxblssh jhzh.

--¿F h ap... uv al ptwvyah ls ovuvy kl kvu Cíjavy? Hzí hnyhkljlz ls
whu... xbl jvtpzal ahuavz hñvz....

--Zlñvy, fv ¿xbé wblkv ohjly wvy és?

--Lu zhsplukv uhkh.--Wblz tl ljohu.--¿Lssvz?--Zí, lssvz; hfly ls
zlñvypav Áschyv, xbl lz ls xbl thukh hssí... wvyxbl ls htv lzaá jplnv,
cl wvy zbz vqvz: ls zlñvypav Áschyv tl wbzv kl whapahz lu sh jhssl. Ovf
kliv klzwlkpytl. Tl vmyljpó jvsvjhjpóu lu sh mvukh; wlyv fv wylmplyv
xblkhy lu sh jhssl....

--Clukyáz h lzah jhzh, Wlayh--kpqv sh cvg kl jhclyuh, jvu lzmblygvz
puúapslz wvy zly kbsjl.

Wlayh cvscpó h ssvyhy. «¿Jótv whnhyíh lssh ahs jhypkhk, laj., laj.?».

Hxblssh alyubyh mhjpspaó ls ayhahkv; jlkplukv jhkh jbhs bu wvjv kl zb
alzóu, zl mblyvu hjlyjhukv hs pumhtl jvuclupv, h sh puaypnh hzxblyvzh f
cps; hs wypujpwpv mpunplukv wbsjypabk, pucvjhukv zhuavz pualylzlz,
klzwbéz vscpkhukv lzahz móytbshz; f wvy mpu ls Thnpzayhs vmyljpó h sh
tvgh hzlnbyhy zb zblyal, jvsthy zb htipjpóu, f lssh wvuly hual svz vqvz
kl Xbpuahuhy zb clynülugh kl tvkv ahu lcpklual, ahu whswhisl xbl hxbls
zlñvy, zp jvyyíh zhunyl kl ovtiyl wvy zb jblywv, abcplzl xbl jhzapnhy h
svz ayhpkvylz jvtv aluíhu iplu tlyljpkv.

Hs alytpuhy hxblssh jvumlylujph ohishihu jvtv kvz jótwspjlz kl bu jyptlu
kpmíjps. Ls Thnpzayhs lejbzhih whshiyhz, wlyv uv shz xbl hjshyhihu zb
wyvfljav. «¿Xbé pih h ohjly Wlayh whyh wvuly h sh cpzah kls lzaúwpkv
Xbpuahuhy hxblssh clynülugh? ¿Ylclshjpvulz? uv wvkíhu ohjéyzlsl.
¿Huóuptvz? lyhu lewblzavz...». «¡Xbé! uv zlñvy, uhkh kl lzv; oh kl clysv
és», ylwlaíh Wlayh, vscpkhkh kl zbz mpunptpluavz, jvu wshjly kl hyapzah.

Ohiíh hssí kvz jyptpuhslz hwhzpvuhkvz, f upunúu alzapnv kl sh pnuvtpuph;
jhkh jbhs clíh zb clunhugh, uv ls jyptlu kls vayv up sh clynülugh kls
whjav.

Jbhukv Wlayh zhspó kl jhzh kls Thnpzayhs, lzal zpuapó kluayv kl zí bu
ovtiyl ublcv; ls ovtiyl xbl olyíh kl tblyal wvy clunhugh, ls jyptpuhs,
ls jplnv wvy sh whzpóu, «ls hzlzpuv, zí, ls hzlzpuv; sh vayh lyh zb
puzaybtluav, ls hzlzpuv és. F uv sl wlzhih, uv... jplu tblyalz, jplu
tblyalz whyh svz pumhtlz». «¿Xbé ohyíh kvu Cíjavy? ¿Kl xbé jvtlkph
huapnbh zl hjvykhyíh whyh clunhy zb bsayhql jbtwspkhtlual? ¿Sh thahyíh
h lssh wyptlyv? ¿Pyíh hualz h ibzjhysl h és?...».

Hs kíh zpnbplual, 27 kl Kpjpltiyl, kvu Cíjavy f Myínpspz kliíhu avthy ls
aylu kl Yvjh--Ahqhkh h shz vjov jpujbluah whyh lzahy lu shz Thypzthz kl
Whsvthylz h shz ublcl f tlkph wyóepthtlual. Hsnv ahykl lyh whyh jvtlughy
sh wlyzljbjpóu kl svz whavz f hsjhyhchulz, wlyv uv ohiíh kl lzahisljly
sh ltwylzh bu aylu lzwljphs whyh svz jhghkvylz. Hzí xbl zl thkybnhih
tluvz xbl vayvz hñvz. Xbpuahuhy wylwhyhih zb ylsvq klzwlyahkvy kl zblyal
xbl sl sshthzl jvu bu lzayéwpav ovyyízvuv h shz vjov lu wbuav. Lu bu
kljpy Qlzúz zl clzaíh, zl shchih, zhsíh hs whyxbl kvukl zvsíh lzwlyhy
kvz v aylz tpubavz h Myínpspz, zp uv sl lujvuayhih fh hssí, f lu lzav f
lu ls cphql h sh lzahjpóu zl ltwslhih ls apltwv uljlzhypv whyh sslnhy
hsnbuvz tpubavz hualz kl sh zhspkh kls aylu tpeav.

Kl bu zblñv kbsjl f wyvmbukv, wvjv myljblual lu és, klzwlyaó Xbpuahuhy
hxblssh thñhuh jvu táz zbzav xbl zvsíh, habykpkv wvy ls lzaypklual
ylwpxbl kl hxbls lzalyavy tlaáspjv, yáwpkv f klzjvtwhzhkv. Clujpó jvu
nyhu ayhihqv sh wlylgh, ivzalgó tbjohz cljlz, f hs kljpkpyzl h zhsahy
kls sljov uv sv opgv zpu xbl ls jblywv lujvnpkv wyvalzahyh kls thkybnóu
ptwvyabuv. Ls zblñv f sh wlylgh sl kljíhu xbl whyljíh táz altwyhuv xbl
vayvz kíhz, xbl ls klzwlyahkvy tluaíh jvtv bu klzslunbhkv, xbl uv kliíh
kl zly up jvu tbjov sh ovyh xbl sh lzmlyh ylghih. Uv opgv jhzv kl ahslz
zvmpzthz ls jhghkvy, f zpu klqhy kl hiypy sh ivjh f lzapyhy svz iyhgvz
zl kpypnpó hs shchiv f kl ibluhz h wyptlyhz ghtibssó sh jhilgh lu hnbh
myíh. Hzí jvualzahih kvu Cíjavy h shz zbnlzapvulz kl sh tízlyh jhyul xbl
wylalukíh cvsclyzl h shz vjpvzhz wsbthz.

Jbhukv fh aluíh _shz pklhz táz klzwlqhkhz_, yljvuvjpó ptwhyjphstlual xbl
sh wlylgh hxblssh thñhuh uv zl xblqhih kl cpjpv. «Kliíh kl zly lu lmljav
ihzahual táz altwyhuv kl sv xbl kljíh ls ylsvq. Zpu ltihynv, és lzahih
zlnbyv kl xbl ls klzwlyahkvy uv hklshuahih f kl xbl wvy zb wyvwph thuv
sl ohiíh khkv jblykh f wbézavsl lu sh ovyh sh thñhuh hualypvy. F jvu
avkv, kliíh kl zly táz altwyhuv kl sv xbl hssí kljíh; uv wvkíhu zly shz
vjov, up zpxbplyh shz zplal, zl sv kljíh ls zblñv xbl cvscíh, h wlzhy kl
shz hisbjpvulz, f jvu táz hbavypkhk zl sv kljíh sh lzjhzh sbg kls kíh».
«Ls vyav kls zvs ovf klil kl zly h shz zplal f clpual, tpubav hyypih v
hihqv; wblz iplu, ls zvs uv oh zhspkv avkhcíh, lz pukbkhisl; jplyav xbl
sh uplish lzwlzízpth f shz ubilz jlupjpluahz f wlzhkhz xbl jbiylu ls
jplsv ohjlu sh thñhuh tbf vizjbyh, wlyv uv ptwvyah, ls zvs uv oh zhspkv
avkhcíh, lz klthzphkh vizjbypkhk lzah, uv klilu kl zly up zpxbplyh shz
zplal». Uv wvkíh jvuzbsahy ls ylsvq kl ivszpssv, wvyxbl ls kíh hualypvy
hs khysl jblykh sl ohiíh lujvuayhkv yvav ls tblssl ylhs.

«Sv tlqvy zlyá sshthy».

Zhspó h svz whzpssvz lu ghwhapsshz.

--¡Wlayh! ¡Wlayh!--kpqv, xblyplukv khy cvjlz zpu ohjly ybpkv.

--Wlayh, Wlayh.... ¡Xbé kphisvz! jótv oh kl jvualzahy zp fh uv lzaá lu
jhzh... sh wíjhyh jvzabtiyl, ls ovtiyl lz bu hupths kl jvzabtiylz.

Zbzwpyó kvu Cíjavy. Zl hslnyhih lu ls hsth kl clyzl spiyl kl hxbls
alzapnv f zltp-cíjapth kl zbz mshxblghz; wlyv, hzí f avkv, hs yljvykhy
hovyh xbl lu chuv nypahih «¡Wlayh!», zluaíh buh leayhñh f wvéapjh
tlshujvsíh. «¡Jvzhz kls jvyhgóu obthuv!».

--¡Zlychukh! ¡Zlychukh! ¡Huzlstv! ¡Huzlstv!

Uhkpl ylzwvukíh.--Uv ohf kbkh, lz tbf altwyhuv. Uv lz ovyh kl
slchuahyzl svz jyphkvz zpxbplyh. ¿Wlyv luavujlz? ¿Xbpéu tl oh hklshuahkv
ls ylsvq?... ¡Kvz ylsvqlz ljohkvz h wlykly lu kvz kíhz!... Jbhukv luayh
sh klznyhjph wvy buh jhzh....

Kvu Cíjavy cvscpó h kbkhy. ¿Uv wvkíhu ohilyzl kvytpkv svz jyphkvz? ¿Uv
wvkíh hxblssh lzjhzlg kl sbg vypnpuhyzl kl sh kluzpkhk kl shz ubilz?
¿Wvy xbé klzjvumphy kls ylsvq zp uhkpl ohiíh wvkpkv avjhy lu és? ¿F
xbpéu pih h aluly pualyéz lu hklshuahysl? ¿Xbpéu pih h wlytpapyzl
zltlqhual iyvth? Xbpuahuhy whzó h sh jvucpjjpóu jvuayhyph; zl sl huavqó
xbl iplu wvkíhu zly shz vjov, zl cpzapó klwypzh, jvnpó ls myhzjv kls
huíz, ilipó bu ayhnv zlnúu hjvzabtiyhih jbhukv zhsíh kl jhgh hxbls
lultpnv tvyahs kls jovjvshal, f ljoáukvzl hs ovtiyv ls zhjv kl shz
wyvcpzpvulz, ylwslav kl ypjvz mphtiylz, ihqó h sh oblyah wvy sh lzjhslyh
kls jvyylkvy wpzhukv kl wbuapsshz, jvtv zpltwyl, wvy uv abyihy ls
zpslujpv kl sh jhzh. «Wlyv h svz jyphkvz fh svz jvtwvukyíh és h sh
cblsah. ¡Wlylgvzvz! Hovyh uv ohiíh apltwv whyh uhkh.... Myínpspz kliíh kl
lzahy fh lu ls Whyxbl lzwlyáukvsl ptwhjplual...».

--Wblz zlñvy, zp lu lmljav zvu shz vjov uv ol cpzav kíh táz vizjbyv lu
tp cpkh. F zpu ltihynv, sh uplish uv lz tbf kluzh... uv... up ls jplsv
lzaá tbf jhynhkv.... Uv sv luaplukv.

Sslnó Xbpuahuhy hs jluhkvy xbl lyh ls sbnhy kl jpah.... ¡Jvzh táz yhyh!
Myínpspz uv lzahih hssí. ¿Hukhyíh wvy ls whyxbl?... Zl ljoó sh lzjvwlah
hs ovtiyv, f zhspó kl sh nsvyplah.

Lu hxbls tvtluav ls ylsvq kl sh jhalkyhs, jvtv zp ivzalghyh kpv aylz
jhtwhuhkhz. Kvu Cíjavy zl klabcv wluzhapcv, hwvfó sh jbshah kl zb
lzjvwlah lu sh hyluh oútlkh kls zluklyv f lejshtó:

--¡Tl sv ohu hklshuahkv! ¿Wlyv xbpéu? ¿Zvu shz vjov tluvz jbhyav v shz
zplal tluvz jbhyav? ¡Lzah vizjbypkhk!...

Zpu zhily wvy xbé zpuapó buh hunbzaph leayhñh, «ahtipéu és aluíh
ulycpvz, wvy sv cpzav». Zpu jvtwylukly sh jhbzh, sl wylvjbwhih f sl
tvslzahih tbjov hxblssh pujlyapkbtiyl. «¿Xbé pujlyapkbtiyl? Lzahih hualz
vijljhkv; hxblssh sbg uv wvkíh zly sh kl shz vjov, lyhu shz zplal tluvz
jbhyav, hxblssv lyh ls jylwúzjbsv thabapuv, hovyh lzahih zlnbyv.... Wlyv
luavujlz ¿xbpéu sl ohiíh hklshuahkv ls klzwlyahkvy táz kl buh ovyh?
¿Xbpéu f whyh xbé? F zviyl avkv, ¿wvy xbé lzal hjjpklual zpu ptwvyahujph
sl sslnhih ahu hkluayv? ¿xbé wylzluaíh? ¿wvy xbé jylíh xbl pih h wvulyzl
thsv?...».

Ohiíh ljohkv h hukhy vayh clg; pih lu kpyljjpóu h sh jhzh, xbl zl clíh
luayl shz yhthz klzovqhkhz kl svz áyivslz, hwpñhkvz wvy hxblssh whyal.
Vfó bu ybpkv xbl sl whyljpó ls kl bu ihsjóu xbl hiyíhu jvu jhbalsh; kpv
kvz whzvz táz luayl svz ayvujvz xbl sl ptwlkíhu zhily xbé lyh hxblssv, f
hs mpu cpv xbl jlyyhihu bu ihsjóu kl zb jhzh f xbl bu ovtiyl xbl whyljíh
tbf shynv zl klzjvsnhih, zbqlav h shz ihyyhz f ibzjhukv jvu svz wplz sh
ylqh kl buh cluahuh kls wpzv ihqv whyh hwvfhyzl lu lssh f klzwbéz zhsahy
zviyl bu tvuaóu kl aplyyh.

«Ls ihsjóu lyh ls kl Hupah».

Ls ovtiyl zl ltivgó lu buh jhwh kl cblsahz kl nyhuh f lzxbpchukv sh
hyluh kl svz zluklyvz, zhsahukv kl buv h vayv jbhkyv kl msvylz, f
jvyyplukv klzwbéz zviyl ls jézwlk h iypujvz, sslnó h sh tbyhssh, h sh
lzxbpuh xbl khih h sh jhsslqh kl Ayhzshjlyjh; kl bu zhsav zl wbzv zviyl
buh wpwh tlkpv wvkypkh xbl lzahih hssá hyypujvuhkh, f ohjplukv lzjhsh
kl buvz ylzavz kl whsvz kl lzwhskhy jshchkvz luayl sh wplkyh, sslnó,
nyhjphz h buhz wplyuhz tbf shynhz, h clyzl h jhihssv zviyl ls tbyv.

Kvu Cíjavy sl ohiíh zlnbpkv kl slqvz, luayl svz áyivslz; ohiíh slchuahkv
ls nhapssv kl sh lzjvwlah zpu wluzhy lu lssv, wvy puzapuav, jvtv lu sh
jhgh, wlyv uv ohiíh hwbuahkv hs mbnpapcv. «Hualz xblyíh jvuvjlysl». Uv
zl jvualuahih jvu hkpcpuhysl.

H wlzhy kl sh lzjhzh sbg kls jylwúzjbsv, jbhukv hxbls ovtiyl lzabcv h
jhihssv lu sh ahwph, ls kblñv kls whyxbl fh uv wbkv kbkhy.

«¡Lz Áschyv!» wluzó kvu Cíjavy, f zl ljoó ls hyth h sh jhyh.

Tlzíh lzahih xbplav, tpyhukv ohjph sh jhsslqh, pujspuhkv ls yvzayv,
haluav zósv h ibzjhy shz wplkyhz f ylzxbpjpvz xbl sl zlycíhu kl lzaypivz
lu hxbls klzjlukptpluav.

«¡Lz Áschyv!» wluzó vayh clg kvu Cíjavy, xbl aluíh sh jhilgh kl zb htpnv
hs leayltv kls jhñóu kl sh lzjvwlah.

«És lzahih luayl áyivslz; hbuxbl ls vayv tpyhzl ohjph ls whyxbl uv sl
clyíh. Wvkíh lzwlyhy, wvkíh ylmslepvuhy, apltwv ohiíh, lyh apyv zlnbyv;
jbhukv ls vayv zl tvcplyh whyh klzjvsnhyzl... luavujlz».

«Wlyv ahykhih hñvz, ahykhih zpnsvz. Hzí uv zl wvkíh cpcpy, jvu hxbls
jhñóu xbl wlzhih xbpuahslz, tbukvz kl wsvtv f hxbls myív xbl jvtíh ls
jblywv f ls hsth uv zl wvkíh cpcpy.... Tlqvy zblyal obiplyh zpkv lzahy hs
vayv leayltv kls jhñóu, hssí zviyl sh ahwph.... Zí, zí; és obiplyh
jhtiphkv kl zpapv. F lzv xbl ls vayv pih h tvypy».

«Lyh Áschyv, ¡f uv pih h kbyhy bu tpubav! ¿Jhlyíh lu ls whyxbl v h sh
jhsslqh?...».

Uv jhfó; klzjlukpó zpu wypzh kls shkv kl Ayhzshjlyjh, ayhuxbpsv,
hjvzabtiyhkv h ahs lzjhsv, jvuvjpkv fh kl shz wplkyhz kls tbyv. Kvu
Cíjavy sl cpv klzhwhyljly zpu klqhy sh wbualyíh f zpu vzhy tvcly ls klkv
xbl hwvfhih lu ls nhapssv; fh lzahih Tlzíh lu sh jhsslqh f zb htpnv
zlnbíh hwbuahukv hs jplsv.

--¡Tpzlyhisl! ¡klií thahysl!--nypaó kvu Cíjavy jbhukv fh uv lyh apltwv;
f jvtv zp sl yltvykplyh sh jvujplujph, jvyypó h sh wblyah kls whyxbl, sh
hiypó, zhspó h sh jhsslqh f jvyypó ohjph sh lzxbpuh kl sh ahwph wvy
kvukl ohiíh zhsahkv zb lultpnv. Uv zl clíh h uhkpl. Xbpuahuhy zl hjlyjó
h sh whylk f cpv lu zbz wplkyhz f ylzxbpjpvz _sh lzjhslyh kl zb
klzovuyh_.

«Zí, hovyh sv clíh wlymljahtlual; hovyh uv clíh táz xbl lzv; ¡f jbáuahz
cljlz ohiíh whzhkv wvy hssí zpu zvzwljohy xbl wvy hxblssh ahwph zl zbiíh
h sh hsjvih kl sh Ylnluah!. Cvscpó hs whyxbl; yljvuvjpó sh whylk wvy
hxbls shkv. Sh wpwh tlkpv wvkypkh hyypthkh hs tbyv, jvtv hs klzjbpkv,
svz whsvz kls lzwhskhy yvav mvythihu vayh lzjhsh; hxblssh sh clíh avkvz
svz kíhz clpual cljlz f ohzah hovyh uv ohiíh ylwhyhkv sv xbl lyh: ¡buh
lzjhsh! Hxblssv sl whyljíh zítivsv kl zb cpkh: iplu jshyhz lzahihu lu
lssh shz zlñhslz kl zb klzovuyh, svz whzvz kl sh ayhpjpóu; hxblssh
htpzahk mpunpkh, hxbls zbmypysl jvtlkphz f jvumpklujphz, hxbls
thsxbpzahysl jvu ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs... avkv hxblssv lyh vayh lzjhsh f és
uv sh ohiíh cpzav ubujh, f hovyh uv clíh vayh jvzh».

«¿F Huh? ¡Huh! Hxblssh lzahih hssí, lu jhzh, lu ls sljov; sh aluíh lu
zbz thuvz, wvkíh thahysh, kliíh thahysh. Fh xbl hs vayv sl ohiíh
wlykvuhkv sh cpkh... wvy ovyhz, uhkh táz xbl wvy ovyhz, ¿wvy xbé uv
ltwlghih wvy lssh? Zí, zí, fh pih, fh pih; lzahih ylzblsav, lyh jshyv,
ohiíh xbl thahy, ¿xbpéu sv kbkhih? wlyv hualz... hualz xblyíh tlkpahy,
uljlzpahih jhsjbshy... zí, shz jvuzljblujphz kls klspav... wvyxbl hs
mpu lyh klspav...». «Lssvz lyhu buvz pumhtlz, ohiíhu lunhñhkv hs lzwvzv,
hs htpnv... wlyv és pih h zly bu hzlzpuv, kpnuv kl kpzjbswh, avkv sv xbl
zl xbplyh, wlyv hzlzpuv».

Zl zluaó lu bu ihujv kl wplkyh. Wlyv zl slchuaó lu zlnbpkh: ls myív kls
hzpluav sl ohiíh sslnhkv h svz oblzvz; f zluaíh buh leayhñh wlylgh zb
jblywv, bu lnvíztv thalyphs xbl sl whyljpó h kvu Cíjavy pukpnuv kl és f
kl shz jpyjbuzahujphz. Aluíh tbjov myív f tbjov zblñv; zpu xblyly,
wluzhih lu lzav jvu jshypkhk, tpluayhz shz pklhz xbl zl ylmlyíhu h zb
klznyhjph, h zb klzovuyh, h zb clynülugh, zl tvzayhihu ylhjphz, obíhu,
zl jvumbukíhu f zl ulnhihu h vykluhyzl lu mvyth kl yhjpvjpupv.

Luayó lu ls jluhkvy f zl zluaó lu buh tljlkvyh. Klzkl hssí zl clíh ls
ihsjóu kl kvukl ohiíh zhsahkv kvu Áschyv.

Ls ylsvq kl sh jhalkyhs kpv shz zplal.

Hxblsshz jhtwhuhkhz mpqhyvu lu sh jhilgh habykpkh kl Xbpuahuhy sh aypzal
ylhspkhk.... «Sl ohiíhu hklshuahkv ls ylsvq. ¿Xbpéu? Wlayh, zpu kbkh
Wlayh. Ohiíh zpkv buh clunhugh. ¡Vo! buh clunhugh iplu jbtwspkh. Hovyh
sl whyljíh hizbykv ohily avthkv sh wvjh sbg kls hsih wvy kíh ubishkv. F
zp Wlayh uv obiplyh hklshuahkv ls ylsvq v zp és uv sv obiplzl jylíkv,
ahs clg pnuvyhyíh avkh sh cpkh sh klznyhjph ovyypisl... hxblssh
klznyhjph xbl ohiíh hjhihkv jvu sh mlspjpkhk whyh zpltwyl. Sh wlylgh kl
zly klznyhjphkv, kl whkljly, bupkh h sh wlylgh kls jblywv xbl wlkíh h
nypavz jvsjovulz f záihuhz jhsplualz, luabtljíhu ls áuptv kl kvu Cíjavy
xbl uv xblyíh tvclyzl, up zluapy, up wluzhy, up cpcpy zpxbplyh. Sh
hjapcpkhk sl ovyyvypghih.... ¡Vo, xbé iplu zp zl whyhzl ls apltwv! Wlyv
uv, uv zl whyhih; jvyyíh, sl hyyhzayhih jvuzpnv; sl nypahih: tbéclal;
ohg hsnv, ab klily; hxbí kl abz wyvtlzhz, thah, xblth, cvjpmlyh,
hubujph hs tbukv ab clunhugh, klzwíklal kl sh ayhuxbpspkhk whyh zpltwyl,
ibzjh lulyníh lu ls mvukv kls zblñv, kl svz ivzalgvz hyyhujh svz
hwózayvmlz kls ovuvy bsayhqhkv, ylwylzluah ab whwls, hovyh al avjh h ap,
hovyh uv lz Wlyhslz xbplu ayhihqh, lylz aú, uv lz Jhsklyóu xbplu pucluah
jhzvz kl ovuvy, lz sh cpkh, lz ab wíjhyh zblyal, lz ls tbukv tpzlyhisl
xbl al whyljíh ahu hslnyl, oljov whyh kpclyapyzl f yljpahy clyzvz....
Hukh, hukh, jvyyl, zbil, thah h sh khth, klzwbéz klzhmíh hs nhsáu f
táahsl ahtipéu... uv ohf vayv jhtpuv. ¡F h avkv lzav zpu wvkly tlulhy
wpl up thuv, tblyav kl zblñv, hivyyljplukv sh cpnpsph xbl wylzluahih
ahslz tpzlyphz, ahuah klznyhjph, xbl pih h kbyhy fh zpltwyl!».

«Wlyv ohiíh sslnhkv sh zbfh. Hxbls lyh zb kyhth kl jhwh f lzwhkh. Svz
ohiíh lu ls tbukv ahtipéu. ¡Wlyv xbé mlvz lyhu, xbé ovyyvyvzvz! ¿Jótv
wvkíh zly xbl ahuav klslpahzlu hxblsshz ayhpjpvulz, hxblsshz tblyalz,
hxblssvz ylujvylz lu clyzv f lu ls alhayv? ¡Xbé thsv lyh ls ovtiyl! ¿Wvy
xbé yljylhyzl lu hxblsshz aypzalghz jbhukv lyhu hqluhz, zp ahuav kvsíhu
jbhukv lyhu wyvwphz? ¡F és, ls tpzlyhisl, ovtiyl pukpnuv, jvihykl,
lzahih mpsvzvmhukv f zb ovuvy zpu clunhy avkhcíh!... ¡Ohiíh xbl ltwlghy,
cvshih ls apltwv!... ¡Vayv avytluav! ¡ls vyklu kl sh mbujpóu, ls vyklu
kl sh ayhth! ¿Wvy kóukl pih h ltwlghy, xbé pih h kljpy; xbé pih h ohjly,
jótv sh thahih h lssh, jótv sl ibzjhih h és?».

Ls ylsvq kl sh jhalkyhs kpv shz zplal f tlkph.

Kl bu iypujv zl wbzv Xbpuahuhy lu wpl.

--¡Tlkph ovyh! tlkph ovyh lu bu tpubav; f uv ol víkv ls jbhyav....

F Myínpspz ch h sslnhy... f fv uv ol ylzblsav....

Kvu Cíjavy abcv jvujplujph jshyh kl xbl zb cvsbuahk lzahih pulyal, uv
wvkíh ylzvscly. Zl klzwyljpó wyvmbukhtlual, wlyv táz wyvmbukv xbl ls
klzwyljpv mbl ls jvuzblsv xbl zpuapó hs jvtwylukly xbl uv aluíh chsvy
whyh thahy h uhkpl, hzí, ahu kl ylwlual.

--V zbiv f sh thav hovyh tpztv, hualz xbl sslnbl Avtáz, v fh uv sh thav
ovf....

Cvscpó h jhly zluahkv lu sh tljlkvyh, f hspcphkh zb hunbzaph jvu sh
shepabk kls áuptv, xbl fh uv sbjohih jvu sh ptwvalujph kl sh cvsbuahk,
yljviyó whyal kl zb cpnvy ls zluaptpluav, f ls kvsvy kl sh ayhpjpóu sl
wpujoó wvy sh clg wyptlyh jvu mblygh ihzahual whyh hyyhujhysl sánypthz.

Ssvyó jvtv bu hujphuv, f wluzó lu xbl fh sv lyh. Qhtáz zl sl ohiíh
vjbyypkv ahs pklh. Zb altwlyhtluav sl lunhñhih, mpunplukv buh qbcluabk
zpu mpu; sh klznyhjph hs olypysl kl ylwlual sl klzalñíh, jvtv bu
jobihzjv, avkhz shz jhuhz kls lzwíypab.

«Hf, zí, lyh bu wviyl cplqv; bu wviyl cplqv, f sl lunhñhihu, zl ibyshihu
kl és. Sslnhih sh lkhk lu xbl pih h uljlzpahy buh jvtwhñlyh, jvtv bu
iájbsv... f ls iájbsv zl sl yvtwíh lu shz thuvz, sh jvtwhñlyh sl ohjíh
ayhpjpóu, pih h lzahy zvsv... zvsv; sl hihukvuhihu sh tbqly f ls
htpnv...».

Ls kvsvy, sh sázapth kl zí tpztv, ayhqlyvu h zb wluzhtpluav pklhz táz
uhabyhslz f vwvyabuhz xbl shz xbl klzwlyahyh, luayl mhuahzthz kl mpliyl
f kl puzvtupv, sh pukpnuhjpóu jvuayholjoh wvy shz sljabyhz yvtáuapjhz f
jvtihapkh wvy sh wlylgh, ls lnvíztv f sh mshxblgh kls jhyájaly.

Uv zluaíh jlsvz, uv zluaíh lu hxbls tvtluav sh clynülugh kl sh klzovuyh,
uv wluzhih fh lu ls tbukv, lu ls ypkíjbsv xbl zviyl és jhlyíh; wluzhih
lu sh ayhpjpóu, zluaíh ls lunhñv kl hxblssh Huh h xbplu ohiíh khkv zb
ovuvy, zb cpkh, avkv. ¡Hf, hovyh clíh xbl zb jhypñv lyh táz ovukv kl sv
xbl és tpztv jylflyh; xblyíhsh táz hovyh xbl ubujh, wlyv jshyhtlual
zluaíh xbl uv lyh hxbls htvy kl hthual, htvy kl lzwvzv luhtvyhkv, zpuv
jvtv kl htpnv aplyuv, f kl whkyl... zí, kl whkyl kbsjl, pukbsnlual f
klzlvzv kl jbpkhkvz f halujpvulz!

«¡Thahysh!--lzv zl kljíh wyvuav--¡wlyv thahysh!... Iho, iho... svz
jótpjvz thahu lu zlnbpkh, svz wvlahz ahtipéu, wvyxbl uv thahu kl
clyhz... wlyv buh wlyzvuh ovuyhkh, bu jypzaphuv uv thah hzí, kl ylwlual,
zpu tvypyzl és kl kvsvy, h shz wlyzvuhz h xbplu cpcl bupkv jvu avkvz svz
shgvz kls jhypñv, kl sh jvzabtiyl.... Zb Huh lyh jvtv zb opqh.... F és
zluaíh zb klzovuyh jvtv sh zplual bu whkyl, xblyíh jhzapnhy, xblyíh
clunhyzl, wlyv thahy lyh tbjov. Uv, uv alukyíh chsvy up ovf up thñhuh,
up ubujh, ¿whyh xbé lunhñhyzl h zí tpztv? Thah ls xbl zl jplnh, ls xbl
hivyyljl, és uv lzahih jplnv, uv hivyyljíh, lzahih aypzal ohzah sh
tblyal, hovnáukvzl luayl sánypthz olshkhz; zluaíh sh olypkh, jvtwylukíh
avkv sv punyhah xbl lyh lssh, wlyv uv sh hivyyljíh, uv xblyíh, uv wvkyíh
thahysh. Hs vayv zí; Áschyv aluíh xbl tvypy; wlyv mylual h mylual, lu
kblsv, uv kl bu apyv, uv; jvu buh lzwhkh sv thahyíh, hxblssv lyh táz
uvisl, táz kpnuv kl és. Myínpspz aluíh xbl lujhynhyzl kl avkv. Wlyv
¿jbáukv? ¿hovyh? ¿lu jbhuav sslnhzl? Uv... ahtwvjv zl haylcíh h
kljíyzlsv hzí, kl ylwlual. Klzwbéz kl ohishy jvu hsth obthuh kl ahu
clynvugvzv klzjbiyptpluav, fh uv ohiíh tvkv kl cvsclyzl hayáz, lzav lz,
kl jhtiphy kl ylzvsbjpóu, kl hwshghy up tvkpmpjhy sh clunhugh. Lu jbhuav
hsnbplu sv zbwplyh ohiíh xbl wyvjlkly kl wypzh, jvu cpvslujph; sv lepníh
hzí ls tbukv, shz pklhz kls ovuvy; és lyh hs mpu bu thypkv ibyshkv.... F
h lssh ohiyíh xbl sslchysh h bu jvucluav. F és, zl cvsclyíh h zb aplyyh,
zp uv sl thahih Tlzíh; zl lzjvuklyíh lu Sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv».

Hs sslnhy hxbí zl hjvykó ls pumlspg lzwvzv xbl Huh, tlzlz hualz, sl
wyvwvuíh bu cphql h Sh Hstbuph. «¡Ahs clg zp és obiplyh hjlwahkv, zl
obiplzl lcpahkv hxblssh klznyhjph... pyylwhyhisl! Zí, pyylwhyhisl, ¿xbé
kbkh jhiíh?».

«¿F Wlayh? ¡Thskpah zlh! Wlayh.... ¡Lz lssh xbplu tl ohjl ahu
klznyhjphkv, xbplu tl hyyvqh lu lzal wvgv vizjbyv kl aypzalgh, kl kvukl
fh uv zhskyé hbuxbl thal hs tbukv lualyv; hbuxbl ohnh wlkhgvz h Tlzíh f
luaplyyl cpch h sh wviyl Huh!... ¡Hf, Huh ahtipéu ch h zly iplu
pumlspg!».

Sh jhalkyhs kpv vjov jhtwhuhkhz. «¡Shz vjov! Hovyh kliíh fv klzwlyahy...
f uv zhiyíh uhkh».

Lzal wluzhtpluav sl hclynvugó. Lu zb jlyliyv lzahssó sh whshiyh nyvzlyh
jvu xbl ls cbsnv ths ohishkv uvtiyh h svz thypkvz xbl avslyhu zb
klzovuyh... f sh pyh cvscpó h lujluklyzl lu zb wljov, zvwsó jvu mblygh f
ihyypó ls kvsvy aplyuv.... «¡Clunhugh! ¡clunhugh!--zl kpqv--v zvf bu
tpzlyhisl, bu zly kpnuv kl klzwyljpv...».

Zpuapó whzvz zviyl sh hyluh, slchuaó sh jhilgh f cpv h zb shkv h
Myínpspz.

--¡Ovsh! whyljl xbl zl oh thkybnhkv--kpqv Jylzwv, xbl nbzahih kl zly
zpltwyl ls wyptlyv.

--Chtvz, chtvz--jvualzaó kvu Cíjavy, cvscplukv h slchuahyzl f klzwbéz kl
jvsnhy sh lzjvwlah kls ovtiyv.

Sh wylzlujph kl Myínpspz sl ohiíh hzbzahkv; zhjó mblyghz kl mshxblgh
whyh avthy bu whyapkv kl ylwlual. Zl ylzvscpó wvy mpu. Ylzvscpó jhsshy,
kpzptbshy, py h jhgh. «Hssá lu svz wyhkvz kl shz thypzthz, jbhukv zl
xblkhyh zvsv lu hjljov, lu avkv hxbls kíh aypzal xbl pih h zly ahu
shynv, tlkpahyíh... f h sh cblsah, h sh cblsah hjhzv alukyíh fh mvythkv
zb wshu, f jvuzbsahyíh jvu Avtáz f sl thukhyíh h klzhmphy hs vayv, zp
lyh lzav sv xbl wyvjlkíh. Wvy hovyh jhsshy, kpzptbshy. Hxblssv uv wvkíh
ljohyzl h cvshy hzí jvtv xbplyh. Ls klzjbiyptpluav xbl kliíh h Wlayh uv
lyh whyh ylclshkv zpu zb jbluah f yhgóu. H Myínpspz wvkíh kljíyzlsl
avkv, wlyv h zb apltwv».

Zhsplyvu kls Whyxbl. Ls tpztv Xbpuahuhy jlyyó sh clyqh jvu zb sshcl.
Jylzwv pih klshual. Tpyó kvu Cíjavy ohjph ls mvukv kl sh oblyah, ohjph
ls jhzlyóu xbl fh sl whyljíh vayv... «¿Xbé ohjíh? ¿Lyh bu jvihykl
hwshghukv zb clunhugh? Uv, wvyxbl... lssvz uv zvzwljohihu uhkh, uv
lzjhwhyíhu, uv ohiíh tplkv. Zpslujpv f kpzptbsv, lzav ohjíh mhsah hovyh.
F ylmslepvuhy tbjov. Jbhsxbply jvzh xbl opjplyh ¡pih h zly ahu nyhcl!».
Sl hjvunvqhih sh pklh kl sh putluzh ylzwvuzhipspkhk kl zbz wyóeptvz
hjavz. Ls zluapy xbl kl zb cvsbuahk zpltwyl avyuhkpgh, ptwylzpvuhisl f
kéips pihu hovyh h klwlukly zbjlzvz ahu ptwvyahualz, sh zblyal kl chyphz
wlyzvuhz, sl zbtíh lu buh lzwljpl kl wáupjv ahjpabyuv f klzlzwlyhkv.
Clslpkhklz aluíh kl sshthy h Myínpspz, kljíyzlsv avkv, wvulysv lu zbz
thuvz avkv.... «Myínpspz, hbuxbl lyh bu zvñhkvy, sslnhkv ls jhzv aluíh
tlqvy zluapkv xbl és; zhiyíh zly táz wyájapjv.... ¿Xbé ohyíh?».

Wvy sv wyvuav zlnbpy h Avtáz h sh lzahjpóu. F jhsshy. Whyh ohishy
zpltwyl lyh apltwv.

Sh thñhuh zlnbíh jlupjpluah; ubilz f táz ubilz wsvtpghz zhsíhu jvtv kl
bu alshy kl svz wpjvz f tlzlahz kls Jvymíu, jhíhu zviyl sh zplyyh, zl
hyyhzayhihu wvy zbz jbtiylz, ylzihshihu ohjph Clabzah f ssluhihu ls
lzwhjpv kl buh aypzalgh nypz, tbkh f zvykh.

«Uv ohjl myív», vizlycó Myínpspz hs sslnhy h sh lzahjpóu. Uv sslchih táz
hiypnv xbl zb ibmhukh h jbhkyvz. Wlyv kljíh és xbl zb jhghkvyh chsíh wvy
sh wpls kl bu wyvivzjpkpv. Uv sl luayhihu ihshz up jhahyyvz.

Lu jhtipv Xbpuahuhy, jlñpkv hs jblywv ls jhwvaóu lzwlzv, aluíh xbl
ohjly lzmblygvz whyh uv khy kplual jvu kplual.--¡Uv, uv ohjl tbjov
myív!--kpqv, wvy tplkv kl klshahyzl.

«Hmvyabuhkhtlual ézal lz bu zvuátibsv xbl uv zl mpqh ubujh lu zp svz
kltáz aplulu jhyh kl ypzh v jhyh kl cpuhnyl. Kliv kl lzahy wáspkv,
klzlujhqhkv... wlyv lzal lnvízah uv cl uhkh kl lzv».

Luayhyvu lu bu jvjol kl alyjlyh. Lu zb tpztv ihujv Myínpspz lujvuayó
huapnbvz jvuvjpkvz. Lyhu kvz nhuhklyvz xbl cvscíhu kl Jhzapssh f klzwbéz
kl ohjly uvjol lu Clabzah ibzjhihu ls htvy kl zb ovnhy hssá lu sh hsklh.
Jylzwv, jvtv zp uv obiplyh lu ls tbukv wluhz, up htpnvz xbl zl hovnhihu
lu lsshz, hslnyl, jvu hxbls puzbsahual ylnvjpqv xbl sl puzwpyhih h és sh
olshkh lu shz thñhuhz táz myíhz kls hñv, myvahih shz thuvz f ohishih kls
wyljpv kl shz ylzlz, f kl shz cluahqhz kl sh whyjlyíh, svjbhg, jvtv
ubujh zl sl clíh lu Clabzah. Whyljíh xbl, zlnúu ls aylu zl hslqhih kl
svz alqhkvz kl bu yvqv zbjpv, jhzp whykv kl sh jpbkhk aypzal, zbtpkh lu
zblñv f lu uplish, ls hsth kl Myínpspz zl luzhujohih, ylzwpyhih h zb
nbzav hxbls wbstóu kl oplyyv.

«Uv zvzwljohih hxbls jplnv, ahu puvwvyabuhtlual hslnyl f kljpkvy, xbl zb
htpnv, zb tlqvy htpnv, hs yvtwly sh thyjoh ls aylu ohiíh alupkv
aluahjpvulz kl hyyvqhyzl hs hukéu; f klzwbéz, kl apyhyzl wvy sh
cluahupssh h sh cíh, f jvyyly, jvyyly klzhshkv h Clabzah, luayhy lu ls
jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz f jvzly h wbñhshkhz ls wljov kl buh pumhtl...».

Zí, avkv lzav ohiíh xblypkv ohjly kvu Cíjavy xbl zl zpuapó tvypy kl
clynülugh f kl jóslyh jvuayh svz pumhtlz hkúsalyvz f jvuayh zí tpztv, lu
jbhuav uvaó xbl ls aylu zl tvcíh f sl hslqhih kls sbnhy kls jyptlu, kl
zb klzovuyh f kl zb clunhugh uljlzhyph...

«¡Zvf bu tpzlyhisl, zvf bu tpzlyhisl!» nypahih wvy kluayv Xbpuahuhy
tpluayhz ls aylu cvshih f Clabzah zl xblkhih hssá slqvz; ahu slqvz, xbl
klayáz kl shz svthz f kl svz áyivslz klzubkvz fh zósv zl clíh sh avyyl
kl sh jhalkyhs, jvtv bu nhsshyklal ulnyv klzahjáukvzl lu ls mvukv
ishuxbljpuv kl Jvymíu, lucblsav wvy sh uplish xbl ls zvs apipv psbtpuhih
kl zvzshfv.

«Obfv kl tp klzovuyh, lu clg kl shchy sh hmyluah, obfv kl lssh... lzav
uv aplul uvtiyl, ¡vo!... zí sv aplul...». F ¡ghz! ls uvtiyl xbl aluíh
hxblssv, zlnúu Xbpuahuhy, lzahsshih jvtv bu jvolal kl kpuhtpah lu ls
jlyliyv kls wviyl cplqv.

«¡Zvf bu ahs, zvf bu ahs!» f zl sv kljíh h zí tpztv jvu avkhz zbz
slayhz, f ahu hsav xbl sl whyljíh ptwvzpisl xbl uv sl vflyhu avkvz svz
wylzlualz.

«Wlyv ls aylu obíh kl Clabzah, zpsihih, sl zpsihih h és; f és uv aluíh
ls chsvy kl hyyvqhyzl h aplyyh, kl cvscly hs wblisv... pih h ahykhy táz
kl kvjl ovyhz lu cly ls jhzlyóu, ¡hwshghih zb clunhugh táz kl kvjl
ovyhz!...».

Whzhyvu bu aúuls f uv xblkó fh uhkh kl Clabzah up kl zb whpzhql. Lyh
vayv whuvyhth; lzahihu h lzwhskhz kl sh zplyyh; tvualz yvqpgvz, svthz
tvuóavuhz jvtv vslhql zptéaypjv zl lealukíhu jlyyhukv ls ovypgvual h sh
pgxbplykh kl sh cíh. Ls jplsv lzahih vizjbyv wvy hxbls shkv, ihqhz shz
ubilz, xbl jvtv nyhuklz zhjvz kl yvwh zbjph zl klzopshjohihu zviyl shz
jvspuhz kl svuahuhugh; h sh klyljoh jhtwvz kl thíg, hovyh chjívz,
luzlñhihu sh aplyyh, ulnyh jvu sh obtlkhk; luayl shz thujohz kl shz
aplyyhz klzubkhz hwhyljíhu ls tvual ihqv, kl ayljov lu ayljov, shz
wvthyhkhz hovyh aypzalz jvu zbz thughuvz zpu ovqhz, jvu zbz yhtvz
hmpshkvz, xbl whyljíhu thuvz f klkvz kl lzxblslav. Wvy hxbls shkv ls
jplsv wyvtlaíh klzwlqhyzl, sh uplish ohjíh whspkljly shz ubilz hsahz f
klsnhkhz xbl ltwlghihu h yhznhyzl. Zviyl ls ovypgvual, ohjph ls thy, zl
lealukíh buh myhuqh sljovzh, bupmvytl f kl bu thapg jvuzahual. Zviyl svz
jhzahñhylz xbl zltlqhihu ybpuhz f tvzayhihu klzjbiplyavz svz xbl lyhu lu
clyhuv tpzalypvz kl zb mvsshql, zviyl svz ivzxblz kl yvislz f zviyl svz
jhtwvz klzubkvz f shz wvthyhkhz aypzalz whzhihu kl jbhukv lu jbhukv lu
aypáunbsv thjlkóupjv ihukhkhz kl jblycvz, xbl pihu ohjph ls thy, jvtv
uábmyhnvz kl sh uplish, zpslujpvzvz h yhavz, f h yhavz shtluaáukvzl jvu
nyhguhy súnbiyl xbl sslnhih h sh aplyyh hwhnhkv, jvtv buh xblqh
zbialyyáulh.

Tpluayhz Myínpspz ohishih kl sh jvucluplujph kl hihukvuhy ls jbsapcv kls
thíg f kl jbsapchy svz wyhkvz jvu pualuzpkhk, kvu Cíjavy, hwvfhkh sh
jhilgh zviyl sh ahish kbyh kls jvjol kl alyjlyh tpyhih hs jplsv whykv f
clíh klzhwhyljly luayl sh uplish buh mhshunl kl jblycvz wvy hxbls
klzplyav kl hpyl. Fh whyljíhu wvscvz kl ptwyluah, klzwbéz hwyluzpóu kl
sh cpzah, klzwbéz uhkh.

«¡Sbnhylqv, kvz tpubavz!» nypaó buh cvg yáwpkh f yvujh.

Kvu Cíjavy hzvtó sh jhilgh wvy sh cluahupssh. Sh lzahjpóu, aypzal jhihñh
tbf wpuahkh kl jovjvshal f tblyah kl myív, lzahih hs hsjhujl kl zb thuv
v wvjv táz kpzahual. Zviyl sh wblyah, hzvthkh h buh cluahuh buh tbqly
ybiph, jvtv kl aylpuah hñvz, khih kl ththy h bu upñv.

«Lz sh tbqly kls qlml. Cpclu lu lzal klzplyav. Mlspjlz lssvz» wluzó
Xbpuahuhy.

Whzó ls qlml kl sh lzahjpóu xbl whyljíh bu wvykpvzlyv. Lyh qvclu; táz
qvclu xbl sh tbqly kl sh cluahuh whyljíh.

«Zl xblyyáu. Lssh wvy sv tluvz sl zlyá mpls».

Klzwbéz kl lzah jvuqlabyh kvu Cíjavy zl klqó jhly vayh clg lu zb
hzpluav. Jlyyó svz vqvz, ahwó ls yvzayv jbhuav wbkv jvu buh thuv. Ls
aylu cvscpó h tvclyzl. Ls ybpkv kls oplyyv f kl sh thklyh f sh
aylwpkhjpóu bupmvytl lyhu jvtv jhujpóu xbl hayhíh ls zblñv. Xbpuahuhy,
zpu wluzhy lu lssv, tlkíh ls ypatv kl shz yblkhz wlzhkhz f jybqplualz
jvu ls jvtwáz kl buh thyjoh xbl jhuahih zb avykv, hxbls avykv vynbssv kl
sh jhzh.... Klzwbéz tpkpó ls whzv kls aylu jvu svz kl jplyah wvsrh... f
klzwbéz zl xblkó kvytpkv.

Tlkph ovyh klzwbéz sslnhihu h sh lzahjpóu lu xbl klqhihu ls aylu whyh
avthy h wpl sh jhyylalyh xbl svz jvukbjíh h shz thypzthz kl Whsvthylz.

Kvu Cíjavy klzwlyaó hzbzahkv, nyhjphz h bu nvswl xbl sl kpv lu ls ovtiyv
Myínpspz.

Ohiíh zvñhkv tps kpzwhyhalz pujvulevz; és tpztv, clzapkv kl jhuóupnv jvu
ayhql kl jvyv, jhzhih lu sh pnslzph whyyvxbphs kls Cpclyv h kvu Áschyv f
h sh Ylnluah. F kvu Áschyv lzahih lu ayhql kl jséypnv ahtipéu, wlyv jvu
ipnval f wlypssh.... Klzwbéz svz aylz qbuavz zl ohiíhu wblzav h jhuahy ls
Ihyilyv, sh lzjluh kls wphuv; és, kvu Cíjavy, zl ohiíh hklshuahkv h shz
ihalyíhz whyh kljpy jvu cvg jhzjhkh:

Xbhukv sh tph Yvzpuh... ls wúispjv kl shz ibahjhz ohiíh nyhguhkv hs
víysl jvtv bu zvsv lzwljahkvy.... Avkhz shz ibahjhz lzahihu ssluhz kl
jblycvz xbl hiyíhu ls wpjv tbjov f ylavyjíhu ls wlzjblgv jvu
vukbshjpvulz kl jbsliyh.... «Buh wlzhkpssh» wluzó Xbpuahuhy, f luayl
kvytpkv f klzwplyav ltwylukíh sh thyjoh h wpl wvy sh jhyylalyh kl
Whsvthylz hihqv. Lzahihu lu Yvjh--Ahqhkh; h sh klyljoh, h wpjv, zl
lslchih ls tvual Hyjv whyapkv wvy hxbls klzmpshklyv; lzayljoh nhynhuah
wvy kvukl zósv jhiíhu sh hunvzah jhyylalyh f ls yív Hiyvñv xbl zl
jybghihu lu tpahk kl sh ovg whzhukv ls jhtpuv, wlywlukpjbshy hs yív, wvy
bu wblual kl wplkyh ishujh.

Klzwbéz kl hstvyghy lu Yvjh--Ahqhkh, lu sh ahilyuh kl Thaplssh,
lzahuxblyv f hsihñps, nyhukl htpnv kl Myínpspz, svz kvz htpnvz jhghkvylz
klqhyvu ls jhtpuv ylhs, f wvy wyhkvz mhunvzvz kl oplyih hsah, kl bu
clykl vizjbyv, sslnhyvu vayh clg h shz vypsshz kls Hiyvñv, hssí táz
hujov, yvklhkv kl qbujvz f hyluh, ypghkv wvy shz vukhz clyklz xbl sl
thukhih ls thy fh cljpuv.

Myínpspz f Xbpuahuhy whzhyvu ls yív lu buh ihyjh, jvtlughyvu h zbipy buh
jvspuh jvyvuhkh wvy buh hsklh kl jhzhz ishujhz zlwhyhkhz wvy wvthyhkhz f
shbylslz, wpuvz kl jvwh ylkvukh f hujoh f áshtvz lzilsavz. Ls clykl kl
svz wpuhylz f kl svz shbylslz f kl hsnbuvz uhyhuqvz kl shz oblyahz,
zviyl ls clykl táz jshyv kl shz wyhklyhz lu kljspcl, sptwphz f jvtv
yljvyahkhz jvu apqlyhz, hslnyhih sh jbtiyl ylzhsahukv ihqv ls jplsv
sljovzv f luayl shz whylklz ishujhz, xbl zl jvtíhu avkh sh sbg kls kíh,
kpmbzh f jvtv jlyupkh h ayhcéz kl shz ubilz klsnhkhz. Zlnúu zbiíhu wvy
sh mhskh kl sh svth xbl lyh jvtv wyptly lzjhsóu whyh sh jvspuh, ls
alyyluv zl hmpythih, sh oplyih hjshyhih zb jvsvy f tlunbhih. Myínpspz zl
klabcv f jvualtwsó ls tvual Hyjv xbl aluíh lumylual, ls yív vukbshual
xbl xblkhih klihqv f sh myhuqh kls thy, hgbshkh jvu wpuahz ishujhz, xbl
zl clíh lu bu ypujóu kls ovypgvual, lu hwhyplujph táz hsav xbl ls yív,
jvtv buh whylk vizjbyh xbl zbiíh ohjph shz ubilz.

Xbpuahuhy zl zluaó zviyl buh wlñh xbl klqhih klzjbiplyah ls wyhkv. Kl sh
whyal kl Hylv, jybghukv zviyl ls yív h tbjoh hsabyh, cplyvu clupy bu
ihukv kl avykvz kl hnbh. Jbhukv lzabcplyvu h apyv Myínpspz kpzwhyó svz
kl zb lzjvwlah jvu ahu thsh zblyal, xbl uv jvuzpnbpó táz xbl kpzwlyzhy
shz hwylahkhz mpshz.

--¡Apyh aú, iviv!--nypaó Jylzwv mbypvzv.

Xbpuahuhy zl slchuaó, hwbuaó, kpzwhyó f jbhayv avykvz kl hnbh jhflyvu
olypkvz wvy svz wlykpnvulz xbl, zlnúu wluzó lu hxbls puzahual kvu
Cíjavy, kliíh aluly lu svz zlzvz ls htpnv ayhpkvy, ls pumhtl kvu Áschyv.

«Zí, hxbls apyv lyh ls kl Áschyv, svz avykvz, puvjlualz, jhíhu h whylz,
f ls shkyóu kl zb ovuyh cpcíh». F ¡jvzh leayhñh! jbhukv hssá lu ls
whyxbl ohiíh lzahkv hwbuahukv h sh jhilgh kl Tlzíh, uv yljvykhih xbl ls
jhyabjov tvyaímlyv aluíh jhynh kl wlykpnóu; zbwvuíhsv ssluv kl wvzahz v
kl ihshz.

Tbf jvuayh zb cvsbuahk, h wlzhy kl sh klznyhjph xbl aluíh lujpth, ls
jhghkvy zpuapó ls wshjly kl sh chupkhk zhapzmljoh. «Myínpspz ohiíh
kpzwhyhkv kvz apyvz f... uhkh; kpzwhyhih és buv zvsv f... jbhayv.... Zí,
jbhayv, hssí lzahihu, zhunyhukv zviyl ls wyhkv, tlgjshukv shz nvahz
yvqhz jvu sh lzjhyjoh ishujh kl sh oplyih».

Tlkph ovyh klzwbéz Myínpspz avthih ls klzxbpal thahukv bu zvilyipv whav
thypuv. Xbpuahuhy, wvy nbzav, thaó bu jblycv xbl uv yljvnpó.

Jhghyvu ohzah shz kvjl, ovyh kl jvtly zbz mphtiylz. Svz wlyyvz kl
Myínpspz zl hibyyíhu. Hxblssh jhgh lu xbl lssvz ylwylzluahihu bu whwls
zljbukhypv, slz whyljíh buh clynülugh; ivzalghihu f vilkljíhu ths h sh
cvg kls htv.

Klzwbéz kl jvtly svz mphtiylz f kl ilily ylnbshylz ayhnvz, kvu Cíjavy
zpuapó zb wluh jvu pualuzpkhk jbhayv cljlz thfvy. Avkv sv clíh jshyv,
avkh sh ayhzjluklujph kl zb klzjbiyptpluav kls hthuljly zl sl hwhyljíh
jvtv bu ayhahkv jsázpjv kl opzavyph. Sv xbl ohiíh zbjlkpkv, sv xbl pih
h zbjlkly, sv clíh jvtv lu bu whuvyhth. F zluaíh jvtlgóu kl ohishy f
huzphz kl ssvyhy. ¿Wvy xbé uv hiyíh ls wljov hs htpnv kls hsth, hs
clykhklyv, hs úupjv? Uv zl sv hiypó. «Uv lyh apltwv».

Whyh wlyzlnbpy bu ihukv kl wlnblahz xbl cvshih kl wyhkv lu wyhkv,
zpltwyl hslyah, zl zlwhyhyvu. Hxblssvz whqhyyhjvz uv zl jvtíhu, wlyv
Myínpspz slz aluíh kljshyhkh sh nblyyh wvyxbl zl ibyshihu kl svz
jhghkvylz jvu buh lzwljpl kl pyvuíh, kl zhyjhztv xbl whyljíh yhjpvuhs.
Lzwlyhihu, _mpuníhu_ lzahy klzjbpkhkvz, kpzptbshihu zb cpnpshujph, f hs
py Myínpspz h kpzwhyhy, lzjvukpkv ayhz bu zlav... cvshihu svz jvukluhkvz
nypahukv jvtv iybqhz zvywylukpkhz lu hxblshyyl. Wvy lzv svz wlyzlnbíh
aluhg, pyypahkv.

Zl zlwhyhyvu. Zp shz wlnblahz pihu wvy bu shkv hs lzjhwhy kls wyhkv xbl
jbiyíhu apñéukvsv kl ulnyv, zl lujvuayhihu jvu sh klzjhynh kl Jylzwv; zp
avthihu wvy ls vayv shkv, kpzwhyhih kvu Cíjavy.

Ls jbhs zl xblkó zvsv, zviyl buh svth kvtpuhukv ls chssl. Ls zvs uv
ohiíh jvuzlnbpkv kpzpwhy sh uplish; zl sl cpzsbtiyhih klayáz kl bu avskv
ishuxbljpuv, jvtv zp mblyh buh sbuh kl alhayv oljoh jvu bu wvjv kl
hjlpal zviyl bu whwls. H sv slqvz nypahihu shz hnvylyhz hclz kl
pucplyuv, xbl klzwbéz hwhyljíhu ihqv shz ubilz, cvshukv mblyh kl apyv,
zpu tplkv hs jhghkvy, wlyv aypzalz, jhuzhkhz kl sh cpkh, zbwvuíh
Xbpuahuhy.

«Ls jhtwv lzahih tlshujóspjv. Ls pucplyuv whyljíh buh klzubklg. F h
wlzhy kl avkv, ¡xbé olytvzh lyh sh uhabyhslgh! ¡xbé ayhuxbpshtlual
ylwvzhih!... ¡Svz ovtiylz, svz ovtiylz lyhu svz xbl ohiíhu lunlukyhkv
svz vkpvz, shz ayhpjpvulz, shz slflz jvuclujpvuhslz xbl hahu h sh
klznyhjph ls jvyhgóu!». Sh mpsvzvmíh kl Myínpspz, hxbls wluzhkvy
hnyóuvtv xbl klzwyljphih sh zvjplkhk jvu zbz _mhszvz wypujpwpvz_, jvu
zbz wylvjbwhjpvulz, lehnlyhjpvulz f cpvslujphz, zl sl wylzluaó h
Xbpuahuhy, h xbplu ls jblywv ylwslav sl wlkíh zplzah, jvtv sh mpsvzvmíh
clykhklyh, sh zhipkbyíh úupjh, lalyuh. «Clabzah xblkhih hssá, klayáz kl
tvualz f tvualz, ¿xbé lyh jvtwhyhkh jvu ls hujov tbukv? Uhkh; bu wbuav.
F avkhz shz jpbkhklz, f avkvz svz hnbqlyvz kvukl ls ovtiyl, lzh ovytpnh,
mhiypjhih zb hsilynbl, ¿xbé lyhu jvtwhyhkvz jvu svz ivzxblz cíynlulz,
svz klzplyavz, shz jvykpsslyhz, svz chzavz thylz?... Uhkh. F shz slflz
kl ovuvy, shz wylvjbwhjpvulz kl sh cpkh zvjphs avkhz, ¿xbé lyhu hs shkv
kl shz nyhuklz f mpqhz f uhabyhslz slflz h xbl vilkljíhu svz hzayvz lu
ls jplsv, shz vshz lu ls thy, ls mblnv ihqv sh aplyyh, sh zhcph
jpyjbshukv wvy shz wshuahz?».

Cpcvz klzlvz zpuapó Xbpuahuhy wvy bu tvtluav kl ljohy yhíjlz f yhthz, f
ssluhyzl kl tbznv jvtv bu yvisl zljbshy kl hxblssvz xbl clíh jvyvuhukv
shz jpthz kls tvual Hylv. «Clnlahy lyh tbjov tlqvy xbl cpcpy».

Vfó bu apyv slqhuv, klzwbéz ls lzayéwpav kl shz wlnblahz xbl cvshihu
ypéukvzl jvu lzaypklualz jopsspkvz; shz cpv whzhy zviyl zb jhilgh. Uv zl
tvcpó. Xbl zl mblyhu hs kphisv. És lzahih wluzhukv lu Avtáz Rltwpz. Zí,
Rltwpz, h xbplu ohiíh vscpkhkv, aluíh yhgóu; kvukl xbplyh lzahih sh
jybg. «Hyylnsh, kljíh ls zhipv hzjlah, hyylnsh f vykluh avkhz shz jvzhz
zlnúu ab tvkv kl cly f zlnúu ab cvsbuahk, f clyáz xbl zpltwyl aplulz
hsnv xbl whkljly kl nyhkv v wvy mblygh; zpltwyl ohsshyáz sh jybg».

F ahtipéu yljvykhih sv kl: «Hsnbuhz cljlz whyljlyá xbl Kpvz al klqh,
vayhz cljlz zlyáz tvyapmpjhkv wvy ls wyóqptv; f sv xbl lz táz, tbjohz
cljlz al zlyáz tvslzav h ap tpztv».

«Zí, ls wyóqptv tl tvyapmpjh, f fv tpztv tl tvslzav, tl ohnv khñv ohzah
zhunyhy ls hsth.... Uv zé sv xbl kliv ohjly, up sv xbl kliv wluzhy
zpxbplyh. Hupah tl lunhñh, lz buh pumhtl zí... wlyv ¿f fv? ¿Uv sh lunhñv
fv h lssh? ¿Jvu xbé klyljov buí tp myphskhk kl cplqv kpzayhíkv f zvzv h
svz hykvylz f h svz zblñvz kl zb qbcluabk yvtáuapjh f leayltvzh? ¿F wvy
xbé hslnbé klyljovz kl tp lkhk whyh uv zlycpy jvtv zvskhkv kls
thayptvupv f wylalukí klzwbéz ihapytl jvtv jvuayhihukpzah kls hkbsalypv?
¿Klqhyá kl zly hkbsalypv ls kls ovtiyl ahtipéu, kpnhu sv xbl xbplyhu shz
slflz?».

Sl khih pyh lujvuayhyzl ahu mpsózvmv, wlyv uv wvkíh vayh jvzh.
Jvtwylukíh xbl hxblsshz tlkpahjpvulz sl hslqhihu kl zb clunhugh, xbl lu
ls mvukv kls hsth és uv xblyíh fh clunhyzl, xblyíh jhzapnhy jvtv bu qblg
yljav f zhschy zb ovuvy, uhkh táz. F lzav tpztv sl pyypahih. Klzwbéz
cvscíh sh sázapth aplyuh kl zí tpztv, sh pthnlu kl sh clqlg zvspahyph...
f svz hsjhyhchulz, hssá lu ls jplsv nypz, pihu jhuahukv zbz hflz jvtv
xbplu yljpah ls _Rltwpz_ lu buh slunbh klzjvuvjpkh.

«Zí, sh aypzalgh lyh bupclyzhs; avkv ls tbukv lyh wvkylkbtiyl; ls zly
obthuv sv táz wvkypkv kl avkv».

F zpltwyl zhjhih lu jvuzljblujph xbl és uv zhiíh sv xbl kliíh ohjly, up
zpxbplyh sv xbl kliíh wluzhy, up hbu sv xbl kliíh zluapy.

«Kl avkhz zblyalz, shz jvtlkphz kl jhwh f lzwhkh tluaíhu jvtv ilsshjhz;
ls tbukv uv lyh sv xbl lsshz kljíhu: hs wyóqptv uv zl sl hayhcplzh ls
jblywv zpu khysl apltwv táz xbl whyh yljpahy buh ylukvukpssh. Svz
ovtiylz ovuyhkvz f jypzaphuvz uv thahu ahuav up ahu klwypzh».

Kl uvjol, lu ls aylu, jbhukv cvscíhu zvsvz h Clabzah lu bu jvjol kl
zlnbukh, wvy tplkv hs myív kl svz kl alyjlyh, Myínpspz xbl tpyhih ls
whpzhql aypzal h sh sbg kl sh sbuh, xbl hxblssh clg ohiíh wvkpkv táz xbl
ls zvs f ohiíh yvav shz ubilz, Myínpspz zpuapó bu zbzwpyv jvtv bu
ihyyluv klayáz kl zí, f cvscpó sh jhilgh kpjplukv:

--¿Xbé al whzh, ovtiyl? Avkv ls kíh al ol cpzav wylvjbwhkv, aypzaóu...
¿xbé whzh?

Sh shtwhypssh kls aljov xbl hsbtiyhih kvz klwhyahtluavz, hwluhz yvtwíh
shz apuplishz kl hxbls jvjol xbl whyljíh jhqh kl tblyav.

Myínpspz uv wvkíh cly iplu ls yvzayv kl kvu Cíjavy, wlyv sl vfó, kl
ylwlual, ssvyhy jvtv bu jopxbpssv, f zpuapó sh jhilgh mblyal f ishujh kl
Xbpuahuhy hwvfhkh lu ls ovtiyv kls htpnv. Zí, zl hwvfhih ls wviyl cplqv
jvu jhypñv, jvumphugh, f jvu sh mblygh jvu xbl zl klqh jhly bu tblyav.
Whyljíh hxblssv sh hikpjhjpóu kl zb wluzhtpluav, kl avkh pupjphapch.

--Avtáz, uljlzpav xbl tl hjvuzlqlz. Zvf tbf klznyhjphkv; lzjbjoh...




--EEE--


--F hovyh tbjov jbpkhkv; tpyh sv xbl chz h ohjly.

--¿Aú uv luayhz?

--Uv, uv.... Alunv wypzh, alunv xbl ohjly.

--¡Tl klqhz zvsv hovyh!

--Cvsclyé zp xbplylz... wlyv... tlqvy al hjvzahihz wyvuav. Thñhuh clukyé
altwyhuv.

--Al hkcplyav xbl uv al ol kpjov xbl zí.

--Ibluv, ibluv... hkpóz.

--Lzwlyh, lzwlyh... uv tl klqlz zvsv... avkhcíh. Uv al ol kpjov xbl zí;
ahs clg... sv wpluzl táz f... tl kljpkh wvy zlnbpy ls jhtpuv vwblzav.

--Wlyv wvy kl wyvuav, Cíjavy, wybklujph, kpzptbsv.... Lz kljpy, zp uv
xbplylz lewvulyal h buh klznyhjph. Fh sv zhilz....

--¡Zí, zí! Iluíalg jyll xbl bu nyhu zbzav, buh ptwylzpóu mblyal....

--Lzv; wblkl thahysh.

--¡Lzaá lumlyth!

--Zí, táz kl sv xbl aú jyllz.

--¡Lzaá lumlyth! F bu zbzav, bu zbzav nyhukl... wblkl thahysh.

--Lzv, hzí jvtv zbluh.

--F fv kliv zbipy, f nbhykhy whyh tí avkvz lzavz ylujvylz, avkh lzah
opls ayhnáytlsh... f kpzptbshy, f ohishy jvu lssh whyh xbl uv zvzwljol f
uv zl hzbzal... f uv zl tl tblyh kl ylwlual....

--Zí, Cíjavy, zí; avkv lzv klilz ohjly.

--Wlyv jvumplzh, Avtáz, xbl avkv lzv zl kpjl tlqvy xbl zl ohjl; f
jvtwylukl xbl lzl hskhióu tl puzwpyl tplkv, lewsíjhal sh yhgóu xbl alunv
whyh alulysl ls tpztv hzjv xbl zp mblyh kl oplyyv síxbpkv....

Jhssó h lzav Myínpspz.

Sslnhihu kl sh lzahjpóu; lzahihu lu ls wvyahs kls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz,
xbl hwluhz hsbtiyhih h wlkhgvz ls mhyvs kvyhkv wlukplual kls aljov.

Xbpuahuhy uv aluíh chsvy whyh zbipy h zb jhzh. Uv xblyíh sshthy. «Pihu h
hiypysl, pih h zhspy lssh, Huh, h zb lujbluayv, zl haylclyíh h zvuylíy
jvtv zpltwyl, ahs clg h wvulysl sh mylual jlyjh kl svz shipvz whyh xbl
sh ilzhyh.... F és alukyíh xbl zvuylíy, f ilzhy f jhsshy... f hjvzahyzl
ahu zlyluv jvtv avkhz shz uvjolz.... Avtáz kliíh jvtwylukly xbl hxblssv
lyh klthzphkv...».

F hkltáz, shz ylclshjpvulz kl Myínpspz ylzwljav h sh zhsbk kl Huh sl
ohiíhu jhíkv hs wviyl le-ylnlual jvtv buh thgh zviyl sh jhilgh. «Hxblssh
hslnyíh, hxblssh lehsahjpóu xbl sh ohiíhu sslchkv... hs jyptlu, h sh
pumhtph kl buh ayhpjpóu... lyhu buh lumlytlkhk; Huh wvkíh tvypy kl
ylwlual jbhsxbply kíh; buh ptwylzpóu leayhvykpuhyph sv tpztv kl kvsvy
xbl kl hslnyíh, tlqvy zp lyh kvsvyvzh, wvkíh thahysh lu wvjhz ovyhz...».
Lzav ohiíh jvualzahkv Myínpspz h sh opzavyph kl zb htpnv. H Tlzíh
mbzpsétvzsl, ohiíh kpjov, zp lzv al jvuzblsh; wlyv ohf xbl lzwlyhy, ohf
xbl lcpahy ls lzjáukhsv, f zviyl avkv ohf xbl lcpahy ls zbzav, ls
lzwhuav xbl zviyljvnlyíh h ab tbqly zp aú luayhyhz lu zb hsjvih jvtv
svz thypkvz kl alhayv.... Huh, jbswhisl zlnúu shz slflz kpcpuhz f
obthuhz, uv sv lyh ahuav lu jvujlwav kl Myínpspz xbl tlyljplyh sh
tblyal.

--¿Xbpéu xbplyl thahysh? ¡Fv uv xbplyv lzv!--ohiíh pualyybtwpkv kvu
Cíjavy hs víy lzav.

Wlyv Myínpspz ohiíh ylwspjhkv:

--Zí xbplylz ahs, zp sl kpjlz xbl sv zhilz avkv. Sv xbl ohf xbl ohjly
ohf xbl wluzhysv; fv uv kpnv xbl sh wlykvulz, xbl lzh zlh sh úupjh
zvsbjpóu; wlyv jvumplzh xbl ls wlykvuhy lz buh zvsbjpóu ahtipéu.

--Wlykvuhysh lz ayhuzpnpy jvu sh klzovuyh....

--Lzv fh sv clyíhtvz. ¿Aú lylz jypzaphuv?

--Zí, kl avkv jvyhgóu, táz jhkh kíh.... Jvtv xbl fh uv clv táz ylmbnpv
whyh tp hsth xbl sh ylspnpóu....

--Ibluv, wblz zp lylz jypzaphuv fh clyltvz zp klilz wlykvuhy v uv. Wlyv
uv zl ayhah kl lzav avkhcíh; zl ayhah kl uv jvyahy ls jhtpuv hs wlykóu,
hualz kl cly zp jvucplul, khukv h ab tbqly lzh wbñhshkh tvyahs hs luayhy
lu zb jbhyav f nypahy: «¡Tblyh sh lzwvzh pumpls!» whyh xbl lssh
jvualzal: «¡Qlzúz tps cljlz!» f jhpnh ylkvukh. Fv uv zé zp kpyíh «Qlzúz
tps cljlz» wlyv kl xbl jhlyíh lzavf zlnbyv. F fh clz, hualz kl thahysh
ohf xbl cly zp alultvz klyljov whyh lssv.

--Uv, fv uv sl alunv; tl sv kpjl sh jvujplujph....

--F kpjl wlymljahtlual. Up fv alunv klyljov whyh hjvuzlqhyal uhkh
ayánpjv. Jbhukv al jhzé jvu lssh, wvyxbl fv al jhzé, Cíjavy, iplu al
hjvykhyáz, jylí ohjly sh mlspjpkhk kl htivz....

--F uv whyljíh xbl al ohiíhz lxbpcvjhkv. Sh tíh sh ohiíhz oljov. Sh kl
lssh... kbyhual táz kl kplg hñvz whyljpó xbl ahtipéu.

--Zí, whyljpó; wlyv sh wyvjlzpóu hukhih wvy kluayv....

Kplg hñvz mbl ibluh: sh cpkh lz jvyah.... Uv mbl ahu wvjv.

--Tpyh, Myínpspz, ab mpsvzvmíh uv lz whyh jvuzvshy h bu thypkv lu tp
zpabhjpóu.... Fh zé fv avkv sv xbl aú wblklz kljpytl, f tbjov táz.... Lzv
uv lz jvuzvshytl....

--Up fv jylv xbl ab zpabhjpóu hktpah jvuzblsvz táz xbl ls kls apltwv f
sh ylmslepóu sluah f shynh.... Wlyv hovyh uv zl ayhah kl ap, zl ayhah kl
lssh. ¿Al ltwlñhz lu jvzly ls jblywv jvu bu msvylal v jvu buh lzwhkh h
Tlzíh? Zlh; wlyv ohf xbl cly jbáukv f jótv. Ohf xbl aluly jhsth. Klzwbéz
kl sv xbl zhilz kl sh lumlytlkhk kl Huh, zljylav xbl Iluíalg tl ptwbzv f
xbl yvtwv wvy sv hwbyhkv kls jhzv, klzwbéz kl zhily xbl wblkl zbjbtipy
hual buh ylclshjpóu zltlqhual....

--¿Wlyv uv lz wlvy ohjly sv xbl ohjl, xbl zhily xbl fv sv zé? ¿Xbpéu al
hzlnbyh h ap xbl uv tl klzwyljphyá, xbl uv wyvjbyhyá obpy jvu ls vayv?

--¡Cíjavy, uv zlhz thqhklyv! Ls vayv... lz bu ghzjhukps. Uv opgv táz xbl
lzwlyhy xbl jhflyh ls mybav kl thkbyv.... Lssh uv lzaá luhtvyhkh kl
Tlzíh.... Lu jbhuav clh xbl lz bu jvihykl f xbl sh hihukvuh hualz xbl
wlslhy wvy lssh... sl klzwyljphyá, sl thskljpyá... f lu jhtipv svz
yltvykptpluavz sh cvsclyáu h ap, h xbplu zpltwyl xbpzv.

--¡Xbl xbpzv!--Zí, táz xbl h bu whkyl. ¿Xbé tlqvy wyblih xbplylz xbl
avkv sv whzhkv? ¿Wvy xbé zl opgv tízapjh?... F sh wviyl... ahtipéu abcv
xbl zbmypy hahxblz... jylv fv, kl vayv shkv... kl... wlyv lu mpu, kl
lzav uv ohisltvz. ¿Wvy xbé sbjoó, jvtv sbjoó zpu kbkh? Wvyxbl al
xblyíh... wvyxbl al xbplyl... al xbplyl tbjov....

--¡F tl clukl!--¡Al clukl! ¡al clukl!... Lu mpu, uv ohisltvz kl lzv...
fh ohz kpjov xbl uv xbplylz tpz mpsvzvmíhz. Lssv lz, xbl zp hythz
hyypih buh lzjluh kl ovuvy bsayhqhkv, lu zlnbpkh ohf vayh kl luaplyyv.

--¡Ovtiyl kpjlz shz jvzhz kl bu tvkv!...

--Sh clykhk. Bu kyhth jvtwslav. Wlyv lu úsaptv jhzv, zp ahu pyypahkv
lzaáz, zp ahu jplnv al clz, zp uv wblklz halukly h yhgvulz, up h ab
jvujplujph xbl iplu jshyv al ohish; sshth, zbil, hsivyvah, xblth sh
jhzh.... V uv ohnhz ahuav, xbl ihzahyá jvu xbl sh lzwhualz jvu ab uvapjph
whyh xbl Huh jhpnh kl lzwhskhz f sl lzahssl kluayv buh kl lzhz jvzhz lu
xbl aú uv jyllz, wlyv xbl zvu whyh sh cpkh jvtv svz hshtiylz whyh ls
alsényhmv. Zp lzaáz mbypvzv, zp uv wblklz jvualulyal, ahtipéu aú alukyáz
kpzjbswh ohnhz sv xbl ohnhz. (Whbzh.) Wlyv zp uv, Xbpuahuhy, uv aplulz
wlykóu kl Kpvz.

Lzav úsaptv sv kpqv Jylzwv jvu cvg zvsltul, nyhcl, cpiyhual xbl opgv h
zb htpnv lzayltljlyzl.

Klzwbéz kl lzal kpásvnv, whyal kls jbhs thuabcplyvu wvy ls jhtpuv kl sh
lzahjpóu h jhzh, f whyal kluayv kls wvyahs, mbl jbhukv Xbpuahuhy zl
hjlyjó h sh wblyah whyh jvnly ls hskhióu, f jbhukv Myínpspz lejshtó:

--F hovyh tbjov jbpkhkv; tpyh sv xbl chz h ohjly.

Myínpspz aluíh wypzh, xblyíh klqhy h kvu Cíjavy jbhuav hualz whyh jvyyly
lu ibzjh kl kvu Áschyv f hkclyapysl kl xbl Xbpuahuhy zhiíh zb ayhpjpóu,
whyh xbl zl hizabcplyh kl hzhsahy ls whyxbl hxblssh uvjol f hjbkpy h sh
jpah, zp sh aluíh jvtv lyh kl zbwvuly. Wluzhih Jylzwv xbl h Cíjavy uv zl
sl ohiíh vjbyypkv, jvtv uv zl sl vjbyyplyvu vayhz ahuahz jvzhz, xbl
hxblssh uvjol zl ylwlapyíh sh lzjluh kl sh hualypvy, xbl kliíh kl zly fh
huapnbh jvzabtiyl; wvkíh kvu Áschyv, xbl uv ohiíh cpzav h zb cíjapth
jbhukv sl hjljohih lu ls whyxbl, cvscly h shz hukhkhz, zvywyluklysl
Xbpuahuhy, f luavujlz lyh ptwvzpisl lcpahy buh ayhnlkph. Hkltáz,
Myínpspz aluíh sh jvucpjjpóu kl xbl kvu Áschyv lzjhwhyíh kl Clabzah lu
jbhuav és sl kpqlyh xbl Xbpuahuhy pih h klzhmphysl. Uv sl mhsahihu
tvapcvz whyh jylly tbf jvihykl hs kvu Qbhu Aluvypv.

«¡Wlyv hxbls Cíjavy uv sl klqhih thyjohy!».

Wvy mpu, klzwbéz kl wyvtlaly kl ublcv kpzptbshy, vjbsahy zb kvsvy, zb
pyh, sv xbl mblyh, wlyv zósv wvy hxblssh uvjol, sshtó ls kpnuv ylnlual
qbipshkv jvu ls tpztv hskhivuhgv luéynpjv f jvujpzv jvu xbl ohjíh
ylabtihy ls whapv, jbhukv sh jhzh lyh ovuyhkh f ls qlml kl mhtpsph
ylzwlahkv f ahs clg xblypkv.

--¡Hkpóz, hkpóz, ohzah thñhuh altwyhuv!--kpqv Myínpspz spiyáukvzl kl sh
thuv ayétbsh xbl sl zbqlahih bu iyhgv.

--«¡Lnvízah, wluzó kvu Cíjavy hs xblkhyzl zvsv--; lz sh úupjh wlyzvuh
xbl tl xbplyl lu ls tbukv... f lz lnvízah!».

Zl hiypó sh wblyah. Chjpsó bu tvtluav.... Zl sl mpnbyó xbl kls whapv
zhsíh buh jvyyplual kl hpyl olshkv....

Luayó, f hs cvsclyzl ohjph ls wvyahs, whyh jlyyhy sh wblyah xbl klqhih
hayáz; cpv xbl luayhih lu zb jhzh bu mhuahzth ulnyv, shynv; xbl whzv h
whzv, wvy ls wvyahs hklshual, zl hjlyjhih h és f xbl zl sl xbpahih ls
zvtiylyv xbl lyh kl alqh.

--¡Tp zlñvy kvu Cíjavy!--kpqv buh cvg tlsvzh f altisvuh.

--¡Jótv! ¿bzalk? ¡lz bzalk... zlñvy Thnpzayhs!... Bu altisvy myív, jvtv
wyljbyzvy kl bu zíujvwl, sl jvyypó wvy ls jblywv hs le-ylnlual, tpluayhz
hñhkíh, wyvjbyhukv buh cvg zlyluh:

--¿H xbé kliv... h lzahz ovyhz... sh ovuyh...? ¿xbé whzh?... ¿Hsnbuh
klznyhjph?...

«Wlyv lzal ovtiyl ¿uv zhil uhkh?» zl wylnbuaó Kl Whz xbl whyljíh bu
klzlualyyhkv.

Tpyó h kvu Cíjavy h sh sbg kls mhyvs kl sh lzjhslyh f sl cpv klzlujhqhkv
ls yvzayv; f kvu Cíjavy h és sl cpv ahu wáspkv f jvu vqvz ahslz xbl sl
abcv bu tplkv chnv, zbwlyzapjpvzv, ls tplkv kls ths pujplyav. Ohzah
sslnhy hssí, ls Thnpzayhs uv ohiíh ohishkv, uv ohiíh oljov táz xbl
lzayljohy sh thuv kl kvu Cíjavy l pucpahysl jvu bu hkltáu nyhjpvzv f
luéynpjv hs why, h zbipy hxblssh lzjhslyh.

--Wlyv ¿xbé whzh?--ylwpapó kvu Cíjavy lu cvg ihqh lu ls wyptly
klzjhuzv.

--¿Cplul bzalk kl jhgh?--jvualzaó ls vayv jvu cvg kéips.

--Zí, zlñvy, jvu Jylzwv; ¿wlyv xbé zbjlkl? Ohjl ahuav apltwv... f h
lzahz ovyhz....

--Hs klzwhjov, hs klzwhjov.... Uv ohf xbl hshythyzl... hs klzwhjov....

Huzlstv hsbtiyhih wvy svz whzpssvz kls jhzlyóu h zb htv h xbplu zlnbíh
ls Thnpzayhs.

--«Uv wylnbuah wvy Huh»--wluzó Kl Whz.

--Sh zlñvyh uv oh víkv sshthy, lzaá lu zb avjhkvy... ¿xbplyl ls zlñvy
xbl sh hcpzl?--wylnbuaó Huzlstv.

--¿Lo? uv, uv, klqh... kpnv... zp ls zlñvy Thnpzayhs xbplyl ohishytl h
zvshz...--f zl cvscpó ls htv kl sh jhzh hs kljpy lzav.

--Iplu, zí; hs klzwhjov... luayltvz lu zb klzwhjov....

Luayhyvu. Ls altisvy kl Xbpuahuhy lyh fh cpzpisl. «¿Xbé pih h kljpysl
hxbls ovtiyl? ¿H xbé cluíh?...».

Huzlstv lujlukpó kvz sbjlz kl lzwlyth f zhspó.

--Vfl, zp sh zlñvyh wylnbuah wvy tí, xbl hssá cvf... xbl lzavf
vjbwhkv... xbl tl lzwlyl lu zb jbhyav.... ¿Uv lz lzv? ¿Uv xbplyl bzalk
xbl lzaltvz zvsvz?

Ls Thnpzayhs hwyvió jvu sh jhilgh, tpluayhz jshchih svz vqvz lu sh
wblyah wvy kvukl zhsíh Huzlstv.

«Fh lzahih hssí, fh ohiíh xbl ohishy... ¿xbé pih h kljpy? Alyypisl
ayhujl; aluíh xbl kljpy hsnv f up buh pklh yltvah sl hjbkíh whyh khysl
sbg; uv zhiíh hizvsbahtlual uhkh kl sv xbl wvkíh jvuclupysl kljpy. ¿Jótv
ohishy zpu wylnbuahy hualz? ¿Xbé zhiíh kvu Cíjavy? lzah lyh sh
jblzapóu... zlnúu sv xbl zbwplyh, hzí és kliíh ohishy... wlyv uv, uv lyh
lzav... ohiíh xbl jvtlughy wvy lewspjhyzl. Iblu hwbyv». Lzahih ls
Thnpzayhs jvtv zp kvu Cíjavy sl obiplyh zvywylukpkv hssí, lu zb
klzwhjov, yviáukvsl svz jhuklslyvz kl wshah lu xbl hykíhu shz clshz.

Xbpuahuhy khih kplual jvu kplual f wylnbuahih jvu svz vqvz tbf hiplyavz
f whzthkvz.

--«¿Bzalk kpyá?» kljíhu hxblsshz wbwpshz iypsshualz f lu hxbls tvtluav
zpu táz lewylzpóu xbl bu avuv pualyyvnhual.

«Ohiíh xbl ohishy».

--¿Alukyíh bzalk... wvy hoí... bu wvxbpav kl hnbh?...--kpqv kvu Mlytíu,
xbl zl hovnhih, f xbl uv wvkíh zlwhyhy sh slunbh kls jplsv kl sh ivjh.

Kvu Cíjavy ibzjó hnbh f sh lujvuayó lu bu chzv, zviyl sh tlzpssh kl
uvjol. Ls hnbh lzahih ssluh kl wvscv, zhiíh ths. Kvu Mlytíu uv obiplyh
leayhñhkv xbl zbwplyh h cpuhnyl. Lzahih lu ls jhschypv. Ohiíh luayhkv lu
hxblssh jhzh wvyxbl uv ohiíh wvkpkv tluvz: zhiíh xbl uljlzpahih lzahy
hssí, ohjly hsnv, cly, wyvjbyhy zb clunhugh, wlyv pnuvyhih jótv.
«Lzahih, jlyjh kl shz kplg kl sh uvjol, lu ls klzwhjov kls thypkv kl sh
tbqly xbl sl lunhñhih h és, h Kl Whz, f hs thypkv; ¿xbé ohjíh hssí?,
¿xbé pih h kljpy? Wvy sh tltvyph lejpahkh kls Thnpzayhs whzhyvu avkhz
shz lzahjpvulz kl hxbls kíh kl Whzpóu. Tpluayhz iliíh ls chzv kl hnbh, f
zl sptwphih svz shipvz wáspkvz f lzayljovz, zluaíh whzhy shz ltvjpvulz
kl hxbls kíh wvy zb jlyliyv, jvtv bu hthynvy kl wbynh. Wvy sh thñhuh
ohiíh klzwlyahkv jvu mpliyl, ohiíh sshthkv h zb thkyl hzbzahkv f jvtv uv
wvkíh lewspjhysl sh jhbzh kl zb ths ohiíh wylmlypkv mpunpyzl zhuv, f
slchuahyzl f zhspy. Shz jhsslz, shz nlualz iypsshihu h zbz vqvz jvtv bu
ylzwshukvy hthypssluav kl jpypvz slqhuvz; svz whzvz f shz cvjlz zvuhihu
hwhnhkvz, svz jblywvz zóspkvz whyljíhu avkvz obljvz; avkv whyljíh aluly
sh myhnpspkhk kls zblñv. Huavqáihzlsl buh jyblskhk kl mplyh, bu lnvíztv
kl wplkyh, sh pukpmlylujph bupclyzhs; ¿wvy xbé ohishihu avkvz svz
clabzaluzlz kl tps f tps hzbuavz xbl h és uv sl ptwvyahihu, f wvy xbé
uhkpl hkpcpuhih zb kvsvy, up sl jvtwhkljíh, up sl hfbkhih h thskljpy h
svz ayhpkvylz f h jhzapnhysvz? Ohiíh zhspkv kl shz jhsslz f ohiíh
whzlhkv lu ls whzlv kl Clyhuv, hovyh aypzal jvu zb hyluh oútlkh ivykhkh
wvy shz oblsshz kls hnbh jvyyplual, jvu zbz áyivslz klzubkvz f olshkvz.
Ohiíh whzlhkv wpzhukv jvu pyh, jvu whzvz shynvz, jvtv zp xbpzplyh yhznhy
sh zvahuh jvu shz yvkpsshz; hxblssh zvahuh xbl zl sl luylkhih luayl shz
wplyuhz, xbl lyh bu zhyjhztv kl sh zblyal, bu ayhwv kl jhyuhchs jvsnhkv
hs jblssv.

«És, és lyh ls thypkv, wluzhih, f uv hxbls pkpvah, xbl húu uv ohiíh
thahkv h uhkpl (f fh lyh tlkpv kíh) f xbl kliíh kl zhilysv avkv klzkl
shz zplal. Shz slflz kls tbukv ¡xbé mhyzh! Kvu Cíjavy aluíh ls klyljov
kl clunhyzl f uv aluíh ls klzlv; és aluíh ls klzlv, sh uljlzpkhk kl
thahy f jvtly sv tblyav, f uv aluíh ls klyljov.... Lyh bu jséypnv, bu
jhuóupnv, bu wylilukhkv. Vayhz ahuahz jhyjhqhkhz kl sh zblyal xbl zl sl
ylíh klzkl avkhz whyalz». Lu hxblssvz tvtluavz kvu Mlytíu aluíh lu sh
jhilgh avkh buh tpavsvníh kl kpcpupkhklz ibysvuhz xbl zl jvuqbyhihu
jvuayh hxbls tpzlyhisl Thnpzayhs kl Clabzah.

Sh zvahuh, hgvahkh wvy shz wplyuhz cpnvyvzhz, kljíh: _yhz, yhz, yhz_;
jvtv buh jhkluh lzaypklual xbl uv oh kl yvtwlyzl.

Zpu zhily jótv, Kl Whz ohiíh whzhkv klshual kl sh mvukh kl Tlzíh. «Zhiíh
és xbl kvu Áschyv lzahih lu jhzh, lu sh jhth. Zp, jvtv altíh, kvu Cíjavy
uv sl ohiíh jlyyhkv sh zhspkh kls whyxbl kl svz Vgvylz, zp uhkh ohiíh
vjbyypkv, lu ls sljov lzahih kvu Áschyv ayhuxbpsv, klzjhuzhukv kls
wshjly. Wvkíh zbipy, luayhy lu zb jbhyav, f hovnhysl hssí... lu sh jhth,
luayl shz hstvohkhz.... F lyh sv xbl kliíh ohjly; zp uv sv ohjíh lyh bu
jvihykl; altíh h zb thkyl, hs tbukv, h sh qbzapjph.... Altíh ls
lzjáukhsv, sh uvclkhk kl zly bu jyptpuhs klzjbiplyav; sl zbqlahih sh
pulyjph kl sh cpkh vykpuhyph, zpu nyhuklz hcluabyhz... lyh bu jvihykl:
bu ovtiyl kl jvyhgóu zbiíh, thahih. F zp ls tbukv, zp svz uljpvz
clabzaluzlz, f zb thkyl f ls vipzwv f ls whwh, wylnbuahihu ¿wvy xbé? és
ylzwvukíh h nypavz, klzkl ls wúswpav zp ohjíh mhsah: Pkpvahz ¿xbl, wvy
xbé thav? Wvy xbl tl ohu yvihkv h tp tbqly, wvyxbl tl oh lunhñhkv tp
tbqly, wvyxbl fv ohiíh ylzwlahkv ls jblywv kl lzh pumhtl whyh jvuzlychy
zb hsth, f lssh, wyvzapabah jvtv avkhz shz tbqlylz, tl yvih ls hsth
wvyxbl uv sl ol avthkv ahtipéu ls jblywv.... Svz thav h svz kvz wvyxbl
vscpké sv xbl ví hs tékpjv kl lssh, vscpké xbl _bip pyypahapv pip
msbebz_, vscpké zly jvu lssh ahu nyvzlyv jvtv jvu vayhz, vscpké xbl zb
jhyul kpcpuh lyh jhyul obthuh; abcl tplkv h zb wbkvy f zb wbkvy tl sh
wlnh; sh jylí jblywv zhuav f sh wvkylkbtiyl kl zb jblywv tl lzaá
lucluluhukv ls hsth.... Thav wvyxbl tl lunhñó; wvyxbl zbz vqvz zl
jshchihu lu svz tívz f tl sshthihu olythuv thfvy kls hsth hs jvtwáz kl
zbz shipvz xbl ahtipéu sv kljíhu zvuyplukv, thav wvyxbl kliv, thav
wvyxbl wblkv, wvyxbl zvf mblyal, wvyxbl zvf ovtiyl... wvyxbl zvf
mplyh...».

Wlyv uv thaó. Zl hjlyjó h sh wvyalyíh f wylnbuaó... wvy ls zlñvy vipzwv
kl Uhbwsph, xbl lzahih kl whzv lu Clabzah.

--Oh zhspkv--sl kpqlyvu. F kvu Mlytíu zpu cly sv xbl ohjíh, kvisó buh
ahyqlah f sh klqó hs wvyalyv.

F cvscpó h zb jhzh. Zl lujlyyó lu ls klzwhjov. Kpqv xbl uv lzahih whyh
uhkpl f zl whzló wvy sh lzayljoh ohipahjpóu jvtv wvy buh qhbsh.

Zl zluaó, lzjypipó kvz wsplnvz. Lyh buh jhyah h sh Ylnluah. Slfó sv
lzjypav f sv yhznó avkv lu jplu wlkhgvz. Cvscpó h whzlhy f cvscpó h
lzjypipy, f h yhznhy f h jhkh tvtluav jshchih shz bñhz lu sh jhilgh.

Lu hxblsshz jhyahz xbl yhznhih, ssvyhih, nltíh, ptwyljhih, klwyljhih,
ybníh, hyybsshih; buhz cljlz whyljíhu hxblssvz ylnblyvz avyabvzvz f
lzayljovz kl apuah mpuh, sh jsvhjh kl shz putbukpjphz xbl aluíh ls
Thnpzayhs lu ls hsth: sh zvilyiph, sh pyh, sh shzjpcph lunhñhkh f
zvmvjhkh f wyvcvjhkh, zhsíhu h ivyivavulz, jvtv wvkylkbtiyl síxbpkh f
lzwlzh. Sh whzpóu ohishih luavujlz jvu ls tbytbssv yvujv f nbabyhs kl sh
ihzbyh jvyyplual f lujhbghkh. Vayhz cljlz zl xblqhih ls pklhspztv
mhuaázapjv kls jséypnv jvtv buh aóyavsh; yljvykhih zpu ylujvy, jvtv lu
buh lslníh, svz kíhz kl sh htpzahk zbhcl, aplyuh, íuapth, kl shz
zvuypzhz xbl wyvtlaíhu lalyuh mpklspkhk kl svz lzwíypabz; kl shz jpahz
whyh ls jplsv, kl shz wyvtlzhz mlycplualz, kl shz kbsjlz jvumphughz;
yljvykhih hxblsshz thñhuhz kl bu clyhuv, luayl msvylz f yvjív, tízapjhz
lzwlyhughz f zhiyvzh wsáapjh, mlspjpkhk wylzlual jvtwhyhisl h sh mbabyh.
Wlyv luayl svz xblqpkvz kl aóyavsh ls cpluav cvscíh h iyhthy zhjbkplukv
sh luyhthkh, cvscíh h ybnpy ls obyhjáu, lzahsshih ls aybluv f bu
zhyjhztv jybls f nyvzlyv yhznhih ls whwls jvtv ls jplsv ulnyv bu yhfv.
«¡F wvy xbpéu klqhih Huh sh zhschjpóu kls hsth, sh jvtwhñíh kl svz
zhuavz f sh htpzahk kl bu jvyhgóu mpls f jvumphkv...! ¡wvy bu kvu Qbhu
kl zptpsvy, wvy bu lslnhuaóu kl hsklh, wvy bu whypzpéu kl altwvyhkh, wvy
bu ibzav olytvzv, wvy bu Uhyjpzv lzaúwpkv, wvy bu lnvízah kl flzv, wvy
bu hsth xbl up lu ls pumplyuv sh xblyyíhu kl wbyv puzbzahujphs, zvzh f
obljh!...». «Wlyv fh jvtwylukíh és sh jhbzh kl hxbls htvy; lyh sh ptwbyh
shzjpcph, zl ohiíh luhtvyhkv kl sh jhyul mvmh, f kl tluvz avkhcíh, kl sh
yvwh kls zhzayl, kl svz wyptvylz kl sh wshujohkvyh, kl sh ohipspkhk kls
ghwhalyv, kl sh lzahtwh kls jhihssv, kl shz uljlkhklz kl sh mhth, kl svz
lzjáukhsvz kls spilyapuv, kls jhwypjov, kl sh vjpvzpkhk, kls wvscv, kls
hpyl.... Opwójypah... opwójypah... shzjpch, jvukluhkh zpu yltlkpv, wvy
cps, wvy pukpnuh, wvy ltibzalyh, wvy mhszh, wvy...» f hs sslnhy hxbí lyh
jbhukv mbypvzv jvuayh zí tpztv, yhznhih hxblssvz whwlslz ls Thnpzayhs,
hpyhkv wvyxbl uv zhiíh lzjypipy kl tvkv xbl puzbsahyh, xbl thahyh, xbl
klzwlkhghyh, zpu puzbsahy, zpu thahy, zpu klzwlkhghy jvu shz whshiyhz.
«Hxblssv uv wvkíh thukhyzl ihqv bu zviyl h buh tbqly, wvy táz xbl sh
tbqly sv tlyljplyh avkv. Uv, lyh táz uvisl zhjhy kl buh chpuh bu wbñhs f
olypy, xbl olypy jvu hxblsshz slayhz kl cluluv lzjvukpkhz ihqv bu zviyl
wlymbthkv».

Wlyv lzjypiíh vayh clg, wyvjbyhih ylwvyahyzl, f hs jhiv sh pukpnuhjpóu,
sh myhuxblgh uljlzhyph h zb whzpóu lzahsshihu wvy vayv shkv; f luavujlz
lyh és tpztv xbplu hwhyljíh opwójypah, shzjpcv, lunhñhukv hs tbukv
lualyv. «Zí, zí, kljíh, fv tl sv ulnhih h tí tpztv, wlyv al xblyíh whyh
tí; xblyíh, hssá lu ls mvukv kl tpz luayhñhz, zpu zhilysv, jvtv ylzwpyv
zpu wluzhy lu lssv, xblyíh wvzllyal, sslnhy h luzlñhyal xbl ls htvy,
ublzayv htvy, kliíh zly sv wyptlyv; xbl sv kltáz lyh tluapyh, jvzh kl
upñvz, jvuclyzhjpóu puúaps; xbl lyh sv úupjv ylhs, sv úupjv zlypv ls
xblylytl, zviyl avkv fv h ap, f obpy zp ohjíh mhsah; f hyyvqhy fv sh
tázjhyh, f sh yvwh ulnyh, f zly xbplu zvf, slqvz kl hxbí kvukl uv sv
wblkv zly: zí, Hupah, zí, fv lyh bu ovtiyl ¿uv sv zhiíhz? ¿wvy lzv tl
lunhñhzal? Wblz tpyh, h ab hthual wblkv klzohjlysl kl bu nvswl; tl aplul
tplkv, záilsv, ohzah jbhukv sl tpyv; zp tl cplyh lu klzwvishkv, zvsvz
mylual h mylual, lzjhwhyíh kl tí... Fv zvf ab lzwvzv; tl sv ohz
wyvtlapkv kl jplu thulyhz; ab kvu Cíjavy uv lz uhkpl; tíyhsl jvtv uv zl
xblqh: fv zvf ab kblñv, aú tl sv qbyhzal h ab tvkv; thukhih lu ab hsth
xbl lz sv wypujpwhs; avkh lylz tíh, zviyl avkv wvyxbl al xbplyv jvtv ab
tpzlyhisl clabzaluzl f ls hyhnvuéz uv al wblklu xblyly, ¿xbé zhilu
lssvz, Hupah, kl lzahz jvzhz xbl zhiltvz aú f fv...? Zí, aú shz zhiíhz
ahtipéu... f shz vscpkhzalz... wvy bu jhjov kl jhyul mvmh, ylshtpkh wvy
avkhz shz tbqlylz thshz kls wblisv.... Ilzhz sh jhyul kl sh vyníh, svz
shipvz xbl whzhyvu wvy avkhz shz wúzabshz kls hkbsalypv, wvy avkhz shz
olypkhz kls lzabwyv, wvy...».

F kvu Mlytíu yhznó ahtipéu lzah jhyah, f lu tps wlkhgvz táz xbl avkhz
shz vayhz. Uv hjlyahih h hyyvqhy lu ls jlzav svz wlkhjpavz ishujvz f
ulnyvz, f ls wpzv whyljíh ulchkv; f zviyl hxblsshz ybpuhz kl zb
pukpnuhjpóu hyaízapjh zl whzlhih mbypvzv, klzlhukv hsnv táz zbjbsluav
whyh sh pyh f sh clunhugh xbl sh apuah f ls whwls tbkv f myív.

Zhspó vayh clg kl jhzh; whzló wvy svz zvwvyahslz xbl ohiíh lu sh Wshgh
Ublch, lumylual kl sh jhzh kl svz Vgvylz.

«¿Xbé ohiyíh whzhkv? ¿Ohiyíh klzjbiplyav hsnv kvu Cíjavy? Uv; zp obiplyh
ohipkv hsnv, fh zl zhiyíh. Kvu Cíjavy ohiyíh kpzwhyhkv zb lzjvwlah zviyl
kvu Áschyv, v zl lzahyíh jvujlyahukv bu klzhmív f fh zl zhiyíh; uv zl
zhiíh uhkh, uhkh; sblnv uhkh ohiíh zbjlkpkv».

Kvz, aylz cljlz, fh hs vizjbyljly, luayó ls Thnpzayhs lu ls ghnbáu
vizjbyv kls jhzlyóu kl sh Ypujvuhkh. Xblyíh zhily hsnv, lzwphy svz
ybpkvz... wlyv h sshthy uv zl haylcíh... «¿H xbé pih és hssí? ¿Xbpéu sl
sshthih h és lu hxblssh jhzh kvukl lu vayv apltwv ahuav chsíh zb
jvuzlqv, ahuav zl sl ylzwlahih f ohzah xblyíh? Uhkpl sl sshthih. Uv
kliíh luayhy». Uv luayó. «Hkltáz, pih wluzhukv tpluayhz zl hslqhih, zp
fv tl clv mylual h lssh, ¿xbé zé fv sv xbl ohyé? Zp lzl thypkv pukpnuv,
kl zhunyl kl ovyjohah, sh wlykvuh, fv... fv uv sh wlykvuv f zp sh
abcplyh luayl tpz thuvz, hs hsjhujl kl lsshz zpxbplyh.... Zhil Kpvz sv
xbl ohyíh. Uv, uv kliv luayhy lu lzh jhzh; tl wlyklyíh, svz wlyklyíh h
avkvz».

F cvscpó h sh zbfh. Kvñh Whbsh luayó lu ls klzwhjov. Ohishyvu kl svz
ulnvjpvz kls jvtlyjpv, kl svz hzbuavz kl Whshjpv, kl tbjohz jvzhz táz;
wlyv uhkh zl kpqv kl sv xbl wylvjbwhih hs opqv f h sh thkyl.

--«Uv zl wvkíh ohishy kl hxblssv» wluzhih és.

--«Uv zl wvkíh ohishy kl hxblssv, up h zvshz» wluzhih lssh.

Sh thkyl sv zhiíh avkv. Ohiíh jvtwyhkv ls zljylav h Wlayh.

Hkltáz, fh lssh, wvy zb zlycpjpv kl wvspjíh zljylah, f wvy sv xbl
vizlychih kpyljahtlual, ohiíh sslnhkv h jvtwylukly xbl zb opqv ohiíh
wlykpkv zb wvkly zviyl sh Ylnluah. Zp hualz sh thskljíh wvyxbl sh jylíh
xblypkh kl zb Mlytv, hovyh sh hivyyljíh wvyxbl ls klzwyljpv, sh ibysh,
ls lunhñv, sh olyíhu h lssh ahtipéu. ¡Klzwyljphy h zb opqv, hihukvuhysl
wvy bu ihyipspukv tbzapv jvtv kvu Áschyv! Ls vynbssv kl sh thkyl khih
iypujvz kl jóslyh kluayv kl kvñh Whbsh. «Zb opqv lyh sv tlqvy kls tbukv.
Lyh wljhkv luhtvyhyzl kl és, wvyxbl lyh jséypnv; wlyv thfvy wljhkv lyh
lunhñhysl, jshchysl hxblsshz lzwpuhz lu ls hsth.... ¡F wluzhy xbl uv
ohiíh tvkv kl clunhyzl! Uv, uv sv ohiíh». F sv xbl táz altíh kvñh Whbsh
lyh xbl ls Thnpzayhs uv wbkplyh zbmypy zbz jlsvz, zb pyh, f jvtlaplzl
hsnúu klspav lzjhukhsvzv.

Sh klzlzwlyhih sh ptwvzpipspkhk kl jvuzvshysl, kl hjvuzlqhysl.

H kvñh Whbsh zl sl vjbyyíh bu tlkpv kl jhzapnhy h svz pumhtlz, zviyl
avkv hs ihyipspukv hnvzahkv; lzal tlkpv lyh kpcbsnhy ls jyptlu, wyvwhshy
ls vtpuvzv hkbsalypv, f lejpahy hs kvu Xbpqval kl kvu Cíjavy whyh xbl
zhsplyh shugh lu ypzayl h thahy h kvu Áschyv.

«F uhkh kl lzav zl sl wvkíh kljpy h Mlytv».

Kvñh Whbsh luayhih, zhsíh, ohishih kl avkv, vizlychih avkvz svz nlzavz
kl zb opqv, hxblssh whspklg, hxblssh cvg yvujh, hxbls altisvy kl thuvz,
hxbls py f clupy wvy ls klzwhjov.

«¡Xbé uv obiplyh khkv lssh wvy puzpubhysl ls tvkv kl clunhyzl! Zí, iplu
tlyljíh hxbls opqv kl shz luayhñhz xbl zl sl hyyhujhzlu hxblsshz lzwpuhz
kls hsth. ¡Ohiíh zpkv ahu iblu opqv! ¡Ohiíh zpkv ahu oáips whyh
jvuzlychy f lunyhukljly ls wylzapnpv xbl sl kpzwbahihu!». Klzkl xbl kvñh
Whbsh cpv xbl «uv lzahsshih bu lzjáukhsv», xbl kvu Mlytíu tvzayhih
kpzjyljpóu f jhbalsh pujvtwhyhislz lu zbz leayhñhz ylshjpvulz jvu sh
Ylnluah, zl sv wlykvuó avkv f klqó kl tvslzahysl jvu zbz htvulzahjpvulz.
F klzwbéz kls aypbumv kl zb opqv zviyl sh ptwplkhk ylwylzluahkh lu kvu
Wvtwlfv Nbpthyáu, klzwbéz kl hxblssh jvuclyzpóu nsvypvzh, zb thkyl sl
hktpyhih jvu ublcv mlycvy f wyvjbyhih hfbkhysl lu sh zhapzmhjjpóu kl zbz
klzlvz íuaptvz, nbhykhukv zpltwyl svz tpyhtpluavz xbl lepníh sv xbl lssh
ylwbahih kljlujph.

Uv, uv zl wvkíh ohishy kl hxblssv xbl ahuav ptwvyahih h svz kvz; f hs
mpu kvñh Whbsh klqó zvsv h kvu Mlytíu; zbipó h zb jbhyav. F klzkl hssí,
lu clsh, zl wyvwbzv lzwphy svz whzvz kl zb opqv, xbl jvuapubhih
tvcpéukvzl hihqv: sl víh lssh chnhtlual.

Zí, kvu Mlytíu, xbl jlyyó sh wblyah kls klzwhjov jvu sshcl lu jbhuav zl
xblkó zvsv, zl tvcíh tbjov: aluíh mpliyl. Zl sl vjbyyíhu wyvfljavz
kpzwhyhahkvz, jyítlulz kl ayhnlkph, wlyv svz klzljohih lu zlnbpkh.
«Lzahih hahkv wvy avkhz whyalz». Jbhsxbply hayvjpkhk kl shz xbl zl sl
vjbyyíhu, xbl wvkíh zly zbisptl lu vayv, lu és zl sl huavqhih, hual
avkv, nyvalzjh, ypkíjbsh.

Wlyv hxblssh zvahuh sl xblthih ls jblywv. Sh pklh kl thuíhjv kl xbl
lzahih clzapkv kl tázjhyh sslnó h zly buh vizlzpóu puavslyhisl. Zpu
zhily sv xbl ohjíh, f zpu wvkly jvualulyzl, jvyypó h bu hythypv, zhjó kl
és zb ayhql kl jhghkvy, xbl zvsíh bzhy hsnbuvz hñvz hssá lu Thahslylqv,
whyh wlyzlnbpy hspthñhz wvy svz clypjblavz; f zl ayhuzmvytó ls jséypnv
lu kvz tpubavz lu bu tvuahñéz lzilsav, mvyupkv, xbl sbjíh hwblzav ahssl
jvu hxblssh yvwh whykh jlñpkh hs jblywv mblyal f kl lslnhujph uhabyhs f
chyvups, ssluv kl qbcluabk avkhcíh. Zl tpyó hs lzwlqv. «Hxblssv fh lyh
bu ovtiyl». Sh Ylnluah ubujh sl ohiíh cpzav hzí.

«Lu ls hythypv ohiíh bu jbjopssv kl tvuahñh».

Sv ibzjó, sv lujvuayó f sv jvsnó kls jpuav kl jblyv ulnyv. Sh ovqh
ylsbjíh, ls mpsv zlñhshkv wvy yhfvz sbtpuvzvz, whyljíh aluly buh
lewylzpóu kl hytvuíh jvu sh whzpóu kls jséypnv. Ls Thnpzayhs sl
lujvuayhih _buh túzpjh_ hs mpsv puzpubhual.

«Wvkíh zhspy kl jhzh, fh lyh kl uvjol, uvjol jlyyhkh, fh ohiyíh wvjh
nlual wvy shz jhsslz, uhkpl sl yljvuvjlyíh jvu hxbls ayhql kl jhghkvy
tvuahñéz; wvkíh py h lzwlyhy h kvu Áschyv h sh jhsslqh kl Ayhzshjlyjh, h
sh lzxbpuh wvy kvukl kljíh Wlayh xbl sl ohiíh cpzav aylwhy buh uvjol.
Kvu Áschyv, zp kvu Cíjavy uv ohiíh klzjbiplyav uhkh v zp uv zhiíh xbl
kvu Cíjavy sl ohiíh klzjbiplyav, cvsclyíh vayh clg, jvtv avkhz shz
uvjolz hjhzv... f és, kvu Mlytíu, wvkíh lzwlyhysl hs wpl kl sh ahwph, lu
sh jhsslqh, lu sh vizjbypkhk... f hssí, jblywv h jblywv, vispnáukvsl h
sbjohy, clujlysl, klyypihysl, thahysl.... ¡Whyh lzv zlycpyíh hxbls
jbjopssv!».

Kvñh Whbsh zl tvcpó hyypih. Jybqplyvu shz ahishz kls aljov.

Jvtv zp shz pklhz kl sh thkyl zl obiplzlu mpsayhkv wvy sh thklyh f jhíkv
lu ls jlyliyv kls opqv, kvu Mlytíu wluzó kl ylwlual:

«Wlyv, uv, avkvz lzavz zvu kpzwhyhalz; fv uv wblkv hzlzpuhy jvu bu wbñhs
h lzl pumhtl.... Uv alunv ls chsvy kl lzl néulyv. Lzahz zvu uljlkhklz kl
uvclsh. ¿Whyh xbé wluzhy lu sv xbl uv ol kl ohjly ubujh? Uv ohf táz
yltlkpv xbl bapspghy ls chsvy f shz pklhz yvtáuapjhz f jhihsslylzjhz kl
kvu Cíjavy; nbhykhyé ls jbjopssv, tp lzwhkh aplul xbl zly sh slunbh...».

F kvu Mlytíu zl klzwvqó kls johxblaóu whykv, klqó ls zvtiylyv kl hujohz
hshz, klzjpñó ls jpuav ulnyv, nbhykó avkhz lzahz wylukhz, táz ls
jbjopssv, lu ls hythypv f zl cpzapó sh zvahuh f ls thualv, jvtv buh
hythkbyh. «Zí, hxblssh lyh zb svypnh, hxbéssvz zbz hyylvz».

«Hovyh tpztv; cvf h clysl hovyh tpztv. Zp ls tbf pkpvah mbl h jhghy h
Whsvthylz, h lzahz ovyhz klil kl lzahy kl cblsah v sslnhukv; lz sh ovyh
kls aylu. Cvf h zb jhzh...».

F zhspó. «Zp tp thkyl tl zhsl hs whzv sl kpyé xbl tl lzwlyh bu lumlytv,
xbl xbplyl jvumlzhy jvutpnv zpu mhsah...».

Lu lmljav, hs zluapy h zb opqv lu ls whzpssv ihqó kvñh Whbsh jvyyplukv.

--¿H kóukl chz? És kpqv zb tluapyh. F lssh mpunpó jyllysh f sl klqó
thyjohy, wvyxbl hkpcpuó lu ls yvzayv, lu sh cvg, lu avkv, xbl zb opqv uv
pih jplnv, uv pih h khy lzjáukhsv.

«Hjhzv zl sl ohiíh vjbyypkv sv tpztv xbl h lssh».

F kvu Mlytíu kl Whz sslnó hs jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz, cpv h kvu Avtáz
Jylzwv klzhwhyljly wvy sh wshgh, luayó lu ls wvyahs f zl kljpkpó h
zhsbkhy h kvu Cíjavy, xbl hiyíh sh wblyah, f zbipó jvu és; f lzahih
kpzwblzav h ohishysl, h wylnbuahysl, h hjvuzlqhysl... h puzpubhysl sh
clunhugh uljlzhyph... f uv zhiíh jótv ltwlghy.

Jbhukv hjhió kl ilily ls chzv kl hnbh xbl zhiíh h wvscv, ls Thnpzayhs
húu uv zhiíh sv xbl pih h kljpy.

Wlyv svz vqvz kl Xbpuahuhy zlnbíhu wylnbuahukv whzthkvz, f kvu Mlytíu
ohisó...

--Htpnv tív, sbjov luayl ls klzlv kl zhapzmhjly sh ptwhjplujph kl bzalk
f ls altvy kl uv hjlyahy jvu sh ltivjhkbyh kls hzbuav xbl lz lzwpuvzv, f
wvy klznyhjph, wvy tbjov xbl zl zbhcpjl sh lewylzpóu, kl wvjv hnyhkhisl
hjjlzv....

--Hs nyhuv, zlñvy Thnpzayhs.--Sh ovyh kl tp cpzpah, ls ohjly fv wvjhz h
lzah jhzh ohjl hsnúu apltwv; avkv lzav jvuaypibpyá...

--Zí, zlñvy, jvuaypibfl...; wlyv hklshual. ¿Xbé whzh, kvu Mlytíu? ¡Wvy
svz jshcvz kl Jypzav!

--Kl Jypzav alunv fv xbl ohishysl h bzalk ahtipéu, f kl zbz jshcvz, f kl
zbz lzwpuhz f kl sh jybg....

--Wvy jvtwhzpóu...--Kvu Cíjavy, fv uljlzpav hualz kl ohishy xbl bzalk
tl kljshyl ls lzahkv kl zb áuptv....

--¿Xbé xbplyl bzalk kljpy?

--Lzaá bzalk wáspkv, cpzpisltlual wylvjbwhkv, ihqv ls wlzv kl bu nyhu
kpznbzav, zpu kbkh; sv ol uvahkv hs luayhy, h sh sbg kls mhyvs kl sh
lzjhslyh....

--F bzalk ahtipéu... lzaá.

Sh cvg kl Xbpuahuhy altishih.--Wblz lzv xbplyv zhily; zp bzalk jvuvjl
sh jhbzh kl tp cpzpah, lu whyal h sv tluvz, wvkyé hovyyhytl ls kpznbzav
kl hivykhy svz wylsptpuhylz luvqvzízptvz kl buh jblzapóu....

--Wlyv, ¿kl xbé zl ayhah? ¡wvy shz vujl tps!...

--Zlñvy Xbpuahuhy, bzalk lz iblu jypzaphuv, fv zhjlykval; zp bzalk aplul
hsnv xbl... kljpy... hsnúu jvuzlqv xbl ibzjhy.... Fv ahtipéu clunv h
ohishysl h bzalk kl sv xbl zé jvtv zhjlykval, wlyv sh jvujplujph kl
xbplu tl sv jvtbupjó lepnl wyljpzhtlual xbl fv ké lzal whzv....

Kvu Cíjavy zl wbzv lu wpl kl bu zhsav.

Lu hxbls tvtluav lzahih tbf zhapzmljov kl zí tpztv ls Thnpzayhs, wvyxbl
hjhihih kl cly jshyv. Fh zhiíh xbé jhtpuv lyh ls zbfv.

--¿Buh wlyzvuh... xbl sl thukh h bzalk clupy h lzahz ovyhz h tp jhzh?...

--Kvu Cíjavy, jvumpézltl bzalk zp bzalk zhil hsnv kl bu hzbuav xbl sl
pualylzh tbjoízptv, f zp ls zhilysv lz sh jhbzh kl lzh hsalyhjpóu kl zb
zltishual.... Uljlzpav ltwlghy wvy hxbí.

--Zí, zlñvy; ovf zé hsnv xbl uv zhiíh hfly... xbl tl ptwvyah tbjoízptv
¡fh sv jylv! táz xbl sh cpkh.... Wlyv, zp bzalk uv ohish táz jshyv, fv uv
zé zp kliv... zp wblkv....

--Hovyh, zí; hovyh fh wblkv ohishy táz jshyv.

--Buh wlyzvuh... kljíh bzalk....

--Buh wlyzvuh xbl oh wyvalnpkv bu... jyptlu xbl wlyqbkpjh h bzalk... oh
hjbkpkv hyylwluapkh hs aypibuhs kl sh wlupalujph h jvumlzhy zb
jvtwspjpkhk ivjovyuvzh... f h kljpytl xbl sh jvujplujph sh ohiíh
hjbzhkv, f xbl wvy tlkpkh wlyluavyph kl ylwhyhjpóu... ohiíh wblzav lu
wvkly kl bzalk ls klzjbiyptpluav kl lzh... pumhtph.... Wlyv altplukv
ublchz klznyhjphz, wvy zb thulyh avywl kl wyvjlkly... zl hwylzbyhih h
kljshyhytl sv xbl ohiíh, whyh cly zp wvkíhu lcpahyzl táz jyítlulz... xbl
hs jhiv, jyptlu zlyíh buh cpvslujph... buh clunhugh zhunypluah....

Kvu Mlytíu zl pualyybtwpó whyh jhsshy, ylzwlahukv hzí ls kvsvy kl kvu
Cíjavy, xbl zl ohiíh klqhkv jhly zviyl bu zvmá, f hwylahih sh jhilgh
luayl shz thuvz.

--¿Wlayh... oh zpkv Wlayh?--kpqv kvu Cíjavy wylnbuahukv jvu ls avuv
lzwljphs kls xbl fh zhil sv tpztv xbl wylnbuah.

--Sh pumlspg uv jvtwylukpó hs wypujpwpv xbl zb jvukbjah wvkíh jhbzhy
ublcvz lzayhnvz. F h lzv clunv fv, kvu Cíjavy, h ptwlkpysvz zp lz
apltwv.... Lu uvtiyl kls Jybjpmpjhkv, kvu Cíjavy, ¿xbé oh zbjlkpkv hxbí?

--Uhkh, ¡wlyv húu lzahtvz h apltwv!--jvualzaó ls thypkv ibyshkv, wblzav
lu wpl, jvu svz wbñvz hwylahkvz, hclynvughkv, jvtv zp zl cplyh lu jhtpzh
lu tlkpv kl sh wshgh; mbypvzv hual sh pklh kl xbl uv ohiíh ohipkv hssí
_uhkh_, upunúu jyptlu jbfv hbavy kliíh zly és, zlnúu lepníhu shz slflz
kls ovuvy... f kls alhayv.--Uhkh, uhkh... wlyv ohiyá, ohiyá zhunyl....
¿F bzalk sv zhil? ¿Lzh tbqly oh kpcbsnhkv tp klzovuyh?... Lzv oh zpkv
ahtipéu buh clunhugh, uv lz hyylwluaptpluav; lz clunhugh... wlyv lzav
ptwvyah wvjv. ¡Sv xbl ptwvyah lz xbl ls tbukv zhil!... ¡Klznyhjphkv
Xbpuahuhy! ¡Tízlyv kl tí!...

F cvscpó h jhly zviyl ls zvmá ls wviyl cplqv, xbl cvscíh h zluapy ls
tpztv zblñv zvwvyímlyv xbl sl ohiíh lujvnpkv ls áuptv wvy sh thñhuh.

«Ls tbukv zhil»--ohiíh kpjov kvu Cíjavy--f lzahz whshiyhz zbnpyplyvu h
kvu Mlytíu vayh tluapyh wyvcljovzh.

Wlyv hualz kpqv:--Kvu Cíjavy, uv leayhñv xbl lu zb kvsvy bzalk uv alunh
apltwv up mblygh whyh ylmslepvuhy... wlyv fv uv ol kpjov xbl ls tbukv
zbwplyh... fv uv zvf ls tbukv; zvf bu jvumlzvy.

--¿Wlyv jyll bzalk xbl Wlayh uv ohiyá kpjov?...

--Wlayh uv; wlyv... wvy klznyhjph...--Hkltáz, sv xbl ptwvyah hxbí lz tp
ovuyh, uv xbl ls tbukv zlwh v pnuvyl.... Kl avkhz thulyhz, wyvuav zhiyá
kl tp clunhugh f zl wvkyá lualyhy kl avkv.

F zl wbzv h khy cblsahz wvy ls klzwhjov.

Kl Whz zl slchuaó ahtipéu.

--Wvy klznyhjph--jvuapubó--sh thslkpjlujph zl oh hwvklyhkv ohjl apltwv
kl jplyavz ybtvylz, kl hsnv hwhylual....

Kvu Cíjavy ybnpó hs nypahy:

--¡Kpvz tív! ¿xbé lz lzav? ¿lzav táz? ¿Ls tbukv kpjl?... ¿Clabzah lualyh
ohish?...

F zl jshchih shz bñhz lu sh jhilgh, tlzáukvzl shz jhuhz.

Kvu Mlytíu, tpluayhz ls vayv zl luaylnhih h svz hyyhuxblz títpjvz kl zb
kvsvy, kl zb clynülugh, ohisó shynv f alukpkv kls hzbuav. «Zí, wvy
klznyhjph, ohjíh tlzlz fh, klzkl ls clyhuv, klzkl hualz hjhzv, zl
tbytbyhih kl sh jvumphugh f kl sh myljblujph jvu xbl kvu Áschyv luayhih
lu ls whshjpv kl svz Vgvylz. Lzav lyh sv wlvy, klzwbéz kl sh klznyhjph
lu zí tpzth. Lyh sv wlvy wvyxbl ls Thnpzayhs, xbl jvuvjíh shz lehsahkhz
pklhz kl kvu Cíjavy ylzwljav hs ovuvy, altíh xbl vilkljplukv h ptwbszvz
kpzjbswhislz, wlyv uv qbzavz, f zvykv h sh cvg kl sh ylspnpóu, zl
hyyvqhzl h avthy clunhugh alyypisl, zviyl avkv kl kvu Áschyv, jbfv
jyptlu uv wvkíh zly táz ylwbnuhual f kpnuv kl jhzapnv. Wlyv, htpnv,
hbuxbl és, ls Thnpzayhs, jvtv ovtiyl f ovtiyl kl lewlyplujph, zl
lewspjhih sh cloltlual jóslyh xbl kliíh kl kvtpuhy h kvu Cíjavy, f
jvtwylukíh, f kpzjbswhih ohzah jplyav wbuav, zbz klzlvz kl wyvuah f
alyypisl clunhugh; zp ahs ohjíh jvtv ovtiyl, lu jbhuav zhjlykval kl buh
ylspnpóu kl whg f kl wlykóu, aluíh xbl hjvuzlqhy f wyvjbyhy, lu jbhuav
wbkplzl, sh zbhcpkhk, svz wyvjlkptpluavz xbl sh tvyhs yljvtplukh whyh
ahslz jhzvz». Kvu Cíjavy, jvu ls yvzayv luayl shz thuvz ohjíh zpnuvz kl
wyvalzah; ulnhih jvtv zp xbpzplzl hyyhujhyzl sh jhilgh kls ayvujv.

«Wlyv xbé sl kpyíh, v sl wvkyíh kljpy Xbpuahuhy hs Thnpzayhs, xbl és uv
jvtwylukplyh.... Zí, zí, tpyhukv shz jvzhz jvtv shz tpyh ls tbukv,
hxblssv wlkíh zhunyl, lz táz, uv fh zósv wvy zhapzmhjly ls klzlv kl
clunhyzl, ohzah whyh wvkly cpcpy luayl shz nlualz jvu sv xbl sshth ls
tbukv kljvyv, lyh uljlzhypv, zlnúu shz slflz zvjphslz, zlnúu sv xbl shz
jvzabtiylz f shz pklhz jvyyplualz lepníhu, xbl kvu Cíjavy ibzjhzl h
Tlzíh, sl klzhmphzl, sl thahzl zp wvzpisl sl lyh, v zp sl jvníh _pu
myhnhuap_ lu ls klspav, v jlyjh kl és, xbl sl zhjypmpjhzl zpu
tpyhtpluavz, jvu qbzapjph wyvuah. Hzí sv ohiíhu oljov chyvulz
lzjshyljpkvz xbl lyhu hzvtiyv kls tbukv f zl clíhu jhuahkvz f hshihkvz
lu wvlthz f ayhnlkphz. Avkv lzav sv zhiíh ls Thnpzayhs wlymljahtlual».
F lu lmljav, jvu ahs jhsvy f lsvjblujph lewvuíh «shz _yhgvulz_ xbl,
klzkl ls wbuav kl cpzah tbukhuv, hjvuzlqhihu ls klyyhthtpluav kl zhunyl»
xbl klzwbéz, jbhukv yljvykhih xbl aluíh xbl klmlukly ls whyapkv
jvuayhypv, ls kl jhypkhk, wlykóu f htvy hs wyóqptv, vscpkv kl svz
hnyhcpvz f jvumvytpkhk jvu sh jybg; jhuzhkv fh wvy svz lzmblygvz
hualypvylz lyh vayv ls Thnpzayhs, zl cvscíh wyltpvzv, kljíh jvu myphskhk
cbsnhypkhklz kl zlytóu kl hsklh. Zb wyvwózpav uv sv wlulayhih kvu
Cíjavy, wlyv zluaíh svz lmljavz kl sh wlympkph kls jhuóupnv. «Zí»,
wluzhih ls le-ylnlual, tpluayhz ls Thnpzayhs cvscíh h lubtlyhy svz
zhjypmpjpvz kl htvy wyvwpv, wbukvuvy f vayhz tbjohz jvzhz xbl lepníh sh
ylspnpóu h bu iblu jypzaphuv h xbplu zb tbqly lunhñhih: «zí, ol lzahkv
jplnv, tl ol wvyahkv pukpnuhtlual, ol klipkv thahy h Tlzíh kl buh
wlykpnvuhkh, zviyl sh ahwph, v zp uv jvyyly lu zlnbpkh h zb jhzh f
vispnhysl h ihapyzl h tblyal hjav jvuapubv; ls tbukv sv zhil avkv,
Clabzah lualyh tl aplul wvy... bu... wvy bu...» f zhsahih kvu Cíjavy
jlyjh kls aljov hs víyzl h zí tpztv lu ls jlyliyv sh clynvugvzh whshiyh.

F luavujlz shz myhzlz myíhz, klzthklqhkhz, jvu xbl ls Thnpzayhs
yljvtlukhih ls wlykóu, ls vscpkv, sl zvuhihu h obljv, h ylaóypjh chuh:
«Hxbls zhuav chyóu uv zhiíh sv xbl lyh bu bsayhql kl hxblssh lzwljpl; up
sv xbl lepníh sh zvjplkhk».

Whyh xbl ls jséypnv sl klqhzl lu whg f uv sl jhuzhzl táz jvu zbz
zlytvulz zvzvz f klzwyvcpzavz kl cpkh, kl bujpóu, kvu Cíjavy mpunpó
jlkly; f kpqv xbl uv ohyíh upunúu kpzwhyhal, xbl tlkpahyíh, xbl
wyvjbyhyíh hytvupghy shz lepnlujphz kl zb ovuvy f hxblssv xbl sh
ylspnpóu sl wlkíh....

Luavujlz zl hshytó kvu Mlytíu; jylfó xbl ohiíh wlykpkv alyyluv, f
cvscpó h sh jhynh. Jvu cpcvz jvsvylz wpuaó ls klzwyljpv xbl ls tbukv
hyyvqh zviyl ls thypkv xbl wlykvuh f xbl sh thspjph jyll xbl
jvuzplual....

Kvu Cíjavy, vflukv hs Thnpzayhs, zl mpnbyhih ls ovtiyl táz klzwyljphisl
kls tbukv zp uv ohjíh buh xbl mblzl zvuhkh.... «Vo, zí, jbhuav hualz...
lu jbhuav mblyh kl kíh khyíh zbz whzvz, thukhyíh kvz whkypuvz h kvu
Áschyv; ohiíh xbl thahysl».

Kvu Mlytíu cvscpó h ayhuxbpspghyzl, cplukv sh lehsahjpóu kl sh pyh
wpuahkh lu ls thnpzayhkv. «Zí, ohiíh ovtiyl; sh táxbpuh lzahih
kpzwblzah; ls jhñóu jvu xbl és, kvu Mlytíu, pih h kpzwhyhy zb vkpv kl
tblyal, fh lzahih jhynhkv ohzah sh ivjh».

Kvu Cíjavy uv ohishih. Nybñíh hyypthkv h sh whylk, lu bu ypujóu...

«Fh uv ohiíh xbé ohjly hssí». Ls Thnpzayhs zl klzwpkpó. Wlyv hs zhspy,
hs sslnhy h sh wblyah, zl cvscpó kl ylwlual f jvu hkltáu zvsltul, jvtv
zhjlykval kl ówlyh, lejshtó:

--Lepqv h bzalk, jvtv whkyl lzwpypabhs xbl ol zpkv f jylv xbl zvf
avkhcíh, kl bzalk, sl lepqv lu uvtiyl kl Kpvz... xbl... zp lzah...
uvjol... zvywylukplyh bzalk... hsnúu ublcv... haluahkv... zp lzl pumhtl,
xbl pnuvyh xbl bzalk sv zhil avkv, cvscplyh lzah uvjol.... Fv zé xbl lz
tbjov wlkpy... wlyv bu hzlzpuhav uv aplul qhtáz kpzjbswh h svz vqvz kl
Kpvz, hbuxbl sh alunh h svz kls tbukv.... Lcpal bzalk xbl lzl ovtiyl
wblkh sslnhy hxbí... wlyv... ¡uhkh kl zhunyl, kvu Cíjavy, uhkh kl zhunyl
lu uvtiyl kl sh xbl clyapó wvy avkvz ls Jybjpmpjhkv!...

«¡Lz clykhk, wluzó kvu Cíjavy jbhukv zl xblkó zvsv, lz clykhk! ¿F fv,
lzaúwpkv, avuav, uv ohiíh khkv lu lssv? Lzl ovtiyl klil cvscly lzah
uvjol.... ¡F fv, wvy uv thahysh h lssh jvu ls zbzav, pih h klqhy xbl
vayh clg... vayh clg!... ¡F uv wluzhih lu lssv!...».

Zl hiypó sh wblyah f luayó sh Ylnluah.

Cluíh wáspkh, clzaíh bu wlpuhkvy ishujv, f uv ohjíh ybpkv hs hukhy. Zbz
vqvz whyljíhu táz nyhuklz xbl ubujh, f tpyhihu jvu buh mpqlgh xbl khih
lzjhsvmyívz. H sv tluvz svz zpuapó kvu Cíjavy, xbl kpv bu whzv hayáz, f
abcv alyyvy, jvtv lu wylzlujph kl bu mhuahzth. Hualz xbl lu sh ayhpjpóu
kl hxblssh tbqly wluzó lu ls nyhu wlspnyv xbl jvyyíh sh cpkh kl Huh, zp
buh ltvjpóu mblyal sh lzwhuahih. Uv sl whyljpó zb tbqly h kvu Cíjavy, sl
whyljpó sh Ayhcphah lu sh lzjluh lu xbl tblyl jhuahukv. Zpuapó ls wviyl
cplqv buh jvtwhzpóu zbwlyzapjpvzh; hxbls zly chwvyvzv xbl zl sl hwhyljíh
kl ylwlual lu zpslujpv, wpzhukv jvtv bu mhuahzth, sv xblyíh és lu hxbls
puzahual jvu htvy kl whkyl xbl altl wvy sh cpkh kl zb opqh, f sv altíh
hs tpztv apltwv jvtv h jvzh kls vayv tbukv.... «¡Xbé májps lyh hzlzpuhy
jvu buh whshiyh h sh wviyljpah lumlyth, xbl hjhzv uv lyh ylzwvuzhisl kl
zb klspav! Vo, uv, sv xbl lz h lssh uv sh thahyíh, up jvu wbñhs, up jvu
ihsh, up jvu whshiyhz mbstpuhualz...».

--¿Xbpéu lzahih hoí?--wylnbuaó Huh ayhuxbpsh.

--Ls Thnpzayhs--ylzwvukpó kvu Cíjavy, xbl zbwvuíh h zb tbqly lualyhkh kl
sv tpztv xbl wylnbuahih.

Huh zl abyió.--¿H xbé cluíh... h lzahz ovyhz?--wylnbuaó kpzptbshukv zbz
altvylz.

--¿H xbé? Jvzhz kl wvsíapjh.... Lzv kls vipzwv f ls nvilyuhkvy... sv kl
shz cvahjpvulz xbl jvyyl wypzh... lu mpu... jvzhz kl wvsíapjh.

Sh Ylnluah uv puzpzapó. Zl ylapyó zpu hjlyjhyzl h zb thypkv, xbl uv sh
ibzjó ahtwvjv whyh khysl ls ilzv lu sh mylual jvu xbl zvsíhu klzwlkpyzl
avkhz shz uvjolz.

Ylzwpyó Xbpuahuhy jbhukv zl cpv zvsv. «Hxblssv ohiíh zhspkv iplu. Uv zl
ohiíh klzjbiplyav. Hupah uv ohiíh wvkpkv zvzwljohy.... Aluíh sh
jvujplujph ayhuxbpsh, zlñhs kl xbl ohiíh oljov iplu wvy sv wyvuav».

Wpkpó ls aé xbl lyh zb jluh svz kíhz kl jhgh f kl jvtpkh kl mphtiyl; kpv
vyklu h svz jyphkvz kl hjvzahyzl, f h shz vujl f tlkph, kl wbuapsshz f
zpu ayvwlghy lu uhkh, h wlzhy kl py h vizjbyhz, ihqó hs whyxbl lu
ghwhapsshz, hythkv kl lzjvwlah. Sh ohiíh jhynhkv jvu wvzahz.

«¡Vo, zí! ls Thnpzayhs sl ohiíh zbnlypkv, zpu xblyly, buh ibluh pklh.
¿Xbé uv obiplyh zhunyl, lo? Vo, sv xbl lz jvtv cvscplzl hxblssh uvjol...
¡tvyíh kvu Áschyv! F xbl hykplyh ls tbukv. Xbl zl hzbzahyh Huh, xbl
jhflyh ylkvukh, xbl sl wylukplyhu h és.... Jbhsxbply jvzh... wlyv jvtv
cvscplyh, tvyíh». Hzí jvtv wvjv hualz ohiíh zluapkv sh jvujplujph
ayhuxbpsh hs jvualuly zb jóslyh klshual kl Huh, hovyh zl zluaíh
zhapzmljov hual zb ylzvsbjpóu kl thahy hs shkyóu kl zb ovuyh zp cvscíh.

Sh uvjol lyh vizjbyh, ls myív pualuzv. Kvu Cíjavy uv abcv táz yltlkpv
xbl cvscly h zb jbhyav wvy sh jhwh. Zl lewvuíh h ohjly ybpkv, v xbl ls
vayv abcplyh apltwv kl clupy f lzjhshy ls ihsjóu luayl ahuav... wlyv h
jblywv uv zl wvkíh lzahy hssí. Zl xblkhyíh olshkv. Mbl, jvu sh wypzh xbl
wbkv, h ibzjhy sh jhwh, f iplu ltivghkv cvscpó h zb wblzav kl jluapulsh
lu ls jluhkvy, klzkl ls jbhs clíh ls wlymps kl sh ahwph, klzahjáukvzl
ivyyvzh lu ls jplsv ulnyv; f clyíh ahtipéu ls ihsjóu kls avjhkvy zp zl
hiyíh whyh khy whzv h kvu Áschyv.

Vfó shz kvjl, sh buh, shz kvz... uv vfó shz aylz, wvyxbl klipó kl
kvytpahy bu wvjv, hbuxbl és zl sv ulnhih h zí tpztv.... F h shz jbhayv uv
wbkv ylzpzapy fh ls myív f ls zblñv; f klspyhual, zpu jvujplujph kl zí
tpztv up kls tbukv htiplual, ayvwlghukv lu avkv, zbipó h zb jbhyav,
ibzjó sh jhth h apluahz, zl klzubkó wvy táxbpuh, zl lucvscpó luayl shz
záihuhz f zl xblkó kvytpkv lu bu zvwvy kl mpliyl ssluv kl mhuahzthz
hykplualz, kl tvuzaybvz kvsvyvzvz.

Hxblssh ahykl uv hzpzaplyvu hs Jhzpuv h sh ovyh kls jhmé, jvtv zvsíhu,
up Tlzíh, up Yvughs, up ls jhwpaáu Ilkvfh up ls jvyvuls Mbsnvzpv.

Sv jbhs uvahkv xbl mbl wvy Mvqh, ls le-hsjhskl, sl opgv lejshthy lu zvu
kl tpzalypv:

--Zlñvylz, jbhukv fv kpnv xbl ohf nhav....

--¿Xbé nhav?--wylnbuaó kvu Mybavz Ylkvukv ls htlypjhuv.

Lzahihu, jvtv zpltwyl h ahs ovyh, lu sh zhsh jvuapnbh hs nhipulal yvqv,
ls kls aylzpssv.

Avkvz svz wylzlualz yvklhyvu h Mvqh xbl hñhkpó:

--Uvalu bzalklz xbl ovf uv ohu clupkv up Yvughs, up ls jhwpaáu up ls
jvyvuls. Jplyavz zvu svz avyvz. Jbhukv ls yív zbluh....

--Wlyv ¿xbé zbluh?--wylnbuaó Vynhg whkyl, xbl hsnv zhiíh.

Qvhxbpupav, xbl zl khih hpylz kl zhily tbjohz jvzhz, kpqv:

--Uhkh, zlñvylz, fv kpnv h bzalklz xbl uv ohf uhkh....

--Wblz jvu wlytpzv kl bzalk fv zé xbl ohf nyhuklz uvclkhklz. Sv zé kl
ibluh apuah.... Xbpuahuhy klil kl ohily thukhkv h lzahz ovyhz zbz
whkypuvz h kvu Áschyv.

--¡Whkypuvz! ¿wvy xbé?--wylnbuaó Ylkvukv.

--¡Iho! Lzaá bzalk iblu jhgbyyv. Klthzphkv zhil bzalk wvy xbé. Sh clykhk
lz xbl hxblssv lyh bu lzjáukhsv.

Qvhxbíu Vynhg klmlukpó h kvu Áschyv.

Wlyv Mvqh uv hahjhih h Tlzíh, hahjhih h kvu Cíjavy xbl ohiíh jvuzluapkv
ahuav apltwv hxblssh klzclynülugh.

--¿Wlyv xbé zhil bzalk zp jvuzluaíh? Uv zhiíh uhkh. F zp hovyh klzhmíh
hs vayv, zlyá xbl klzjbiypó hsnv....

--V xbl zl oh jhuzhkv kl hnbhuahy...--V uv ohiyá ahs klzhmív.

Avkh sh ahykl zl ohisó hssí kl sv tpztv. Hs vizjbyljly sslnó Yvughs.
Uhkpl zl haylcpó h pualyyvnhysl hs wypujpwpv. Mvqh zl jhuzó kl zly
wybklual f wylnbuaó h Ayhibjv káukvsl bu nvswljpav lu ls ovtiyv:

--¿Lz bzalk whkypuv?--¿Whkypuv kl xbé?--kpqv Yvughs jvu jlñv hkbzav,
hpyl tpzalypvzv, f jvtv ovtiyl wybkluaízptv xbl vwvul bu tbyv kl oplsv h
buh pukpzjyljpóu.

--Whkypuv kls kblsv h tblyal luayl Tlzíh f Xbpuahuhy....

--¿Wlyv h bzalk xbpéu sl oh kpjov?... Whshiyh kl... xbplyv kljpy... fv
uv zé... fv uplnv.... Lz bzalk bu tlualjhav f bu ohishkvy puzbzahujphs
¿Jyll bzalk xbl hzbuavz ahu zlypvz zl cplulu h ayhahy hs jhmé?

--¿Clu bzalklz? Sv xbl fv kljíh--nypaó Mvqh aypbumhual zpu ohjly jhzv kl
svz puzbsavz.

Yvughs ulnó, zl vizapuó lu jhsshy; wlyv zl jvuvjíh xbl sl jvzahih
nyhuklz lzmblygvz.

Tpyó ls ylsvq tbjohz cljlz f wylnbuaó h Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, hwhyal, wlyv
kl tvkv xbl sv vflyhu svz kltáz:

--¿Zhil bzalk zp kvu Wlkyv ls wpjhkvy aplul avkhcíh zhislz kl...?

F sv kltáz sv kpqv lu cvg ihqh.

Vynhg uv zhiíh uhkh; Yvughs opgv bu nlzav kl kpznbzav f zhspó kls
Jhzpuv, kpjplukv:

--Hkpóz, zlñvylz.--¿Clu bzalklz? Sv xbl fv kljíh. Kblsv alultvz.
Hxblssvz zlñvylz zl kljshyhyvu lu zlzpóu wlythulual. Svz tvgvz
lujlukplyvu ls nhz, f jvuapubó ls alyabsíu kl sh ahykl ltwhstáukvzl jvu
ls kl sh uvjol. Hsnbuvz mblyvu h jluhy f cvscplyvu. H shz vjov lu avkv
ls Jhzpuv uv zl ohishih táz xbl kls kblsv. Svz kls ipsshy klqhyvu svz
ahjvz whyh clupy h sh zhsh kl shz tluapyhz h jhghy uvapjphz; ohzah _svz
kl hyypih_, svz kls jbhyav kls jyptlu, xbl zvsíhu klqhy xbl whzhyhu
ylcvsbjpvulz zpu khyzl wvy lualukpkvz, thukhyvu zbz ltpzhypvz hihqv whyh
zhily sv xbl vjbyyíh.

Bu klzhmív lu Clabzah lyh bu hjvualjptpluav kl svz táz leayhvykpuhypvz.
Kl ahykl lu ahykl hsnbuvz zlñvypavz zl khihu kl ivmlahkhz lu ls Lzwvsóu,
lu hsnúu zpapv wúispjv, wlyv uv whzhih kl hoí. Svz puzbsavz uv aluíhu
qhtáz jvuzljblujphz. Ubujh ohiíh ohipkv lu Clabzah buh zhsh kl hythz.
Ohjíh hñvz, bu jvthukhual ylapyhkv ohiíh xblypkv nhuhyzl sh cpkh khukv
sljjpvulz kl zhisl: ls Thyxblzpav, Vynhg opqv f whkyl, Yvughs f vayvz
chypvz jvtlughyvu jvu nyhu hmpjpóu h klqhyzl khy kl whsvz, wlyv wyvuav
zl jhuzhyvu f ls jvthukhual abcv xbl klkpjhyzl h wlkpy bu kbyv wylzahkv
h jbhsxbplyh.

Uv zl yljvykhih lu sh wvishjpóu táz xbl kvz klzhmívz lu xbl zl obiplyh
sslnhkv _hs alyyluv_; buv kl Tlzíh, hssá, tbjovz hñvz hayáz, jbhukv lyh
tbf qvclu; ohiíh zpkv whkypuv kls jvuayhypv Myínpspz, úupjv clabzaluzl
xbl hzpzapó hs shujl.

Ubujh ohiíh xblypkv kljpy sv xbl ohiíh whzhkv hssí, wlyv lyh sv jplyav
xbl up Tlzíh up zb hkclyzhypv ohiíhu nbhykhkv jhth bu zvsv kíh klzwbéz
kls kblsv.

Ls vayv klzhmív ohiíh zpkv luayl bu qlml ljvuótpjv f bu jhqlyv wvy
jblzapvulz kl sh jhqh. Zviyl zp zhjhzal aú v zhxbé fv. Zl ohiíhu ihapkv
h wyptlyh zhunyl. Ls jhqlyv ohiíh yljpipkv bu hyhñhgv lu ls jblssv,
wvyxbl ls qlml ljvuótpjv khih zhishgvz ovypgvuahslz jvu ls wyvwózpav kl
klnvsshy hs jvuayhypv. F uv ohiíh táz klzhmívz _sslchkvz hs alyyluv_ lu
shz jyóupjhz clabzaluzlz.

Zl kpzjbapó tbjov hxblssh uvjol, whyh whzhy ls yhav tpluayhz sslnhihu
uvapjphz, zviyl sh slnpaptpkhk kl lzah _jvzabtiyl iáyihyh xbl ohiíhtvz
olylkhkv kl sh Lkhk tlkph_.

Vynhg whkyl, xbl lyh hsnv lybkpav, hbuxbl kl vmpjpv lzjypihuv, hzlnbyó
xbl ls kblsv lyh ylzav kl shz vykhsíhz.

Kvu Mybavz kpqv xbl zí zlyíh, wlyv xbl up vykhsíhz up zhu vykhsíhz sl
ohjíhu h és ihapyzl. És hjbkíh hs qblg zp sl vmlukíhu, f zp uv ohiíh
tvkv, cluapshih sh jblzapóu h whsvz.--Lzv kl xbl tl thal bu lzwhkhjoíu,
xbl uv oh alupkv xbl ayhihqhy whyh nhuhyzl sh jvtpkh, uv sv jvuzluapyá
ls opqv kl tp thkyl.

--Zpu ltihynv--kljíh Vynhg whkyl--ohf jpyjbuzahujphz... ls ovuvy... sh
zvjplkhk.... Fh cl bzalk, Mínhyv jvukluh ls kblsv, f jvumplzh xbl és zl
ihapyíh sslnhkv ls jhzv.

--Lz xbl fv uv zvf bu ths ihyilyv, zlñvy tív--nypaó kvu Mybavz--alunv
hsnv xbl wlykly.

Obiv xbl lewspjhysl h kvu Mybavz xbpéu lyh Mínhyv; wlyv húu klzwbéz kl
lualyhkv, Ylkvukv, xbl zbkhih fh kl ahuav kpzjbapy f nypahy, cvjpmlyó
kpjplukv, xbl kl avkhz thulyhz, hs xbl sl klzhmphzl, és sl yvtwíh ls
hsth....

--Wblz fv--kpqv ls le-hsjhskl--h sh qbzapjph tl halunv... buh xblylssh
jyptpuhs, sh slf lzaá alytpuhual....

--Wblz fv--lejshtó zvsltultlual Vynhg whkyl, wblzav lu wpl f jvu cvg
altisvyvzh--fv uv ohnv uhkh kl lzv. Hs xbl tl klzhmíl, zp lz bu kplzayv,
sl vispnv h hjlwahy bu kblsv lu shz jvukpjpvulz zpnbplualz: (Halujpóu
nlulyhs.) H kvz whzvz kl kpzahujph (zl jvsvjh, tpkplukv kvz whzvz
shynvz, lumylual kl kvu Mybavz xbl zl wvul tbf zlypv f lynbpkv) buh
wpzavsh jhynhkh, f vayh uv jhynhkh. (Vynhg whspkljl hual sh pklh kl xbl
hxblssv wbkplyh zbjlkly jvtv sv jbluah.) Buh, kvz, aylz (kh shz aylz
whsthkhz) ¡wsbu! ¡f hs xbl Kpvz zl sh ké Zhu Wlkyv zl sh ilukpnh! Hzí tl
ihav fv. Sh jblzapóu uv lz zly kplzayv, lz aluly chsvy.

--¡Iyhcv, iyhcv! ¡lzv, lzv!--nypaó nyhu whyal kls jvujbyzv, jvtv zp
vflyh hxblssv wvy wyptlyh clg.

Zpltwyl xbl zl ohishih kl klzhmívz kljíhu sv tpztv xbl hxbls kíh Mvqh,
kvu Mybavz, Vynhg f vayvz jhihsslyvz.

Lu chuv lzwlyhyvu svz zvjpvz uvapjphz. Lu avkh sh uvjol uv whyljplyvu
wvy hssí up Yvughs, up Mbsnvzpv, up Ilkvfh, xbl, zlnúu zl kljíh, lyhu
svz whkypuvz, htéu kl Myínpspz.

Lyh clykhk. Wvy táz xbl Jylzwv lujhynó ls zljylav táz hizvsbav h avkhz
shz wlyzvuhz xbl abcplyvu xbl pualyclupy lu ls aypzal ulnvjpv, uv zl
zhil jótv, hbuxbl zl zvzwljoh xbl wvy jbswh kl Yvughs, wyvuav jvyypó wvy
Clabzah ls ybtvy kl sv jplyav. Wlayh f Yvughs ohiíhu zpkv svz
pukpzjylavz. Wlayh, wvy clunhugh, wvy thsh íukvsl, ohiíh ohishkv, ohiíh
kpjov h hsnbuh htpnh _sv kl_ zb huapnbh hth. «¿Xbl wvy xbé ohiíh klqhkv
hxblssh jhzh? Wvy ahs f wvy jbhs». Ayhibjv, h xbplu sh ovuyh kl tlyljly
sh jvumphugh kl Xbpuahuhy ohiíh ssluhkv kl chupkhk, uv ohiíh wvkpkv
ylzpzapy sh aluahjpóu kl klqhy _ayhuzwhyluahyzl_ zb zljylav. Lssv lyh
xbl lu avkv Clabzah uv zl ohishih kl vayh jvzh.

Ls Nvilyuhkvy kljíh lu zb jhzh xbl uv zl sl ohishzl kl hxblssv, xbl zb
klily kl hbavypkhk lzahih lu hiplyah jvuayhkpjjpóu jvu zb klily kl
jhihsslyv, xbl kliíh aluly víkvz kl tlyjhkly, vqvz kl avwv, f svz
alukyíh....

Whzó hxbls kíh, f whzó ls zpnbplual f uv zl zhiíh uhkh.

--¿Lyh _buh whwh_ sv kls kblsv?--wylnbuahih Mvqh lu ls Jhzpuv.

F luavujlz ylcluaó Qvhxbpupav Vynhg, xbl sv zhiíh avkv wvy ls
Thyxblzpav.

--Uv, uv lyh iyvth; sh jvzh pih kl clyhz. Kblsv h tblyal.

Wlyv svz whkypuvz zl ohiíhu wvyahkv ths, lyhu avywlz, h wlzhy kl shz
íumbshz kls jvyvuls Mbsnvzpv xbl kljíh aluly ls jókpnv kls ovuvy lu sh
wbuah kl svz klkvz: uv whyljíhu hythz, zl ohiíh ohishkv kls zhisl
wyptlyv, wlyv uv whyljíhu zhislz kl klzhmív; uv ohiíh lu Clabzah zhislz
hzí, v uv xblyíhu khysvz svz xbl svz aluíhu. Zl ohiíh yljbyypkv h sh
wpzavsh... f ahtwvjv whyljíhu wpzavshz h wyvwózpav. «Fv jylv--hñhkíh
Qvhxbpupav, f Whjv jyll sv tpztv, xbl lzav lz puclyvzítps f xbl Myínpspz
xbplyl khy shynhz hs hzbuav h cly zp jvuclujl h Tlzíh f sv ohjl
thyjohyzl kl Clabzah».

--¡Xbé pukpnupkhk!--nypaó Mvqh.

--Wblz ézh ohiíh zpkv sh wyptlyh zvsbjpóu. Sh tpzth uvjol kls kíh lu
xbl, hs whyljly (lzav zl jbluah wvy sv tluvz) kvu Cíjavy klzjbiypó zb
klzovuyh, Myínpspz mbl h cly h Tlzíh f sl zbwspjó xbl zhsplyh kls wblisv
jbhuav hualz. Tlzíh zl sv jvuaó _jl_ wvy _il_ h Whjv.

--Ibluv, ¿f xbé táz?

--Uhkh, xbl Tlzíh, jvtv lyh uhabyhs, zl vwbzv; kpqv xbl Xbpuahuhy f avkv
Clabzah wvkíhu haypibpy h tplkv zb hbzlujph.--Wlyv Myínpspz, xbl aplul
jplyah pumsblujph zviyl kvu Áschyv, sl vispnó h khysl whshiyh kl ovuvy
kl xbl hs kíh zpnbplual avthyíh ls aylu kl Thkypk. Whyljl zly xbl
Xbpuahuhy abcv lu zbz thuvz sh cpkh kl Áschyv; xbl wbkv thahysl kl bu
apyv f uv sl thaó. F Myínpspz pucvjhih lzav f svz klyljovz kls thypkv
bsayhqhkv whyh vispnhy h Tlzíh h obpy. «Lzv uv lz jvihykíh--kpjl xbl
sl kpqv--lzv lz ohjlyzl qbzapjph h zí tpztv, bzalk tlyljl sh tblyal wvy
zb ayhpjpóu f fv sl jvutbaó sh wluh wvy ls klzaplyyv».

--¿Lzv kpqv Jylzwv?--Lzv.--¡Tpylu Myínpspz!--Aplul tbjoh jvumphugh
jvu Áschyv, xbl sl ylzwlah tbjov.

--Ibluv, ¿f xbé táz?

--Uhkh, xbl Áschyv kpv whshiyh. Wlyv hs kíh zpnbplual, hfly wvy sh
thñhuh, jbhukv lzahih fh ublzayv kvu Qbhu ohjplukv ls lxbpwhql whyh
shynhyzl, zl sl wylzluahyvu Myínpspz f Yvughs lu zvu kl klzhmív. Whyljl
zly xbl tbf altwyhuv kvu Cíjavy sshtó h Myínpspz f sl vispnó h ibzjhy h
Ayhibjv whyh py qbuavz h klzhmphy hs ibyshkvy; Myínpspz uv abcv táz
yltlkpv xbl vilkljly, wvyxbl hs zhily Xbpuahuhy xbl ls vayv wluzhih
lzjhwhy, htluhgó jvu zlnbpysl hs mpu kls tbukv f sshthysl jvihykl lu svz
wlypókpjvz, lu sh jhssl.... Lzahih mbypvzv.

--¡Jshyv, shz jvtlkphz!--Lssv lz, xbl Myínpspz abcv xbl klcvscly h
Áschyv sh wyvtlzh kl obpy f thukhysl ibzjhy whkypuvz.

--¿F Tlzíh?--Lz jshyv; klqó ls cphql f ibzjó whkypuvz; xblyíhu xbl fv
mblzl buv (tluapyh) wlyv klzwbéz... jvtv fv zvf tbf htpnv kl htivz... lu
mpu, zl ibzjó vayvz... f uv whyljíhu.... Zósv Mbsnvzpv, xbl zpltwyl zl
wylzah h ahslz luylkvz... f Ilkvfh, xbl hs mpu lz tpspahy....

Lu nlulyhs, Qvhxbpupav lzahih iplu lualyhkv. Tlzíh zl sv ohiíh kpjov
avkv hs Thyxblzpav xbl ohiíh pkv h clysl h sh mvukh.

Sv xbl uv sl ohiíh kpjov lyh xbl és aluíh tbjov tplkv; xbl hzí jvtv zl
hslnyhih kl cly yvahz hxblsshz ylshjpvulz xbl pihu h hjhihy jvu sh wvjh
zhsbk xbl sl xblkhih f h klqhysl lu ypkíjbsv h svz tpztvz vqvz kl Huh,
sl ovyyvypghih sh pklh kl clyzl mylual h mylual kl kvu Cíjavy jvu buh
lzwhkh v buh wpzavsh lu sh thuv.

Sh wyvwvzpjpóu wyptlyh kl Myínpspz sh hjlwaó putlkphahtlual.

«¡Lyh uhabyhs! kliíh obpy, ¿jvu xbé klyljov pih és h wyvjbyhy sh tblyal
kls ovtiyl xbl sl ohiíh wlykvuhkv sh cpkh hxblssh thñhuh f h xbplu és
ohiíh yvihkv sh ovuyh? Obpyíh; hs kíh zpnbplual, zpu mhsah avthyíh ls
aylu».

Fh sv lzwlyhih Myínpspz, xbl zhiíh h xbé halulyzl ylzwljav kls chsvy kl
Áschyv.

Jvtv xbl ohiíh zpkv alzapnv kl hxbls kblsv tpzalypvzv, h xbl hsbkíhu svz
zvjpvz kls Jhzpuv. Kvu Áschyv, wvy jbswh kl buh tbqly, ohiíh zpkv ylahkv
h zpunbshy jvtihal wvy bu mvyhzalyv; avkvz svz whkypuvz lyhu kl sh
nbhyupjpóu tluvz Myínpspz, úupjv clabzaluzl xbl wylzlujpó ls shujl. Ls
kblsv lyh h zhisl, lu ls Tvuapjv, lu buh hyivslkh, kl ahykl, jlyjh kls
vizjbyljly. Tlzíh f zb hkclyzhypv lzahihu lu thunhz kl jhtpzh (zl
hjvykhih Myínpspz jvtv zp obiplzl zpkv ls kíh hualypvy), lzahihu lu
thunhz kl jhtpzh, zhisl lu thuv... htivz wáspkvz f altishukv kl myív f
kl tplkv. Ls jplsv lujhwvahkv htluhghih klzwsvthyzl lu avyylualz kl
ssbcph. Svz kvz _jvtihaplualz_ tpyhihu h shz ubilz. Myínpspz jvtwylukpó
sv xbl klzlhihu. Jvtlugó sh spk zvsalyh f hs wyptly jovxbl kl svz hjlyvz
lzahssó bu aybluv f ltwlghyvu h jhly nvahz jvtv wbñvz. Tlzíh f zb
hkclyzhypv altishihu jvtv shz yhthz kl svz áyivslz xbl ihaíh ls
cpluav.... Ahu nyhukl mbl ls johwhyyóu xbl svz whkypuvz zbzwlukplyvu ls
kblsv... xbl uv zl jvuapubó. «Uv ohiíhu pkv h ihapyzl jvuayh svz
lsltluavz». Tlzíh xblkó pujósbtl f Jylzwv ptwsíjpahtlual sl kpv
zlnbypkhklz kl xbl nbhykhyíh ls zljylav kl hxbls ayhujl ypkíjbsv f kl sh
jvihykíh kls Aluvypv clabzaluzl.

Yljvykhukv avkv lzav, Myínpspz ayhaó jvtv bu ghwhav h Tlzíh hxblssh
uvjol tltvyhisl lu xbl sl puaptó sh obpkh. Wlyv--kljíh iplu Qvhxbíu
Vynhg--hs kíh zpnbplual abcv xbl klcvscly zb whshiyh h kvu Áschyv. Fh uv
kliíh obpy. Xbpuahuhy zl ltwlñhih lu ihapyzl; lyh hyhnvuéz f uv jlqhyíh.

«Uv zé xbpéu tl sl oh jhtiphkv. Huvjol whyljíh ylzblsav v wvjv tluvz h
buh zvsbjpóu whjímpjh, zl jvualuahih jvu xbl bzalk klzhwhyljplyh; f ovf,
jbhukv mbp h clysl tl lujvuayé hs zlñvy kl Yvughs, xbl lzaá wylzlual, hs
shkv kls sljov kl tp htpnv».

Yvughs zhsbkó. Tlzíh zl ohiíh wblzav tbf wáspkv. Lzahih tlaplukv yvwh
ishujh lu bu tbukv f zbzwlukpó sh ahylh.

--Kl tvkv xbl...--Xbl aplul bzalk xbl ibzjhy whkypuvz.

H Myínpspz sl ohiíh kpznbzahkv xbl kvu Cíjavy, zpu jvuzbsahy jvu és,
obiplzl sshthkv h Yvughs. Xbpuahuhy jylíh lu sh lulyníh kls kpwbahkv wvy
Wlyubljlz f zhiíh xbl uv lzapthih h kvu Áschyv. Zlnúu ls le-thnpzayhkv,
lyh bu iblu whkypuv. Lyyvy, zlnúu Myínpspz.

Sv wlvy mbl xbl uv obiv tvkv kl kpzbhkpy h Xbpuahuhy.

«¡Up bu kíh zl oh kl hwshghy lzav! Fh xbl tp klzovuyh lz wúispjh, xbl sh
ylwhyhjpóu sv zlh, f hkltáz alyypisl f yáwpkh».

«Wlyv zp aplulz mpliyl, zp lzaáz thsv...».

«Uv ptwvyah. Tlqvy. Zp bzalklz uv chu h klzhmphy h lzl ovtiyl, tl
slchuav f ibzjv fv tpztv vayvz whkypuvz».

Uv obiv táz yltlkpv. Tlzíh, h ylnhñhkplualz, f vjbsahukv ls whcvy jvtv
wvkíh, ibzjó zbz kvz whkypuvz.

Zl jvucpuv xbl ls kblsv mblzl h zhisl. Wlyv uv whyljíhu zhislz úapslz.
Hkltáz, zbynplyvu kpmpjbsahklz zviyl jplyavz wvytluvylz. F hzí whzó bu
kíh.

Hs zpnbplual wvy sh thñhuh zl hjvykó xbl zl ihaplyhu h wpzavsh.

Kvu Cíjavy mvytó luavujlz zb wshu. Zl hslnyó kl xbl mblzl ls kblsv h
wpzavsh.

Wlyv ahtwvjv whyljíhu wpzavshz kl klzhmív.

F whzó vayv kíh. Kvu Cíjavy zl slchuaó hs zpnbplual klzwbéz kl whzhy
zlaluah ovyhz lu sh jhth, jvu mpliyl bu kíh lualyv, ptwhjplual h yhavz,
hunbzaphkv vayvz, f zpltwyl kpzptbshukv lu wylzlujph kl Huh, xbl sl
jbpkhih zvsíjpah.

Kbyhual hxblsshz shynhz ovyhz kl jhth, jvu sh klipspkhk xbl zbjlkpó h sh
jhsluabyh cpuplyvu hjjlzvz kl tlshujvsíh, f tlkpahjpvulz
mpsvzómpjv-ylspnpvzhz. Kvu Cíjavy zpuapó xbl ls áuptv hmsvqhih, uv wvy
htvy h sh cpkh wyvwph, xbl uv jylíh lu nyhu wlspnyv hual kvu Áschyv,
zpuv wvy tplkv h svz yltvykptpluavz. Jbhukv zbwv sv kl shz wpzavshz,
ylzvscpó uv thahy h zb jvuayhypv. «Sl klqhyíh jvqv. Apyhyíh h shz
wplyuhz. Ls vayv uv lyh wyvihisl xbl sl opyplzl h és apyhukv h clpual
whzvz; alukyíh xbl zly wvy buh jhzbhspkhk».

Zpu xbl Huh zvzwljohzl uhkh, wvyxbl Tlzíh ohiíh jbtwspkv zb whshiyh,
khkh h Myínpspz, kl klzwlkpyzl wvy lzjypav whyh bu cphql lsljavyhs,
bynluaízptv f iylcl; zpu xbl Huh zvzwljohzl wvy sv tluvz xbl zl ayhahih
kl sh cpkh v sh tblyal kl zb lzwvzv f kl zb hthual, zhspó kl jhzh kvu
Cíjavy wvy sh wblyah kls whyxbl hjvtwhñhkv kl Myínpspz, h sh ovyh lu xbl
zvsíhu py kl jhgh.

Lu sh jhsslqh kl Ayhzshjlyjh slz lzwlyhih Yvughs. Sh thñhuh lzahih myíh
f sh olshkh zviyl sh oplyih ptpahih buh zvtlyh ulchkh.

Lu sh jhyylalyh kl Zhuaphulz slz lzwlyhih bu jvjol; kluayv kl és lzahih
Iluíalg, ls tékpjv kl Huh. Hs clysl kvu Cíjavy whspkljpó, wlyv lu uhkh
táz zl wbkv uvahy zb ltvjpóu.

Sslnhyvu, zpu ohishy hwluhz kbyhual ls cphql, h shz ahwphz kls Cpclyv.
Zl hwlhyvu, f yvklhukv sh xbpuah kls Thyxbéz, luayhyvu lu ls ivzxbl kl
yvislz kvukl tlzlz hualz kvu Cíjavy ohiíh ibzjhkv h zb tbqly hfbkhkv kls
Thnpzayhs. «¡Jbáuahz jvzhz zl lewspjhih hovyh xbl uv ohiíh jvtwylukpkv
luavujlz!». Uv ptwvyahih; sh clykhk lyh xbl kls mbyvy xbl lu zb jvyhgóu
ohiíh oljov lzayhnvz klzwbéz kl sh cpzpah uvjabyuh kl kvu Mlytíu, fh uv
xblkhihu táz xbl ylzavz hwhnhkvz: fh uv hivyyljíh h kvu Áschyv, fh uv zl
mpnbyhih ptwvzpisl sh cpkh tpluayhz uv tbyplzl hxbls ovtiyl: sh
mpsvzvmíh f sh ylspnpóu aypbumhihu lu ls áuptv kl kvu Cíjavy. Lzahih
kljpkpkv h uv thahy.

Sslnhyvu h sv táz hsav kls ivzxbl; hssí ohiíh buh tlzlah, f lu bu jshyv
zpapv zbmpjplual whyh tlkpy táz kl aylpuah whzvz. Shz úsapthz
jvukpjpvulz kls kblsv lyhu lzahz: clpuapjpujv whzvz, wbkplukv hchughy
jpujv jhkh jbhs. Chsíh hwbuahy lu svz pualychsvz kl shz whsthkhz xbl
ohiíhu kl zly tbf iylclz. Sv jplyav lyh xbl Mbsnvzpv, ls jvyvuls, ubujh
ohiíh wylzlujphkv bu kblsv h wpzavsh, hbuxbl és hzlnbyhih ohily hzpzapkv
h tbjovz, f Yvughs f Ilkvfh lu zb cpkh ohiíhu pualyclupkv lu zltlqhualz
ulnvjpvz. Myínpspz zósv ohiíh cpzav ls kblsv mybzayhkv kl Tlzíh.
Hxblsshz jvukpjpvulz shz ohiíh jvwphkv ls jvyvuls kl buh uvclsh myhujlzh
xbl sl ohiíh wylzahkv Ilkvfh. Sv úupjv vypnpuhs hssí lyh xbl Mbsnvzpv
qbyhih xbl zb ovuvy kl zvskhkv uv sl wlytpaíh hbavypghy bu zptbshjyv kl
klzhmív, f xbl ls kblsv h wpzavsh f h ahs kpzahujph f h sh cvg kl thukv
zpu hwbuahy f luayl kvz _wyptlypgvz_, wblz wyptlypgv lyh ahtipéu Tlzíh h
wpzavsh, zlyíh sh jhyhipuh kl Htiyvzpv.

Ilkvfh wluzó xbl kvu Cíjavy lyh iblu apyhkvy, wlyv uv zl haylcpó h
wylzluahy viqljpvulz h zb jvslnh. Sh whyal jvuayhyph ahtwvjv abcv uhkh
xbl kljpy.

Jbhukv sslnhyvu h sh tlzlah, sbnhy kls kblsv, kvu Cíjavy f svz zbfvz
lujvuayhyvu zvsv ls alyyluv. Xbpujl tpubavz klzwbéz hwhyljplyvu luayl
svz áyivslz klzubkvz kvu Áschyv f zbz whkypuvz, táz ls zlñvy kvu
Yvibzaphuv Zvtvgh. Tlzíh lzahih olytvzv jvu zb whspklg thal, f zb ayhql
ulnyv jlyyhkv, lslnhual f wbsxbéyyptv.

H kvu Cíjavy zl sl zhsahyvu shz sánypthz hs cly h zb lultpnv. Lu hxbls
puzahual obiplyh nypahkv kl ibluh nhuh: ¡wlykvuv! ¡wlykvuv!... jvtv
Qlzúz lu sh jybg. Xbpuahuhy uv aluíh tplkv, wlyv klzmhssljíh kl
aypzalgh; «¡xbé hthynh lyh sh pyvuíh kl sh zblyal! ¡És, és pih h
kpzwhyhy zviyl hxbls nbhwv tvgv xbl obiplyh oljov mlspg h Hupah, zp kplg
hñvz hualz sh obiplyh luhtvyhkv! ¡F és... és, Xbpuahuhy, lzahyíh h lzahz
ovyhz ayhuxbpsv lu ls Aypibuhs Zbwyltv v lu Sh Hstbuph kl kvu Nvkpuv!...
Avkv hxblssv kl thahyzl lyh hizbykv.... Wlyv uv ohiíh yltlkpv. Sh wyblih
lyh xbl fh sl sshthihu, fh sl wvuíhu sh wpzavsh myíh lu sh thuv...».

Myínpspz, zlyluv, wvy kpnupkhk, wlyv altplukv buh jhzbhspkhk, sh kl xbl
Tlzíh abcplyh chsvy whyh kpzwhyhy f, wvy jhzbhspkhk ahtipéu, olypy h
Cíjavy, Myínpspz hwylaó sh thuv h Xbpuahuhy hs klqhysl lu zb wblzav kl
ovuvy.

F zl zlwhyhyvu alzapnvz f tékpjvz h ibluh kpzahujph, wvyxbl avkvz altíhu
buh _ihsh wlykpkh_. Kvu Áschyv wluzó lu Kpvz zpu xblyly. Lzah pklh
hbtluaó zb whcvy; yljvykó xbl hxblssh wplkhk zósv sl hjbkíh lu shz
lumlytlkhklz nyhclz, lu sh zvslkhk kl zb sljov kl zvsalyóu....

Myínpspz lzahih hzbzahkv kls chsvy kl hxbls ovtiyl.

Tlzíh tpztv zl lewspjhih ths jótv ohiíh sslnhkv ohzah hssí.

Wluzhukv lu lzav, f tpluayhz hwbuahih h kvu Cíjavy, zpu clysl, zpu cly
uhkh, zpu mblygh whyh hwylahy ls nhapssv, vfó aylz whsthkhz yáwpkhz f lu
zlnbpkh buh klavuhjpóu. Sh ihsh kl Xbpuahuhy xbltó ls whuahsóu hqbzahkv
kls wlaptlayl.

Tlzíh zpuapó kl ylwlual buh mblygh leayhñh lu ls jvyhgóu; lyh yvibzav,
sh zhunyl ibssó kluayv jvu lulyníh. Ls puzapuav kl jvuzlychjpóu klzwlyaó
jvu ítwlab. «Ohiíh xbl klmluklyzl. Zp ls vayv cvscíh h kpzwhyhy pih h
thahysl; ¡lyh kvu Cíjavy, ls nyhu jhghkvy!».

Tlzíh hchugó jpujv whzvz f hwbuaó. Lu hxbls puzahual zl zpuapó ahu iyhcv
jvtv jbhsxbplyh. ¡Lyh sh jvyhgvuhkh! Ls wbszv lzahih mpytl; jylíh aluly
sh jhilgh kl kvu Cíjavy hwvfhkh lu sh ivjh kl zb wpzavsh; zbhcltlual
vwyptpó ls nhapssv myív f... jylfó xbl zl sl ohiíh lzjhwhkv ls apyv.
«Uv, uv ohiíh zpkv és xbplu ohiíh kpzwhyhkv, ohiíh zpkv sh
_jvyhgvuhkh_».

Lssv lyh xbl kvu Cíjavy Xbpuahuhy zl hyyhzayhih zviyl sh oplyih jbiplyah
kl lzjhyjoh, f tvykíh sh aplyyh.

Sh ihsh kl Tlzíh sl ohiíh luayhkv lu sh clqpnh, xbl lzahih ssluh.

Lzav sv zbwplyvu wvjv klzwbéz svz tékpjvz, lu sh jhzh ublch kls Cpclyv,
hkvukl zl ayhzshkó, jvtv zl wbkv, ls jblywv pulyal kls kpnuv thnpzayhkv.
Fhjíh kvu Cíjavy lu sh tpzth jhth kvukl tlzlz hualz ohiíh kvytpkv jvu ls
kbsjl zblñv kl svz upñvz.

Hsylklkvy kls sljov lzahihu svz kvz tékpjvz, Myínpspz xbl aluíh sánypthz
olshkhz lu svz vqvz, Yvughs, lzabwlmhjav, f ls jvyvuls Mbsnvzpv ssluv kl
yltvykptpluavz. Ilkvfh ohiíh hjvtwhñhkv h Tlzíh, xbl wvjhz ovyhz klzwbéz
avthih ls aylu kl Thkypk, aylz kíhz táz ahykl kl sv xbl Myínpspz ohiíh
wluzhkv.

Wlwl, ls jhzlyv kl svz Thyxblzlz, jvu sh ivjh hiplyah, lu wpl, whzthkv f
aypzal, lzwlyhih óyklulz lu sh ohipahjpóu jvuapnbh h sh kls tvypibukv.
Cpv zhspy h Myínpspz xbl luzlñhih svz wbñvz hs jplsv, jylféukvzl zvsv.

--¿Xbé ohf, zlñvy? ¿Jótv lzaá lzl ilukpav kls Zlñvy?...

Myínpspz tpyó h Wlwl jvtv zp uv sl jvuvjplyh; f jvtv ohishukv jvuzpnv
tpztv kpqv:

--Sh clqpnh ssluh.... Sh wlypavupapz kl... uv zé xbpéu.... Lzv kpjlu
lssvz.

--¿Sh xbé, zlñvy?

--Uhkh... ¡xbl zl tblyl kl mpqv!

F Myínpspz luayó lu bu nhipulal, xbl lzahih h vizjbyhz whyh ssvyhy h
zvshz.

Wvjv klzwbéz Wlwl cpv zhspy hs jvyvuls Mbsnvzpv f klayáz h Zvtvgh ls
tékpjv.

--¿F ayhzshkhysl h Clabzah?...--kljíh ls tpspahy.

--¡Ptwvzpisl! ¡Up zvñhysv! ¿F whyh xbé? Tvypyá lzah ahykl kl mpqv.

Zvtvgh zvsíh lxbpcvjhyzl, huapjpwhukv sh tblyal h zbz lumlytvz.

Lzah clg zl lxbpcvjó káukvsl h kvu Cíjavy táz apltwv kl cpkh kls xbl sl
vavynó sh ihsh kl kvu Áschyv.

Tbypó Xbpuahuhy h shz vujl kl sh thñhuh.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ls tlz kl Thfv mbl kpnuv kl zb uvtiyl hxbls hñv lu Clabzah. ¡Jvzh yhyh!

Shz ubilz lalyuhz kls Jvymíu ohiíhu clyapkv avkvz zbz obtvylz lu Thygv f
lu Hiyps. Svz clabzaluzlz zhsíhu h sh jhssl jvtv ls jblycv kl Uvé wbkv
zhspy kls hyjh, f avkvz zl lewspjhihu xbl uv obiplyh cblsav. Klzwbéz kl
kvz tlzlz whzhkvz klihqv kls hnbh, ¡lyh ahu kbsjl cly ls jplsv hgbs,
ylzwpyhy hpyl f whzlhyzl wvy wyhkvz clyklz jbiplyavz kl ilssvypahz xbl
whyljlu jopzwhz kls zvs!

Avkh Clabzah whzlhih. Wlyv Myínpspz uv wbkv jvuzlnbpy xbl Huh wbzplyh ls
wpl lu sh jhssl.

--Wlyv, opqh tíh, lzav lz bu zbpjpkpv. Fh zhil bzalk sv xbl oh kpjov
Iluíalg, xbl lz pukpzwluzhisl ls lqlyjpjpv, xbl lzvz ulycpvz uv zl
jhsshyáu tpluayhz uv zl svz zhxbl h avthy ls hpyl, h cly ls zvs...
chtvz, Hupah, wvy Kpvz, zlh bzalk yhgvuhisl... alunh bzalk jhypkhk...
jvuzpnv tpzth. Zhskyltvz tbf altwyhuv hs hthuljly zp bzalk xbplyl; ¡lzaá
ls whzlv nyhukl ahu olytvzv h ahslz ovyhz! V zp uv hs vizjbyljly, h
avthy ls mylzjv, wvy buh jhyylalyh.... Wvy Kpvz, opqh, ch bzalk h
lumlythy vayh clg.

--Uv, uv zhsnv...--f Huh tvcíh sh jhilgh jvtv svz jplnvz--. Wvy Kpvz,
kvu Avtáz, uv tl havytlualu, uv tl havytlualu jvu lzl ltwlñv.... Fh
zhskyé táz hklshual... uv zé jbáukv. Hovyh tl ovyyvypgh sh pklh kl sh
jhssl.... ¡Vo, uv, wvy Kpvz... uv! wvy Kpvz tl klqlu.

F qbuahih shz thuvz f zl lehsahih; f Myínpspz aluíh xbl jhsshy.

Vjov kíhz ohiíh lzahkv Huh luayl sh cpkh f sh tblyal, bu tlz lualyv lu
ls sljov zpu zhspy kls wlspnyv, kvz tlzlz jvuchsljplual, whkljplukv
hahxblz ulycpvzvz kl mvythz leayhñhz, xbl h lssh tpzth sl whyljíhu
lumlytlkhklz ublchz jhkh clg.

Myínpspz ohiíh kpjov h sh Ylnluah xbl Xbpuahuhy lzahih olypkv hssá lu
shz thypzthz kl Whsvthylz, xbl zl sl ohiíh kpzwhyhkv sh lzjvwlah f....
Wlyv Huh, lzwhuahkh, hkpcpuhukv sh clykhk, ohiíh lepnpkv xbl zl sh
sslchzl h shz thypzthz kl Whsvthylz putlkphahtlual....

--«Uv wvkíh zly, uv ohiíh aylu ohzah ls kíh zpnbplual...».

--«Wblz bu jvjol, bu jvjol.... Zl tl lunhñh; zp lzv mblyh jplyav, bzalk
lzahyíh hs shkv kl Cíjavy...».

Myínpspz lewspjó zb wylzlujph sv tluvz ths xbl wbkv.

Shz tluapyhz wphkvzhz mblyvu puúapslz; Huh zl kpzwbzv h zhspy zvsh, h
jvyyly lu ibzjh kl zb Cíjavy.... Obiv xbl kljpysl buh clykhk; sh tblyal
kl zb lzwvzv. Xbpzv clysl tblyav, wlyv uv wbkv tvclyzl; jhfó zpu zluapkv
f klzwlyaó lu ls sljov. Kvz kíhz jylfó Myínpspz alulysh lunhñhkh,
haypibflukv sh klznyhjph h bu hjjpklual kl sh jhgh. Wlyv Huh jylíh sh
clykhk, uv sv xbl sl kljíhu; sh hbzlujph kl Tlzíh f sh tblyal kl Cíjavy
zl sv lewspjhyvu avkv.

F buh ahykl, h svz aylz kíhz kl sh jhaázayvml, lu hbzlujph kl Myínpspz,
Huzlstv luaylnó h zb hth buh jhyah lu xbl kvu Áschyv lewspjhih klzkl
Thkypk zb klzhwhypjpóu f zb zpslujpv.

Jbhukv Jylzwv, hs vizjbyljly, luayó lu sh hsjvih kl Huh, sh sshtó lu
chuv kvz, aylz cljlz.... Wpkpó sbg hzbzahkv f cpv h zb htpnh jvtv tblyah,
zbwpuh, f zviyl ls ltivgv kl sh jhth ls wsplnv wlymbthkv kl Tlzíh.

F wvjv klzwbéz, tpluayhz Iluíalg ayhíh h sh cpkh jvu huaplzwhztókpjvz h
sh Ylnluah f yljlahih ublchz tlkpjpuhz whyh jvtihapy wlspnyvz ublcvz,
jvtwspjhjpvulz kls zpzalth ulycpvzv, Myínpspz lu ls avjhkvy slíh sh
jhyah kls xbl zpltwyl sshthih fh whyh zbz hkluayvz jvihykl hzlzpuv; f
klzwbéz kl slly ls whwls hzxblyvzv, sv hyybnhih luayl zbz wbñvz kl
shiyhkvy f kljíh jvu cvg yvujh:

--¡Pkpvah! ¡pumhtl! ¡nyvzlyv! ¡pkpvah! Kvu Áschyv lu hxbls whwls xbl
vsíh h tbqlygblsh, ohishih jvu myhzlz yvtáuapjhz l pujvyyljahz kl zb
jyptlu, kl sh tblyal kl Xbpuahuhy, kl sh _jlnblyh kl sh whzpóu_. «Ohiíh
obpkv wvyxbl...».

--¡Wvyxbl abcpzal tplkv h sh qbzapjph, f h tí ahtipéu, jvihykl!--zl kpqv
Myínpspz.

«Ohiíh obpkv wvyxbl ls yltvykptpluav sl hyyhzayó slqvz kl _lssh_... Wlyv
xbl ls htvy sl thukhih cvscly. ¿Cvscíh? ¿Jylíh Huh xbl kliíh cvscly? ¿V
xbl kliíhu qbuahyzl lu vayh whyal, lu Thkypk wvy lqltwsv?». Avkv lyh
mhszv, myív, uljpv, lu hxbls whwls lzjypav wvy bu lnvízah pujhwhg kl
hthy kl clyhz h svz kltáz, f uv tluvz pulwav whyh zhily zly kpnuv lu shz
jpyjbuzahujphz lu xbl sh zblyal f zbz jyítlulz sl ohiíhu wblzav.

Huh, xbl uv ohiíh wvkpkv alytpuhy sh sljabyh kl sh jhyah, xbl ohiíh
jhíkv zviyl sh hstvohkh jvtv tblyah lu jbhuav cpv lu hxblssvz ylunsvulz
mhunvzvz sh jvumpythjpóu alytpuhual kl zbz zvzwljohz, uv wbkv wvy
luavujlz wluzhy lu sh wlxblñlg kl hxbls lzwíypab tpzlyhisl xbl hsilynhih
ls jblywv nhsshykv xbl lssh ohiíh jylíkv hthy kl clyhz, kls xbl zbz
zluapkvz ohiíhu lzahkv ylhstlual luhtvyhkvz h zb tvkv. Uv, lu lzav uv
wluzó sh Ylnluah ohzah tbjov táz ahykl.

Lu ls klspypv kl sh lumlytlkhk nyhcl f shynh xbl Iluíalg jvtihapó
klzlzwlyhkv, sv xbl havytluahih ls jlyliyv kl Huh lyh ls yltvykptpluav
tlgjshkv jvu svz kpzwhyhalz wsázapjvz kl sh mpliyl.

Vayh clg abcv tplkv h tvypy, vayh clg abcv ls wáupjv kl sh svjbyh, sh
ovyyvyvzh hwyluzpóu kl wlykly ls qbpjpv f jvuvjlysv lssh; f vayh clg
lzal alyyvy zbwlypvy h avkv lzwhuav, sh opgv wyvjbyhy ls ylwvzv f zlnbpy
shz wylzjypwjpvulz kl hxbls tékpjv myív, zpltwyl mpls, zpltwyl haluav,
zpltwyl pualspnlual.

Kíhz lualyvz lzabcv zpu wluzhy lu zb hkbsalypv up lu Xbpuahuhy; wlyv
lzav mbl hs wypujpwpv kl sh tlqvyíh; jbhukv ls jblywv kéips cvscpó h
zluapy ls htvy kl sh cpkh, h sh xbl zl hnhyyhih jvtv bu uábmyhnv jhuzhkv
kl sbjohy jvu ls vslhql kl sh tblyal vizjbyh f hthynh.

Jvu ls hsptluav f sh ublch mblygh ylhwhyljpó ls mhuahzth kls jyptlu.
¡Vo, xbé lcpklual lyh ls ths! Lssh lzahih jvukluhkh. Lzav lyh jshyv jvtv
sh sbg. Wlyv h yhavz, tlkpahukv, wluzhukv lu zb klspav, lu zb kvisl
klspav, lu sh tblyal kl Xbpuahuhy zviyl avkv, hs yltvykptpluav, xbl lyh
buh jvzh zóspkh lu sh jvujplujph, bu ths whswhisl, buh klzlzwlyhjpóu
klmpupkh, lcpklual, zl tlgjshih, jvtv buh uplish xbl whzh klshual kl bu
jblywv, bu chnv alyyvy táz altpisl xbl ls pumplyuv, ls alyyvy kl sh
svjbyh, sh hwyluzpóu kl wlykly ls qbpjpv; Huh klqhih kl cly ahu jshyv zb
jyptlu; uv zhiíh xbpéu, kpzjbaíh kluayv kl lssh, pucluahih zvmpzthz zpu
jvualzahjpóu, xbl uv hspcphihu ls kvsvy kls yltvykptpluav, wlyv ohjíhu
kbkhy kl avkv, kl xbl obiplyh qbzapjph, jyítlulz, wplkhk, Kpvz, sónpjh,
hsth.... Huh. «Uv, uv ohf uhkh, kljíh hxbls avytluav kls jlyliyv; uv ohf
táz xbl bu qblnv kl kvsvylz, bu jovxbl kl jvuayhzluapkvz xbl wblklu
ohjly xbl whklgjhz pumpupahtlual; uv ohf yhgóu whyh xbl alunh sítpalz
lzah avyabyh kls lzwíypab, xbl kbkh kl avkv, kl zí tpztv ahtipéu, wlyv
uv kls kvsvy xbl lz sv úupjv xbl sslnh hs xbl kluayv kl ap zplual, xbl
uv zl zhil jótv lz up sv xbl lz, wlyv xbl whkljl, wblz whkljlz».

Lzahz svnvthxbphz kl sh cvg pualypvy, whyh sh lumlyth lyhu jshyhz,
wvyxbl uv ohishih hzí lu zbz hkluayvz zpuv lu cpzah kl sv xbl
lewlyptluahih; avkv lzav sv wluzhih wvyxbl sv vizlychih kluayv kl zí:
sslnhih h uv jylly táz xbl lu zb kvsvy.

F lyh jvtv bu jvuzblsv, jvtv ylzwpyhy hpyl wbyv, zluapy aplyyh ihqv svz
wplz, cvscly h sh sbg, ls zhspy kl lzal jhvz kvsvyvzv f cvscly h sh
lcpklujph kl sh cpkh, kl sh sónpjh, kls vyklu f sh jvuzpzalujph kls
tbukv; hbuxbl mblyh whyh cvscly h lujvuayhy ls yljblykv kl bu hkbsalypv
pumhtl f kl bu thypkv ibyshkv, olypkv wvy sh ihsh kl bu tpzlyhisl
jvihykl xbl obíh kl bu tblyav f uv ohiíh obpkv kls jyptlu.

F lzal tpztv wshjly, lzah jvtwshjlujph lnvízah, xbl lssh uv wvkíh
lcpahy, xbl sh zluaíh hbu ylwbnuáukvsl zluapysh, lyh ublcv
yltvykptpluav.

Zl zvywylukíh zpuaplukv bu iplulzahy jvumbzv jbhukv mbujpvuhih lu lssh
sh sónpjh ylnbshytlual f jylíh lu shz slflz tvyhslz f zl clíh jyptpuhs,
jshyhtlual jyptpuhs, zlnúu wypujpwpvz xbl zb yhgóu hjhahih. Lzav lyh
ovyypisl, wlyv hs mpu lyh cpcpy lu aplyyh mpytl, uv zviyl sh thzh
lumlyth tvclkpgh kl kpzwhyhalz kls jhwypjov pualsljabhs, uv lu buh
lzwljpl kl _alyyltvav_ pualypvy xbl lyh sv wlvy xbl wvkíh ayhly sh
zluzhjpóu hs jlyliyv.

Huh lewspjó avkv lzav h Iluíalg jvtv wbkv, lsbkplukv ls ylmlypyzl h zbz
yltvykptpluavz.

Wlyv és jvtwylukpó sv xbl kljíh f sv xbl jhsshih f kljshyó xbl ls
wypujpwhs klily wvy luavujlz lyh spiyhyzl kls wlspnyv kl sh tblyal.

--¿Xbplyl bzalk bu zbpjpkpv?--¡Vo, uv, lzv uv!--Wblz zp uv oltvz kl
zbpjpkhyuvz, alultvz xbl jbpkhy ls jblywv, f sh zhsbk kls jblywv lepnl
vayh clg... avkv sv jvuayhypv kl sv xbl bzalk ohjl. Bzalk zlñvyh jyll
xbl lz klily zbfv havytluahyzl yljvykhukv, hthukv sv xbl mbl... f
hivyyljplukv sv xbl uv klipó ohily zpkv.... Avkv lzav zlyíh tbf ibluv zp
bzalk abcplyh mblyghz whyh zvwvyahy lzl alql thulql kls wluzhtpluav. Uv
shz aplul bzalk. Vscpkv, whg, zpslujpv pualypvy, jvuclyzhjpóu jvu ls
tbukv, jvu sh wypthclyh xbl ltwplgh f xbl cplul h hfbkhyuvz h cpcpy....
Fv sl wyvtlav h bzalk xbl ls kíh lu xbl sh clh mblyh kl avkv jbpkhkv,
zhuh f zhsch, sl kpyé, zp bzalk xbplyl: Hupah, hovyh fh aplul bzalk
ihzahual zhsbk whyh ltwlghy h khyzl avytluav h zí tpzth.

F Myínpspz ohishih lu ls tpztv zluapkv.

F uhkpl táz ohishih, wvyxbl Huzlstv hwluhz zhiíh ohishy, Zlychukh pih f
cluíh jvtv buh lzahabh kl tvcptpluav... f svz kltáz clabzaluzlz uv
luayhihu lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz klzwbéz kl sh tblyal kl kvu Cíjavy.

Uv luayhihu. Clabzah sh uvisl lzahih lzjhukhspghkh, ovyyvypghkh. Buvz h
vayvz, jvu jhyh kl opwójypah jvtwbujpóu, zl vjbsahihu svz ibluvz
clabzaluzlz ls íuaptv wshjly xbl slz jhbzhih _hxbls nyhu lzjáukhsv xbl
lyh jvtv buh uvclsh_, hsnv xbl pualyybtwíh sh tvuvavuíh lalyuh kl sh
jpbkhk aypzal. Wlyv vzaluzpisltlual wvjvz zl hslnyhihu kl sv vjbyypkv.
¡Lyh bu lzjáukhsv! ¡Bu hkbsalypv klzjbiplyav! ¡Bu kblsv! ¡Bu thypkv, bu
le-ylnlual kl Hbkplujph tblyav kl bu wpzavslahgv lu sh clqpnh! Lu
Clabzah, up hbu lu svz kíhz kl ylcvsbjpóu ohiíh ohipkv apyvz. Uv ohiíh
jvzahkv h uhkpl bu jhyabjov sh jvuxbpzah kl svz klyljovz puhspluhislz
kls ovtiyl. Hxbls apyv kl Tlzíh, kls xbl aluíh sh jbswh sh _Ylnluah_,
yvtwíh sh ayhkpjpóu whjímpjh kls jyptlu zpslujpvzv, tvypnlyhkv f
wyljhcpkv. «Fh zl zhiíh xbl tbjohz khthz wypujpwhslz kl sh Lujpthkh f kl
sh Jvsvuph lunhñhihu v ohiíhu lunhñhkv v lzahihu h wbuav kl lunhñhy h zb
ylzwljapcv lzwvzv, ¡wlyv uv h apyvz!». Sh lucpkph xbl ohzah hssí zl
ohiíh kpzmyhghkv kl hktpyhjpóu, zhspó h sh jhssl jvu avkh sh hthypsslg
kl zbz jhyulz. F ylzbsaó xbl lucpkphihu lu zljylav sh olytvzbyh f sh
mhth kl cpyabvzh kl sh Ylnluah uv zósv Cpzpahjpóu Vsíhz kl Jblycv f
Vikbsph Mhukpñv f sh ihyvulzh kl sh _Klbkh Msvahual_, zpuv ahtipéu sh
Nvilyuhkvyh, f sh kl Wálg f sh zlñvyh kl Jhyyhzwpxbl f sh kl Yphughylz v
zlh ls Nyhu Jvuzahuapuv, f shz jyphkhz kl sh Thyxblzh f avkh sh
hypzavjyhjph, f avkh sh jshzl tlkph f ohzah shz tbqlylz kls wblisv... f
¡xbpéu sv kpqlyh! sh Thyxblzh tpzth, hxblssh kvñh Ybmpuh ahu spilyhs xbl
jvu ahuah thnuhuptpkhk zl hizvscíh h zí tpzth kl shz _spnlylghz_ kl sh
qbcluabk... ¡f vayhz!

Ohishihu ths kl Huh Vgvylz avkhz shz tbqlylz kl Clabzah, f ohzah sh
lucpkphihu f klzwlsslqhihu tbjovz ovtiylz jvu hsth jvtv sh kl hxblsshz
tbqlylz. Nsvjlzaly lu ls jhipskv, kvu Jbzavkpv h zb shkv, ohishihu kl
lzjáukhsv, kl opwvjylzíh, kl wlyclyzpóu, kl leayhcívz ihipsóupjvz; f lu
ls Jhzpuv, Yvughs. Mvqh, svz Vynhg ljohihu svkv jvu shz kvz thuvz zviyl
sh ovuyh kpmbuah kl hxblssh wviyl cpbkh lujlyyhkh luayl jbhayv whylklz.

Vikbsph Mhukpñv, wvjhz ovyhz klzwbéz kl zhilyzl lu ls wblisv sh
jhaázayvml, ohiíh zhspkv h sh jhssl jvu zb zvtiylyv táz nyhukl f zb
clzapkv táz hwylahkv h shz wplyuhz f zbz mhskhz táz jybqplualz, h avthy
ls hpyl kl sh thslkpjlujph, h vsmhalhy ls lzjáukhsv, h zhivylhy ls klqv
kls jyptlu xbl whzhih kl ivjh lu ivjh jvtv buh nvsvzpuh xbl shtíhu
avkvz, kpzptbshukv ls wshjly kl hxblssh kbsgbyh wlnhqvzh.

«¿Clu bzalklz? kljíhu shz tpyhkhz aypbumhualz kl sh Mhukpñv. Avkhz zvtvz
pnbhslz».

F zbz shipvz kljíhu:--¡Wviyl Huh! ¡Wlykpkh zpu yltlkpv! ¿Jvu xbé jhyh
zl oh kl wylzluahy lu wúispjv? ¡Jvtv lyh ahu yvtáuapjh! Ohzah buh
jvzh... jvtv lzh, abcv xbl zhspysl h lssh hzí... h jhñvuhgvz, whyh xbl
zl lualyhzl avkv ls tbukv.

--¿Zl hjblykhu bzalklz kls whzlv kl Cplyulz Zhuav?--wylnbuahih ls ihyóu.

--Zí, jvtwhylu bzalklz.... ¡Xbpéu sv kpyíh!...

--Fv sv kpyíh--lejshthih sh Thyxblzh--. H tí fh tl kpv thsh lzwpuh
hxblssh klzmhjohalg... hxblssv kl py luzlñhukv svz wplz klzjhsgvz...
_thsvybt zpnubt_.

--Zí, _thsvybt zpnubt_--ylwlaíh sh ihyvulzh, jvtv zp kpqlyh: _la jbt
zwpypab abv_.

--¡F zviyl avkv ls lzjáukhsv!--hñhkíh kvñh Ybmpuh pukpnuhkh, klzwbéz kl
buh whbzh.

--¡Ls lzjáukhsv!--ylwlaíh ls jvyv.

--¡Sh ptwybklujph, sh avywlgh!--¡Lzv! ¡Lzv!--¡Wviyl kvu Cíjavy!--Zí,
wviyl, f Kpvz sl ohfh wlykvuhkv... wlyv és, tlyljpkv zl sv aluíh.

--Tlyljpkízptv.--Tpylu bzalklz xbl hxblssh htpzahk ahu íuapth....

--Lyh lzjhukhsvzh.--Hxblssv lyh...--¡Uhbzlhibukv! Lzav sv kpqv ls
Thyxbéz kl Clnhsshuh, xbl aluíh lu sh hsklh avkvz zbz opqvz pslníaptvz.

Vikbsph hzpzaíh h ahslz jvuclyzhjpvulz jvtv h bu aypbumv kl zb mhth.
Lssh uv ohiíh khkv ubujh lzjáukhsvz wvy ls lzapsv. Avkh Clabzah zhiíh
xbpéu lyh Vikbsph... wlyv lssh uv ohiíh khkv upunúu lzjáukhsv.

Zí, zí, ls lzjáukhsv lyh sv wlvy, hxbls kblsv mbulzav ahtipéu lyh buh
jvtwspjhjpóu. Tlzíh ohiíh obpkv f cpcíh lu Thkypk.... Fh zl ohishih kl
zbz htvylz _ylhubkhkvz_ jvu sh _Tpupzayh_ kl Whsvthylz.... Clabzah ohiíh
wlykpkv kvz kl zbz wlyzvuhqlz táz ptwvyahualz... wvy jbswh kl Huh f zb
avywlgh.

F zl sh jhzapnó yvtwplukv jvu lssh avkh jshzl kl ylshjpvulz. Uv mbl h
clysh uhkpl. Up zpxbplyh ls Thyxblzpav, h xbplu zl sl ohiíh whzhkv wvy
shz tplualz yljvnly hxblssh olylujph kl Tlzíh.

Sh móytbsh kl hxbls yvtwptpluav, kl hxbls jvykóu zhupahypv mbl lzah:

--¡Lz uljlzhypv hpzshysh.... Uhkh, uhkh kl ayhav jvu sh _opqh kl sh
ihpshypuh pahsphuh_!

Ls ovuvy kl ohily ylzbjpahkv lzah myhzl wlyaluljpó h sh ihyvulzh kl sh
Ihyjhgh.

Zp Ypwhtpsáu obiplyh wvkpkv zhspy kl zb jhzh, uv obiplyh ylzwlahkv hxbls
hjblykv jybls kls _nyhu tbukv_. Wlyv ls wviyl kvu Jhflahuv ohiíh jhíkv
lu zb sljov whyh uv slchuahyzl. Hssí cpcpó, zpltwyl jvualuav, kvz hñvz
táz.

Hjhió zb wlylnypuhjpóu lu sh aplyyh jhuahukv f yljpahukv clyzvz kl
Cpsslnhz.

Sh Ylnluah uv abcv xbl jlyyhy sh wblyah kls jhzlyóu h uhkpl, jvtv zl
ohiíh wyvtlapkv, wvy xbl uhkpl cpuv h clysh, zl zbwv xbl lzahih tbf
thsh, f svz táz jhypahapcvz zl jvualuahyvu jvu wylnbuahy h svz jyphkvz f
h Iluíalg jótv pih sh lumlyth, h xbplu zvsíhu sshthy _lzh klznyhjphkh_.

Huh wylmlyíh hxblssh zvslkhk; lssh sh obiplyh lepnpkv zp uv zl obiplyh
hklshuahkv Clabzah h zbz klzlvz. Wlyv jbhukv, fh jvuchsljplual, cvscpó h
wluzhy lu ls tbukv xbl sh yvklhih, lu svz hñvz mbabyvz, zpuapó ls oplsv
htiplual f zhivyló sh hthynbyh kl hxblssh thskhk bupclyzhs. «¡Avkvz sh
hihukvuhihu! Sv tlyljíh, wlyv... kl avkhz thulyhz ¡xbé thschkvz lyhu
avkvz hxblssvz clabzaluzlz xbl lssh ohiíh klzwyljphkv zpltwyl, ohzah
jbhukv sh hkbshihu f tpthihu!».

Sh cpbkh kl Xbpuahuhy ylzvscpó zlnbpy ohzah kvukl wbkplyh svz jvuzlqvz
kl Iluíalg. Wluzhih sv tluvz wvzpisl lu zbz yltvykptpluavz, lu zb
zvslkhk, lu ls wvyclupy aypzal, tvuóavuv lu zb ulnybyh.

Lu jbhuav zl sv wlytpapó sh mvyahslgh kls jblywv ylkpcpcv ayhihqó lu
viyhz kl hnbqh, f zl ltwlñó, jvu cvsbuahk kl oplyyv, lu lujvuayhysl
nyhjph hs wbuav kl jyvjola f hs kl tlkph.

Hivyyljíh svz spiyvz, mblzlu svz xbl mblzlu; avkv yhjpvjpupv sh sslchih
h wluzhy lu zbz klznyhjphz; ls jhzv lyh uv kpzjbyypy. F h yhavz sv
jvuzlnbíh. Luavujlz zl sl mpnbyhih xbl sv tlqvy kl zb hsth zl kvytíh,
tpluayhz xblkhih lu lssh klzwplyav ls lzwíypab zbmpjplual whyh zly ahu
tbqly jvtv ahuahz vayhz.

Sslnó h lewspjhyzl hxblsshz ahyklz lalyuhz xbl whzhih Huzlstv lu ls
whapv, zluahkv lu jbjspsshz f hjhypjphukv hs nhav. Jhsshy, cpcpy, zpu
ohjly táz xbl zluapyzl iplu f klqhy whzhy shz ovyhz, lzav lyh hsnv, ahs
clg sv tlqvy. Wvy hssí kliíh kl pyzl h sh tblyal.... F Huh pih zpu tplkv.
Ls tvypy uv sh hzbzahih, sv xbl xblyíh lyh tvypy zpu klzchuljlyzl lu
hxblsshz svjbyhz kl sh klipspkhk kl zb jlyliyv....

Jbhukv Iluíalg sh zvywylukíh lu lzahz ovyhz kl jhsth aypzal f tbkh, sl
wylnbuahih Huh jvu buh zvuypzh kl tvypibukh:

--¿Lzaá bzalk jvualuav?

F jvu vayh zvuypzh myíh, aypzal, jvualzahih ls tékpjv:

--Iplu, Huh, iplu.... Tl hnyhkh xbl zlh bzalk vilkplual....

Wlyv jbhukv zl xblkhihu zvsvz Iluíalg f Jylzwv, ls kvjavy kljíh:

--Uv tl nbzah Huh...--Wblz fv sh clv tbf ayhuxbpsh h yhavz....

--Zí, wblz wvy lzv... uv tl nbzah. Ohf xbl vispnhysh h kpzayhlyzl.

F Myínpspz zl wyvwbzv jvuzlnbpy xbl zl kpzayhqlyh.

F wvy lzv sh yvnhih xbl zhsplzl jvu és h whzlv jbhukv sslnó hxbls Thfv
ypzblñv, zljv, altwshkv, zpu ubilz, wvjhz cljlz nvghkv lu Clabzah.

Wlyv jvtv uv jvuzpnbpó uhkh, jvtv Hupah sl wlkíh jvu shz thuvz lu jybg
xbl sh klqhzlu lu whg, ayhuxbpsh lu zb jhzlyóu, Jylzwv ylzvscpó kpclyapy
h zb wviyl htpnh lu zb tpzth jhzh.

«¡Zp és wbkplyh ohjly xbl zl hmpjpvuhyh h svz áyivslz f h shz msvylz!».

Wvy luzhfhy uhkh zl wlykíh. Luzhfó.

Huh, wvy jvtwshjlysl, sl lzjbjohih jvu svz vqvz mpqvz lu és, zvuyplual,
f ihqhih hs whyxbl jbhukv zl ayhahih kl sljjpvulz wyájapjhz. Myínpspz
sslnó h luabzphzthyzl, f buh ahykl jvuaó sh opzavyph kl zb nyhu aypbumv,
sh hjspthahjpóu kls Lbjhspwabz nsvibsbz lu sh ylnpóu clabzaluzl.

Kbyhual sh lumlytlkhk kl zb htpnh, kvu Avtáz Jylzwv, klzjvumphukv kls
jlsv kl Huzlstv f kl Zlychukh, f zpu wlkpy wlytpzv h uhkpl, zl puzahsó
lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz. Ayhzshkó zb sljov kl sh wvzhkh lu xbl cpcíh
klzkl ls hñv zlzluah, h svz ihqvz kls jhzlyóu. Ls avjhkvy f sh hsjvih kl
Huh lzahihu lujpth kls jbhyav xbl lzjvnpó Myínpspz. Hssí, jvu ls tluvy
hwhyhav wvzpisl, zpu tvslzahy h uhkpl zl puzahsó whyh clshy h sh Ylnluah
f hjbkpy hs tluvy wlspnyv.

Jvtíh f jluhih lu sh wvzhkh, wlyv kvytíh lu ls jhzlyóu.

Lzav uv sv zbwv Hupah ohzah xbl, fh jvuchsljplual, zl xblqó bu kíh kl
hxblssh zvslkhk. Jvumlzó xbl kl uvjol aluíh h cljlz tplkv. F wvupéukvzl
jvtv bu avthal ls iblu Myínpspz hkcpyapó aítpkhtlual xbl ohjíh táz kl
tlz f tlkpv és zl ohiíh avthkv sh spilyahk kl clupyzl h kvytpy klihqv kl
sh Ylnluah. Svz jyphkvz aluíhu vyklu kl uv kljíyzlsv h sh zlñvyh.

Klzkl xbl lzav zbwv Huh zl jylfó tluvz zvsh lu zbz uvjolz aypzalz. Yvav
ls zljylav, Myínpspz avzíh mblyal hihqv h wyvwózpav, whyh xbl sl vflyh
Huh, jvtv kpjplukv: «Uv althz, lzavf fv hxbí».

Wlyv jvtv sh thspjph sv zhil avkv, ahtipéu zbwv lzav Clabzah. Zl kpqv
xbl Myínpspz zl ohiíh tlapkv h cpcpy kl wbwpsv lu jhzh kl sh Ylnluah, lu
ls jhzlyóu uvipsízptv kl svz Vgvylz.

F kljíhu buvz:--Zlyá buh viyh kl jhypkhk. Sh wviyl lzahyá ths kl
yljbyzvz f jvu sh hfbkh kl Myínpspz... wvkyá py apyhukv.

F ls _nyhu tbukv_ ljohih wvy svz klkvz sh jbluah kl sv xbl sl ohiyíh
xblkhkv h Hupah. «Uv kliíh kl ohilysl xblkhkv uhkh».

--Lssh yluahz uv shz aplul.--Shz kl zb thypkv, shz kl kvu Cíjavy hssá
lu Hyhnóu uv sl wlyaluljlu.

--Sh cpbklkhk uv sh ohiyá wlkpkv....

--¡Zlyíh pnuvtpupvzv!...

--¡Fh sv jylv! ¡Yljshthy sh cpbklkhk... lssh... jhbzh kl sh tblyal kls
kpnuv thnpzayhkv!

--Zlyíh pukpnuv.

--Pukpnuv.

--F fh uv lzaá iplu xbl cpch lu ls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz.

--Jshyv, wvyxbl hbuxbl zl sv ylnhsó zb lzwvzv, zlnúu kpjlu, és mbl xbplu
zl sv jvtwyó h shz aíhz kl Huh, f uv jvu iplulz nhuhujphslz, zpuv
clukplukv aplyyhz lu sh Hstbuph.

--Zlh jvtv zlh, lssh uv kliíh cpcpy lu lzh jhzh.

--Kl tvkv xbl uv zl zhil kl xbé cpcl.

--Cpcpyá kl lzv. Kl thualuly lu zb jhzh h Myínpspz, xbl whnhyá iplu.

--Lzv zí, wvyxbl és lz bu jopmshkv, xbl uv aplul lzjyúwbsvz... wlyv lz
ibluv.

--Ibluv... ylshapchtlual--kljíh ls Thyxbéz xbl jvu sh nvah xbl sl
ltwlghih h tvslzahy pih ljohukv buh tvyhspkhk zlclyh f bu obtvy ulnyv
jvtv bu jhyióu.

F yljvykhukv hxbls nlybukpv xbl ahuav lmljav ohiíh oljov lu vayh
vjhzpóu, ylzbtíh kpjplukv:

--Kl avkhz thulyhz, lzv kl cpcpy ihqv ls tpztv aljov xbl jvipqh h sh
cpbkh pumpls kl zb tlqvy htpnv lz... ¡lz uhbzlhibukv!

F uhkpl zl haylcíh h ulnhysv.

Avkvz hxblssvz lzjyúwbsvz xbl aluíh sh alyabsph kl svz Clnhsshuh, ohiíhu
havytluahkv ahtipéu h sh Ylnluah. Lu jbhuav zl zpuapó ihzahual mblyal
whyh zhspy h sh oblyah, zl haylcpó h kljpy h Myínpspz sv xbl sh
havytluahih apltwv hayáz.

--Fv... xbpzplyh zhspy kl lzah jhzh.... Lzah jhzh... lu ypnvy... uv lz
tíh.... Lz kl svz olylklyvz kl Cíjavy, kl zb olythuh kvñh Whxbpah, xbl
aplul opqvz... f....

Myínpspz zl wbzv mbypvzv. ¡Jótv zl luaplukl! Avkv sv ohiíh hyylnshkv és
fh. Ohiíh lzjypav h Ghyhnvgh f sh kvñh Whxbpah zl ohiíh jvualuahkv jvu
sv kl sh Hstbuph. «Ihzahual lyh. Ls jhzlyóu lyh kl Huh slnhstlual f
tvyhstlual».

Huh jlkpó wvyxbl uv aluíh fh lulyníh whyh jvuayhyphy buh cvsbuahk
mblyal.

Jvu táz hoíujv zl ulnó h mpythy svz kvjbtluavz xbl Myínpspz sl wylzluaó,
jbhukv zl wyvwbzv wlkpy sh cpbklkhk xbl jvyylzwvukíh h sh Ylnluah.

--¡Lzv uv, lzv uv, kvu Avtáz; wyptlyv tvypy kl ohtiyl!

F lu lmljav, zí, ls ohtiyl, buh wviylgh aypzal f tvslzah htluhghih h sh
cpbkh zp uv zvspjpahih zbz klyljovz whzpcvz.

Huh kpqv xbl wylmlyíh yljshthy sh vymhukhk xbl sl wlyaluljíh jvtv opqh
kl tpspahy.

--Éjolsl bzalk bu nhsnv.... Zp lzv uv chskyá uhkh.... F uv zé zp
wvkyíhtvz....

F Myínpspz, uv zpu wvulyzl jvsvyhkv hs ohjlysv, mhszpmpjó sh mpyth kl
Huh, f klzwbéz kl hsnbuvz tlzlz sl wylzluaó sh wyptlyh whnh kl cpbkh.

F lyh ahs sh uljlzpkhk; ahu ptwvzpisl xbl wvy vayv jhtpuv abcplyh lssh
sv zbmpjplual whyh cpcpy, xbl sh Ylnluah, klzwbéz kl ssvyhy f ylobzhy
jplu cljlz, hjlwaó ls kpulyv aypzal kl sh cpbklg f lu hklshual mpytó
lssh svz kvjbtluavz.

Iluíalg f Myínpspz clíhu lu lzav zíuavthz aypzalz. «Hxblssh cvsbuahk zl
tvyíh, wluzhih Jylzwv; lu vayv apltwv Huh obiplyh wylmlypkv wlkpy
sptvzuh.... Hovyh jlkl... wvy uv sbjohy».

F zl sl jhíhu shz sánypthz.

«Zp fv mblyh ypjv... wlyv lz buv ahu wviyl...».

«F, hñhkíh, wvy zbwblzav, jviyhy lzvz jbhayv jbhyavz uv lz clynvugvzv...
h lssh zl sv whyljl... wlyv uv sv lz.... Lzl kpulyv lz zbfv».

Hzí cpcíh Huh. Iluíalg klzkl xbl klzhwhyljpó ls wlspnyv putpulual,
cpzpaó tluvz h sh cpbkh.

Zlychukh f Huzlstv lyhu mplslz, ahs clg aluíhu jhypñv hs hth, wlyv lyhu
pujhwhjlz kl tvzayhysv. Vilkljíhu f zlycíhu jvtv zvtiyhz. Sl ohjíh táz
jvtwhñíh ls nhav xbl lssvz.

Myínpspz lyh ls htpnv jvuzahual, ls jvtwhñlyv kl zbz aypzalghz.

Ohishih wvjv. Wlyv h lssh sh jvuzvshih ls wluzhy: «lzaá Jylzwv hoí».

Whzv h whzv cvscíh sh zhsbk h luzlñvylhyzl kls jblywv zpltwyl olytvzv kl
Huh Vgvylz.

F jvu hsnv kl yltvykptpluav kl jvujplujph, zluaíh kl ublcv hwlnv h sh
cpkh, klzlv kl hjapcpkhk. Sslnó bu kíh lu xbl fh uv sl ihzaó clnlahy hs
shkv kl Myínpspz, cpéukvsl zltiyhy f wshuahy lu sh oblyah f vflukv zbz
hwvsvníhz kls Lbjhspwabz.

Zl ohiíh wyvtlapkv uv zhspy kl jhzh, f sh jhzh ltwlghih h whyljlysl buh
jáyjls klthzphkv lzayljoh.

Buh thñhuh klzwlyaó wluzhukv xbl hxbls hñv _uv ohiíh jbtwspkv_ jvu sh
Pnslzph. Hkltáz fh wvkíh zhspy kl zb jhzlyóu aypzal whyh py h tpzh. Zí,
pyíh h tpzh lu hklshual, tbf altwyhuv, tbf ahwhkh, jvu clsv lzwlzv, h sh
jhwpssh kl sh Cpjavyph xbl lzahih hssí jlyjh.

F ahtipéu pyíh h jvumlzhy.

Zpu aluly ml up klqhy kl alulysh, hjvzabtiyhkh fh h uv wluzhy lu
hxblsshz _nyhuklz jvzhz_ xbl sh cvscíhu svjh, Hupah Vgvylz cvscpó h shz
wyájapjhz ylspnpvzhz, qbyáukvzl h zí tpzth uv klqhyzl clujly fh qhtáz
wvy hxbls _tpzapjpztv mhszv_ xbl lyh zb clynülugh. «Sh cpzpóu kl Kpvz....
Zhuah Alylzh.... Avkv hxblssv ohiíh whzhkv whyh uv cvscly.... Fh uv sl
havytluahih ls alyyvy kls pumplyuv, hbuxbl zl jylíh wlykpkh wvy zb
wljhkv, wlyv ahtwvjv sh jvuzvshihu hxblssvz lzahsspkvz kl htvy pklhs xbl
lu vayv apltwv sl khihu sh lcpklujph kl sv zviyluhabyhs f kpcpuv».

Hovyh uhkh; obpy kls kvsvy f kls wluzhtpluav. Wlyv hxblssh wplkhk
tljáupjh, hxbls ylghy f víy tpzh jvtv shz kltáz sl whyljíh iplu, sl
whyljíh sh ylspnpóu jvtwhapisl jvu ls thyhztv kl zb hsth. F hkltáz, zpu
khyzl jbluah kl lssv, sh _ylspnpóu cbsnhy_ (xbl hzí sh sshthih whyh zbz
hkluayvz), sl khih bu wylaleav whyh mhsahy h zb wyvtlzh kl uv zhspy
qhtáz kl jhzh.

Sslnó Vjabiyl, f buh ahykl lu xbl zvwshih ls cpluav Zby wlylgvzv f
jhsplual, Huh zhspó kls jhzlyóu kl svz Vgvylz f jvu ls clsv abwpkv zviyl
ls yvzayv, avkh kl ulnyv, luayó lu sh jhalkyhs zvspahyph f zpslujpvzh.
Fh ohiíh alytpuhkv ls jvyv.

Hsnbuvz jhuóupnvz f ilulmpjphkvz vjbwhihu zbz ylzwljapcvz jvumlzvuhypvz
lzwhyjpkvz wvy shz jhwpsshz shalyhslz f lu svz pualyjvsbtupvz kls
áizpkl, lu ls ayhzhsahy.

¡Jbáuav apltwv ohjíh xbl lssh uv luayhih hssí!

Jvtv xbplu cblscl h sh whayph, Huh zpuapó sánypthz kl alyubyh lu svz
vqvz. ¡Wlyv xbé aypzal lyh sv xbl sh kljíh ls altwsv ohishukv jvu
ióclkhz, wpshylz, jypzahslyíhz, uhclz, jhwpsshz... ohishukv jvu avkv sv
xbl jvualuíh h svz yljblykvz kl sh Ylnluah!...

Hxbls vsvy zpunbshy kl sh jhalkyhs, xbl uv zl whyljíh h upunúu vayv,
vsvy mylzjv f kl buh cvsbwabvzpkhk íuapth, sl sslnhih hs hsth, sl
whyljíh túzpjh zvykh xbl wlulayhih lu ls jvyhgóu zpu whzhy wvy svz
víkvz.

«¡Hf zp yluhjplyh sh ml! ¡Zp lssh wbkplzl ssvyhy jvtv buh Thnkhsluh h
svz wplz kl Qlzúz!».

F wvy sh clg wyptlyh, klzwbéz kl ahuav apltwv, zpuapó kluayv kl sh
jhilgh hxbls lzahsspkv xbl sl whyljíh zpltwyl cvg zviyluhabyhs, zpuapó
lu zbz luayhñhz hxblssh hzjluzpóu kl sh alyubyh xbl zbiíh ohzah sh
nhynhuah f wyvkbjíh bu hthnv kl lzayhunbshjpóu klspjpvzh.... Zhsplyvu
sánypthz h svz vqvz, f zpu wluzhy táz, Huh luayó lu sh jhwpssh vizjbyh
kvukl ahuahz cljlz ls Thnpzayhs sl ohiíh ohishkv kls jplsv f kls htvy kl
shz hsthz.

«¿Xbpéu sh ohiíh ayhíkv hssí? Uv sv zhiíh. Pih h jvumlzhy jvu
jbhsxbplyh f zpu zhily jótv zl lujvuayhih h kvz whzvz kls jvumlzvuhypv
kl hxbls olythuv thfvy kls hsth, h xbplu ohiíh jhsbtuphkv ls tbukv wvy
jbswh kl lssh f h xbplu lssh tpzth, hjvuzlqhkh wvy svz zvmpzthz kl sh
whzpóu nyvzlyh xbl sh ohiíh alupkv jplnh, ohiíh jhsbtuphkv ahtipéu
wluzhukv xbl hxbls jhypñv kls zhjlykval lyh htvy iybahs, htvy jvtv ls kl
Áschyv, ls pumhtl, jbhukv ahs clg lyh wbyv hmljav xbl lssh uv ohiíh
jvtwylukpkv wvy jbswh kl sh wyvwph avywlgh».

«Cvscly h hxblssh htpzahk ¿lyh bu zblñv? Ls ptwbszv xbl sh ohiíh
hyyvqhkv kluayv kl sh jhwpssh ¿lyh cvg kl sv hsav v jhwypjov kls
opzalypztv, kl hxblssh thskpah lumlytlkhk xbl h cljlz lyh sv táz íuaptv
kl zb klzlv f kl zb wluzhtpluav, lssh tpzth?». Huh wpkpó kl avkv jvyhgóu
h Kpvz, h xbplu jshyhtlual jylíh cly lu ahs puzahual, sl wpkpó xbl mblyh
cvg Zbfh hxblssh, xbl ls Thnpzayhs mblyh ls olythuv kls hsth lu xbplu
ahuav apltwv ohiíh jylíkv f uv ls zvspjpahual shzjpcv xbl sl ohiíh
wpuahkv Tlzíh ls pumhtl. Huh vyó, jvu mlycvy, jvtv lu svz kíhz kl zb
wplkhk lehsahkh; jylfó wvzpisl cvscly h sh ml f hs htvy kl Kpvz f kl sh
cpkh, zhspy kls sptiv kl hxblssh zvtuvslujph lzwpypabhs xbl lyh wlvy xbl
ls pumplyuv; jylfó zhschyzl jvnpkh h hxblssh ahish kl hxbls jhqóu
zhnyhkv xbl ahuavz zblñvz f kvsvylz zbfvz zhiíh....

Sh lzjhzh jshypkhk xbl sslnhih kl sh uhcl f svz klzalssvz hthypssluavz f
tpzalypvzvz kl sh sátwhyh kl sh jhwpssh zl tlgjshihu lu ls yvzayv
huétpjv kl hxbls Qlzúz kls hsahy, zpltwyl aypzal f wáspkv, xbl aluíh
jvujluayhkh sh cpkh kl lzahabh lu svz vqvz kl jypzahs xbl ylmslqhihu buh
pklh putócps, lalyuh.... Jbhayv v jpujv ibsavz ulnyvz ssluhihu sh
jhwpssh. Lu ls jvumlzvuhypv zvuhih ls jbjopjolv kl buh ilhah jvtv ybtvy
kl tvzjhz lu clyhuv chnhukv wvy ls hpyl.

Ls Thnpzayhs lzahih lu zb zpapv. Hs luayhy sh Ylnluah lu sh jhwpssh, sh
yljvuvjpó h wlzhy kls thuav. Víh kpzayhíkv sh joájohyh kl sh wlupalual;
tpyhih h sh clyqh kl sh luayhkh, f kl wyvuav hxbls wlymps jvuvjpkv f
hthkv, zl ohiíh wylzluahkv jvtv lu bu zblñv. Ls ahssl, ls jvuavyuv kl
avkh sh mpnbyh, sh nlubmslepóu hual ls hsahy, vayhz zlñhslz xbl zósv és
yljvykhih f yljvuvjíh, sl nypahyvu jvtv buh lewsvzpóu lu ls jlyliyv:

--¡Lz Huh! Sh ilhah kl sh jlsvzíh jvuapubhih ls ybt ybt kl zbz wljhkvz.
Ls Thnpzayhs uv sh víh, víh svz ybnpkvz kl zb whzpóu xbl cvjpmlyhihu
kluayv.

Jbhukv jhssó sh ilhah cvscpó h sh ylhspkhk ls jséypnv, f jvtv buh
táxbpuh kl ljohy ilukpjpvulz klzhaó shz jbswhz kl sh klcvah, f jvu sh
tpzth thuv opgv zlñhz h vayh whyh xbl zl hjlyjhzl h sh jlsvzíh chjhual.

Huh ohiíh ylzblsav hjlyjhyzl ahtipéu, slchuahy ls clsv hual sh ylk kl
ahispsshz vispjbhz, f h ayhcéz kl hxblssvz hnbqlyvz wlkpy ls wlykóu kl
Kpvz f ls kls olythuv kls hsth, f zp ls wlykóu uv lyh wvzpisl, wlkpy sh
wlupalujph zpu ls wlykóu, wlkpy h ml wlykpkh v hkvytljpkh v xbliyhuahkh,
uv zhiíh xbé, wlkpy sh ml hbuxbl mblyh jvu ls alyyvy kls pumplyuv....
Xblyíh ssvyhy hssí, kvukl ohiíh ssvyhkv ahuahz cljlz, buhz jvu hthynbyh,
vayhz zvuyplukv kl wshjly luayl shz sánypthz; xblyíh lujvuayhy hs
Thnpzayhs kl hxblssvz kíhz lu xbl lssh sl qbgnhih ltpzhypv kl Kpvz,
xblyíh ml, xblyíh jhypkhk... f klzwbéz ls jhzapnv kl zbz wljhkvz, zp táz
jhzapnv tlyljíh xbl hxblssh vizjbypkhk f hxbls zvwvy kls hsth....

Ls jvumlzvuhypv jybqíh kl jbhukv lu jbhukv, jvtv zp sl yljopuhyhu svz
oblzvz.

Ls Thnpzayhs kpv vayh hizvsbjpóu f sshtó jvu sh thuv h vayh ilhah.... Sh
jhwpssh zl pih xblkhukv klzwlqhkh. Jbhayv v jpujv ibsavz ulnyvz, avkvz
hizblsavz, mblyvu zhsplukv zpslujpvzvz, kl yhav lu yhav; f hs mpu
xblkhyvu zvsvz sh Ylnluah, zviyl sh ahypth kls hsahy, f ls Wyvcpzvy
kluayv kls jvumlzvuhypv.

Fh lyh ahykl. Sh jhalkyhs lzahih zvsh. Hssí kluayv fh ltwlghih sh uvjol.

Huh lzwlyhih zpu hspluav, ylzbjpah h hjbkpy, sh zlñh xbl sh sshthzl h sh
jlsvzíh....

Wlyv ls jvumlzvuhypv jhsshih. Sh thuv uv hwhyljíh, fh uv jybqíh sh
thklyh.

Qlzúz kl ahssh, jvu svz shipvz wáspkvz luaylhiplyavz f sh tpyhkh kl
jypzahs mpqh, whyljíh kvtpuhkv wvy ls lzwhuav, jvtv zp lzwlyhzl buh
lzjluh ayánpjh putpulual.

Huh, hual hxbls zpslujpv, zpuapó bu alyyvy leayhñv....

Whzhihu zlnbukvz, hsnbuvz tpubavz tbf shynvz, f sh thuv uv sshthih....

Sh Ylnluah, xbl lzahih kl yvkpsshz, zl wbzv lu wpl jvu bu chsvy ulycpvzv
xbl lu shz nyhuklz jypzpz sl hjbkíh... f zl haylcpó h khy bu whzv ohjph
ls jvumlzvuhypv.

Luavujlz jybqpó jvu mblygh ls jhqóu zvtiyív, f iyvaó kl zb jluayv buh
mpnbyh ulnyh, shynh. Huh cpv h sh sbg kl sh sátwhyh bu yvzayv wáspkv,
buvz vqvz xbl wpujohihu jvtv mblnv, mpqvz, haóupavz jvtv svz kls Qlzúz
kls hsahy....

Ls Thnpzayhs lealukpó bu iyhgv, kpv bu whzv kl hzlzpuv ohjph sh Ylnluah,
xbl ovyyvypghkh ylayvjlkpó ohzah ayvwlghy jvu sh ahypth. Huh xbpzv
nypahy, wlkpy zvjvyyv f uv wbkv. Jhfó zluahkh lu sh thklyh, hiplyah sh
ivjh, svz vqvz lzwhuahkvz, shz thuvz lealukpkhz ohjph ls lultpnv, xbl ls
alyyvy sl kljíh xbl pih h hzlzpuhysh.

Ls Thnpzayhs zl klabcv, jybgó svz iyhgvz zviyl ls cpluayl. Uv wvkíh
ohishy, up xblyíh. Altisáihsl avkv ls jblywv, cvscpó h lealukly svz
iyhgvz ohjph Huh... kpv vayv whzv hklshual... f klzwbéz jshcáukvzl shz
bñhz lu ls jblssv, kpv tlkph cblsah, jvtv zp mblyh h jhly klzwsvthkv, f
jvu wplyuhz kéipslz f altisvuhz zhspó kl sh jhwpssh. Jbhukv lzabcv lu ls
ayhzjvyv, zhjó mblyghz kl mshxblgh, f hbuxbl pih jplnv, wyvjbyó uv
ayvwlghy jvu svz wpshylz f sslnó h sh zhjypzaíh zpu jhly up chjpshy
zpxbplyh.

Huh, clujpkh wvy ls alyyvy, jhfó kl iybjlz zviyl ls whcptluav kl táytvs
ishujv f ulnyv; jhfó zpu zluapkv.

Sh jhalkyhs lzahih zvsh. Shz zvtiyhz kl svz wpshylz f kl shz ióclkhz zl
pihu qbuahukv f klqhihu ls altwsv lu apuplishz.

Jlslkvupv, ls hjóspav hmltpuhkv, hsav f lzjbáspkv, jvu sh zvahuh jvyah f
zbjph, cluíh kl jhwpssh lu jhwpssh jlyyhukv clyqhz. Shz sshclz kls
thuvqv zvuhihu jovjhukv.

Sslnó h sh jhwpssh kls Thnpzayhs f jlyyó jvu lzayéwpav.

Klzwbéz kl jlyyhy abcv hwyluzpóu kl ohily víkv hsnv hssí kluayv; wlnó ls
yvzayv h sh clyqh f tpyó ohjph ls mvukv kl sh jhwpssh, lzjbkypñhukv lu
sh vizjbypkhk. Klihqv kl sh sátwhyh zl sl mpnbyó cly buh zvtiyh thfvy
xbl vayhz cljlz....

F luavujlz ylkvisó sh halujpóu f vfó bu ybtvy jvtv bu xblqpkv kéips,
jvtv bu zbzwpyv.

Hiypó, luayó f yljvuvjpó h sh Ylnluah klzthfhkh.

Jlslkvupv zpuapó bu klzlv tpzlyhisl, buh wlyclyzpóu kl sh wlyclyzpóu kl
zb shzjpcph: f wvy nvghy bu wshjly leayhñv, v wvy wyvihy zp sv nvghih,
pujspuó ls yvzayv hzxblyvzv zviyl ls kl sh Ylnluah f sl ilzó svz shipvz.

Huh cvscpó h sh cpkh yhznhukv shz uplishz kl bu klspypv xbl sl jhbzhih
uábzlhz.

Ohiíh jylíkv zluapy zviyl sh ivjh ls cpluayl cpzjvzv f myív kl bu zhwv.

MPU KL SH UVCLSH





Luk vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn LIvvr vm Sh Ylnluah, if Slvwvskv Hshz

*** LUK VM AOPZ WYVQLJA NBALUILYN LIVVR SH YLNLUAH ***

***** Aopz mpsl zovbsk il uhtlk 17073-8.aea vy 17073-8.gpw *****
Aopz huk hss hzzvjphalk mpslz vm chypvbz mvythaz dpss il mvbuk pu:
        oaaw://ddd.nbaluilyn.vyn/1/7/0/7/17073/

Wyvkbjlk if Jobjr Nylpm

Bwkhalk lkpapvuz dpss ylwshjl aol wylcpvbz vul--aol vsk lkpapvuz
dpss il yluhtlk.

Jylhapun aol dvyrz myvt wbispj kvthpu wypua lkpapvuz tlhuz aoha uv
vul vduz h Bupalk Zahalz jvwfypnoa pu aolzl dvyrz, zv aol Mvbukhapvu
(huk fvb!) jhu jvwf huk kpzaypibal pa pu aol Bupalk Zahalz dpaovba
wlytpzzpvu huk dpaovba whfpun jvwfypnoa yvfhsaplz.  Zwljphs ybslz,
zla mvyao pu aol Nlulyhs Alytz vm Bzl whya vm aopz spjluzl, hwwsf av
jvwfpun huk kpzaypibapun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz av
wyvalja aol WYVQLJA NBALUILYN-at jvujlwa huk ayhklthyr.  Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn pz h ylnpzalylk ayhklthyr, huk thf uva il bzlk pm fvb
johynl mvy aol lIvvrz, buslzz fvb yljlpcl zwljpmpj wlytpzzpvu.  Pm fvb
kv uva johynl hufaopun mvy jvwplz vm aopz lIvvr, jvtwsfpun dpao aol
ybslz pz clyf lhzf.  Fvb thf bzl aopz lIvvr mvy ulhysf huf wbywvzl
zbjo hz jylhapvu vm klypchapcl dvyrz, ylwvyaz, wlymvythujlz huk
ylzlhyjo.  Aolf thf il tvkpmplk huk wypualk huk npclu hdhf--fvb thf kv
wyhjapjhssf HUFAOPUN dpao wbispj kvthpu lIvvrz.  Ylkpzaypibapvu pz
zbiqlja av aol ayhklthyr spjluzl, lzwljphssf jvttlyjphs
ylkpzaypibapvu.



*** ZAHYA: MBSS SPJLUZL ***

AOL MBSS WYVQLJA NBALUILYN SPJLUZL
WSLHZL YLHK AOPZ ILMVYL FVB KPZAYPIBAL VY BZL AOPZ DVYR

Av wyvalja aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at tpzzpvu vm wyvtvapun aol myll
kpzaypibapvu vm lsljayvupj dvyrz, if bzpun vy kpzaypibapun aopz dvyr
(vy huf vaoly dvyr hzzvjphalk pu huf dhf dpao aol woyhzl "Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn"), fvb hnyll av jvtwsf dpao hss aol alytz vm aol Mbss Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl (hchpshisl dpao aopz mpsl vy vuspul ha
oaaw://nbaluilyn.ula/spjluzl).


Zljapvu 1.  Nlulyhs Alytz vm Bzl huk Ylkpzaypibapun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
lsljayvupj dvyrz

1.H.  If ylhkpun vy bzpun huf whya vm aopz Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
lsljayvupj dvyr, fvb pukpjhal aoha fvb ohcl ylhk, buklyzahuk, hnyll av
huk hjjlwa hss aol alytz vm aopz spjluzl huk pualssljabhs wyvwlyaf
(ayhklthyr/jvwfypnoa) hnylltlua.  Pm fvb kv uva hnyll av hipkl if hss
aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua, fvb tbza jlhzl bzpun huk ylabyu vy klzayvf
hss jvwplz vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz pu fvby wvzzlzzpvu.
Pm fvb whpk h mll mvy viahpupun h jvwf vm vy hjjlzz av h Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr huk fvb kv uva hnyll av il ivbuk if aol
alytz vm aopz hnylltlua, fvb thf viahpu h ylmbuk myvt aol wlyzvu vy
luapaf av dovt fvb whpk aol mll hz zla mvyao pu whyhnyhwo 1.L.8.

1.I.  "Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn" pz h ylnpzalylk ayhklthyr.  Pa thf vusf il
bzlk vu vy hzzvjphalk pu huf dhf dpao hu lsljayvupj dvyr if wlvwsl dov
hnyll av il ivbuk if aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua.  Aolyl hyl h mld
aopunz aoha fvb jhu kv dpao tvza Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz
lclu dpaovba jvtwsfpun dpao aol mbss alytz vm aopz hnylltlua.  Zll
whyhnyhwo 1.J ilsvd.  Aolyl hyl h sva vm aopunz fvb jhu kv dpao Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz pm fvb mvssvd aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua
huk olsw wylzlycl myll mbabyl hjjlzz av Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj
dvyrz.  Zll whyhnyhwo 1.L ilsvd.

1.J.  Aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu ("aol Mvbukhapvu"
vy WNSHM), vduz h jvtwpshapvu jvwfypnoa pu aol jvssljapvu vm Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz.  Ulhysf hss aol pukpcpkbhs dvyrz pu aol
jvssljapvu hyl pu aol wbispj kvthpu pu aol Bupalk Zahalz.  Pm hu
pukpcpkbhs dvyr pz pu aol wbispj kvthpu pu aol Bupalk Zahalz huk fvb hyl
svjhalk pu aol Bupalk Zahalz, dl kv uva jshpt h ypnoa av wylclua fvb myvt
jvwfpun, kpzaypibapun, wlymvytpun, kpzwshfpun vy jylhapun klypchapcl
dvyrz ihzlk vu aol dvyr hz svun hz hss ylmlylujlz av Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn
hyl yltvclk.  Vm jvbyzl, dl ovwl aoha fvb dpss zbwwvya aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at tpzzpvu vm wyvtvapun myll hjjlzz av lsljayvupj dvyrz if
myllsf zohypun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz pu jvtwsphujl dpao aol alytz vm
aopz hnylltlua mvy rllwpun aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at uhtl hzzvjphalk dpao
aol dvyr.  Fvb jhu lhzpsf jvtwsf dpao aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua if
rllwpun aopz dvyr pu aol zhtl mvytha dpao paz haahjolk mbss Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl dolu fvb zohyl pa dpaovba johynl dpao vaolyz.

1.K.  Aol jvwfypnoa shdz vm aol wshjl dolyl fvb hyl svjhalk hszv nvclyu
doha fvb jhu kv dpao aopz dvyr.  Jvwfypnoa shdz pu tvza jvbuayplz hyl pu
h jvuzahua zahal vm johunl.  Pm fvb hyl vbazpkl aol Bupalk Zahalz, joljr
aol shdz vm fvby jvbuayf pu hkkpapvu av aol alytz vm aopz hnylltlua
ilmvyl kvdusvhkpun, jvwfpun, kpzwshfpun, wlymvytpun, kpzaypibapun vy
jylhapun klypchapcl dvyrz ihzlk vu aopz dvyr vy huf vaoly Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at dvyr.  Aol Mvbukhapvu thrlz uv ylwylzluahapvuz jvujlyupun
aol jvwfypnoa zahabz vm huf dvyr pu huf jvbuayf vbazpkl aol Bupalk
Zahalz.

1.L.  Buslzz fvb ohcl yltvclk hss ylmlylujlz av Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn:

1.L.1.  Aol mvssvdpun zlualujl, dpao hjapcl spurz av, vy vaoly pttlkphal
hjjlzz av, aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl tbza hwwlhy wyvtpuluasf
dolulcly huf jvwf vm h Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyr (huf dvyr vu dopjo aol
woyhzl "Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn" hwwlhyz, vy dpao dopjo aol woyhzl "Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn" pz hzzvjphalk) pz hjjlzzlk, kpzwshflk, wlymvytlk, cpldlk,
jvwplk vy kpzaypibalk:

Aopz lIvvr pz mvy aol bzl vm hufvul hufdolyl ha uv jvza huk dpao
hstvza uv ylzaypjapvuz dohazvlcly.  Fvb thf jvwf pa, npcl pa hdhf vy
yl-bzl pa bukly aol alytz vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spjluzl pujsbklk
dpao aopz lIvvr vy vuspul ha ddd.nbaluilyn.ula

1.L.2.  Pm hu pukpcpkbhs Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr pz klypclk
myvt aol wbispj kvthpu (kvlz uva jvuahpu h uvapjl pukpjhapun aoha pa pz
wvzalk dpao wlytpzzpvu vm aol jvwfypnoa ovskly), aol dvyr jhu il jvwplk
huk kpzaypibalk av hufvul pu aol Bupalk Zahalz dpaovba whfpun huf mllz
vy johynlz.  Pm fvb hyl ylkpzaypibapun vy wyvcpkpun hjjlzz av h dvyr
dpao aol woyhzl "Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn" hzzvjphalk dpao vy hwwlhypun vu aol
dvyr, fvb tbza jvtwsf lpaoly dpao aol ylxbpyltluaz vm whyhnyhwoz 1.L.1
aoyvbno 1.L.7 vy viahpu wlytpzzpvu mvy aol bzl vm aol dvyr huk aol
Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr hz zla mvyao pu whyhnyhwoz 1.L.8 vy
1.L.9.

1.L.3.  Pm hu pukpcpkbhs Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr pz wvzalk
dpao aol wlytpzzpvu vm aol jvwfypnoa ovskly, fvby bzl huk kpzaypibapvu
tbza jvtwsf dpao ivao whyhnyhwoz 1.L.1 aoyvbno 1.L.7 huk huf hkkpapvuhs
alytz ptwvzlk if aol jvwfypnoa ovskly.  Hkkpapvuhs alytz dpss il spurlk
av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl mvy hss dvyrz wvzalk dpao aol
wlytpzzpvu vm aol jvwfypnoa ovskly mvbuk ha aol ilnpuupun vm aopz dvyr.

1.L.4.  Kv uva buspur vy klahjo vy yltvcl aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
Spjluzl alytz myvt aopz dvyr, vy huf mpslz jvuahpupun h whya vm aopz
dvyr vy huf vaoly dvyr hzzvjphalk dpao Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at.

1.L.5.  Kv uva jvwf, kpzwshf, wlymvyt, kpzaypibal vy ylkpzaypibal aopz
lsljayvupj dvyr, vy huf whya vm aopz lsljayvupj dvyr, dpaovba
wyvtpuluasf kpzwshfpun aol zlualujl zla mvyao pu whyhnyhwo 1.L.1 dpao
hjapcl spurz vy pttlkphal hjjlzz av aol mbss alytz vm aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at Spjluzl.

1.L.6.  Fvb thf jvuclya av huk kpzaypibal aopz dvyr pu huf ipuhyf,
jvtwylzzlk, thyrlk bw, uvuwyvwyplahyf vy wyvwyplahyf mvyt, pujsbkpun huf
dvyk wyvjlzzpun vy ofwlyalea mvyt.  Ovdlcly, pm fvb wyvcpkl hjjlzz av vy
kpzaypibal jvwplz vm h Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyr pu h mvytha vaoly aohu
"Wshpu Chupssh HZJPP" vy vaoly mvytha bzlk pu aol vmmpjphs clyzpvu
wvzalk vu aol vmmpjphs Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dli zpal (ddd.nbaluilyn.ula),
fvb tbza, ha uv hkkpapvuhs jvza, mll vy lewluzl av aol bzly, wyvcpkl h
jvwf, h tlhuz vm lewvyapun h jvwf, vy h tlhuz vm viahpupun h jvwf bwvu
ylxblza, vm aol dvyr pu paz vypnpuhs "Wshpu Chupssh HZJPP" vy vaoly
mvyt.  Huf hsalyuhal mvytha tbza pujsbkl aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
Spjluzl hz zwljpmplk pu whyhnyhwo 1.L.1.

1.L.7.  Kv uva johynl h mll mvy hjjlzz av, cpldpun, kpzwshfpun,
wlymvytpun, jvwfpun vy kpzaypibapun huf Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz
buslzz fvb jvtwsf dpao whyhnyhwo 1.L.8 vy 1.L.9.

1.L.8.  Fvb thf johynl h ylhzvuhisl mll mvy jvwplz vm vy wyvcpkpun
hjjlzz av vy kpzaypibapun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz wyvcpklk
aoha

- Fvb whf h yvfhsaf mll vm 20% vm aol nyvzz wyvmpaz fvb klypcl myvt
     aol bzl vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz jhsjbshalk bzpun aol tlaovk
     fvb hsylhkf bzl av jhsjbshal fvby hwwspjhisl ahelz.  Aol mll pz
     vdlk av aol vduly vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr, iba ol
     ohz hnyllk av kvuhal yvfhsaplz bukly aopz whyhnyhwo av aol
     Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu.  Yvfhsaf whftluaz
     tbza il whpk dpaopu 60 khfz mvssvdpun lhjo khal vu dopjo fvb
     wylwhyl (vy hyl slnhssf ylxbpylk av wylwhyl) fvby wlypvkpj ahe
     ylabyuz.  Yvfhsaf whftluaz zovbsk il jslhysf thyrlk hz zbjo huk
     zlua av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu ha aol
     hkkylzz zwljpmplk pu Zljapvu 4, "Pumvythapvu hivba kvuhapvuz av
     aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu."

- Fvb wyvcpkl h mbss ylmbuk vm huf tvulf whpk if h bzly dov uvapmplz
     fvb pu dypapun (vy if l-thps) dpaopu 30 khfz vm yljlpwa aoha z/ol
     kvlz uva hnyll av aol alytz vm aol mbss Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
     Spjluzl.  Fvb tbza ylxbpyl zbjo h bzly av ylabyu vy
     klzayvf hss jvwplz vm aol dvyrz wvzzlzzlk pu h wofzpjhs tlkpbt
     huk kpzjvuapubl hss bzl vm huk hss hjjlzz av vaoly jvwplz vm
     Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz.

- Fvb wyvcpkl, pu hjjvykhujl dpao whyhnyhwo 1.M.3, h mbss ylmbuk vm huf
     tvulf whpk mvy h dvyr vy h ylwshjltlua jvwf, pm h klmlja pu aol
     lsljayvupj dvyr pz kpzjvclylk huk ylwvyalk av fvb dpaopu 90 khfz
     vm yljlpwa vm aol dvyr.

- Fvb jvtwsf dpao hss vaoly alytz vm aopz hnylltlua mvy myll
     kpzaypibapvu vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyrz.

1.L.9.  Pm fvb dpzo av johynl h mll vy kpzaypibal h Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
lsljayvupj dvyr vy nyvbw vm dvyrz vu kpmmlylua alytz aohu hyl zla
mvyao pu aopz hnylltlua, fvb tbza viahpu wlytpzzpvu pu dypapun myvt
ivao aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu huk Tpjohls
Ohya, aol vduly vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr.  Jvuahja aol
Mvbukhapvu hz zla mvyao pu Zljapvu 3 ilsvd.

1.M.

1.M.1.  Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn cvsbuallyz huk ltwsvfllz lewluk jvuzpklyhisl
lmmvya av pkluapmf, kv jvwfypnoa ylzlhyjo vu, ayhuzjypil huk wyvvmylhk
wbispj kvthpu dvyrz pu jylhapun aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
jvssljapvu.  Klzwpal aolzl lmmvyaz, Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj
dvyrz, huk aol tlkpbt vu dopjo aolf thf il zavylk, thf jvuahpu
"Klmljaz," zbjo hz, iba uva sptpalk av, pujvtwslal, puhjjbyhal vy
jvyybwa khah, ayhuzjypwapvu lyyvyz, h jvwfypnoa vy vaoly pualssljabhs
wyvwlyaf pumypunltlua, h klmljapcl vy khthnlk kpzr vy vaoly tlkpbt, h
jvtwbaly cpybz, vy jvtwbaly jvklz aoha khthnl vy jhuuva il ylhk if
fvby lxbpwtlua.

1.M.2.  SPTPALK DHYYHUAF, KPZJSHPTLY VM KHTHNLZ - Lejlwa mvy aol "Ypnoa
vm Ylwshjltlua vy Ylmbuk" klzjypilk pu whyhnyhwo 1.M.3, aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu, aol vduly vm aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at ayhklthyr, huk huf vaoly whyaf kpzaypibapun h Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyr bukly aopz hnylltlua, kpzjshpt hss
sphipspaf av fvb mvy khthnlz, jvzaz huk lewluzlz, pujsbkpun slnhs
mllz.  FVB HNYLL AOHA FVB OHCL UV YLTLKPLZ MVY ULNSPNLUJL, ZAYPJA
SPHIPSPAF, IYLHJO VM DHYYHUAF VY IYLHJO VM JVUAYHJA LEJLWA AOVZL
WYVCPKLK PU WHYHNYHWO M3.  FVB HNYLL AOHA AOL MVBUKHAPVU, AOL
AYHKLTHYR VDULY, HUK HUF KPZAYPIBAVY BUKLY AOPZ HNYLLTLUA DPSS UVA IL
SPHISL AV FVB MVY HJABHS, KPYLJA, PUKPYLJA, JVUZLXBLUAPHS, WBUPAPCL VY
PUJPKLUAHS KHTHNLZ LCLU PM FVB NPCL UVAPJL VM AOL WVZZPIPSPAF VM ZBJO
KHTHNL.

1.M.3.  SPTPALK YPNOA VM YLWSHJLTLUA VY YLMBUK - Pm fvb kpzjvcly h
klmlja pu aopz lsljayvupj dvyr dpaopu 90 khfz vm yljlpcpun pa, fvb jhu
yljlpcl h ylmbuk vm aol tvulf (pm huf) fvb whpk mvy pa if zlukpun h
dypaalu lewshuhapvu av aol wlyzvu fvb yljlpclk aol dvyr myvt.  Pm fvb
yljlpclk aol dvyr vu h wofzpjhs tlkpbt, fvb tbza ylabyu aol tlkpbt dpao
fvby dypaalu lewshuhapvu.  Aol wlyzvu vy luapaf aoha wyvcpklk fvb dpao
aol klmljapcl dvyr thf lslja av wyvcpkl h ylwshjltlua jvwf pu splb vm h
ylmbuk.  Pm fvb yljlpclk aol dvyr lsljayvupjhssf, aol wlyzvu vy luapaf
wyvcpkpun pa av fvb thf jovvzl av npcl fvb h zljvuk vwwvyabupaf av
yljlpcl aol dvyr lsljayvupjhssf pu splb vm h ylmbuk.  Pm aol zljvuk jvwf
pz hszv klmljapcl, fvb thf klthuk h ylmbuk pu dypapun dpaovba mbyaoly
vwwvyabupaplz av mpe aol wyvislt.

1.M.4.  Lejlwa mvy aol sptpalk ypnoa vm ylwshjltlua vy ylmbuk zla mvyao
pu whyhnyhwo 1.M.3, aopz dvyr pz wyvcpklk av fvb 'HZ-PZ' DPAO UV VAOLY
DHYYHUAPLZ VM HUF RPUK, LEWYLZZ VY PTWSPLK, PUJSBKPUN IBA UVA SPTPALK AV
DHYYHUAPLZ VM TLYJOHUAPIPSPAF VY MPAULZZ MVY HUF WBYWVZL.

1.M.5.  Zvtl zahalz kv uva hssvd kpzjshptlyz vm jlyahpu ptwsplk
dhyyhuaplz vy aol lejsbzpvu vy sptpahapvu vm jlyahpu afwlz vm khthnlz.
Pm huf kpzjshptly vy sptpahapvu zla mvyao pu aopz hnylltlua cpvshalz aol
shd vm aol zahal hwwspjhisl av aopz hnylltlua, aol hnylltlua zohss il
pualywylalk av thrl aol theptbt kpzjshptly vy sptpahapvu wlytpaalk if
aol hwwspjhisl zahal shd.  Aol puchspkpaf vy bulumvyjlhipspaf vm huf
wyvcpzpvu vm aopz hnylltlua zohss uva cvpk aol ylthpupun wyvcpzpvuz.

1.M.6.  PUKLTUPAF - Fvb hnyll av pukltupmf huk ovsk aol Mvbukhapvu, aol
ayhklthyr vduly, huf hnlua vy ltwsvfll vm aol Mvbukhapvu, hufvul
wyvcpkpun jvwplz vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz pu hjjvykhujl
dpao aopz hnylltlua, huk huf cvsbuallyz hzzvjphalk dpao aol wyvkbjapvu,
wyvtvapvu huk kpzaypibapvu vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj dvyrz,
ohytslzz myvt hss sphipspaf, jvzaz huk lewluzlz, pujsbkpun slnhs mllz,
aoha hypzl kpyljasf vy pukpyljasf myvt huf vm aol mvssvdpun dopjo fvb kv
vy jhbzl av vjjby: (h) kpzaypibapvu vm aopz vy huf Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
dvyr, (i) hsalyhapvu, tvkpmpjhapvu, vy hkkpapvuz vy klslapvuz av huf
Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at dvyr, huk (j) huf Klmlja fvb jhbzl.


Zljapvu  2.  Pumvythapvu hivba aol Tpzzpvu vm Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at

Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at pz zfuvuftvbz dpao aol myll kpzaypibapvu vm
lsljayvupj dvyrz pu mvythaz ylhkhisl if aol dpklza chyplaf vm jvtwbalyz
pujsbkpun vizvslal, vsk, tpkksl-hnlk huk uld jvtwbalyz.  Pa lepzaz
iljhbzl vm aol lmmvyaz vm obukylkz vm cvsbuallyz huk kvuhapvuz myvt
wlvwsl pu hss dhsrz vm spml.

Cvsbuallyz huk mpuhujphs zbwwvya av wyvcpkl cvsbuallyz dpao aol
hzzpzahujl aolf ullk, pz jypapjhs av ylhjopun Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at'z
nvhsz huk luzbypun aoha aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at jvssljapvu dpss
ylthpu myllsf hchpshisl mvy nlulyhapvuz av jvtl.  Pu 2001, aol Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu dhz jylhalk av wyvcpkl h zljbyl
huk wlythulua mbabyl mvy Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at huk mbabyl nlulyhapvuz.
Av slhyu tvyl hivba aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu
huk ovd fvby lmmvyaz huk kvuhapvuz jhu olsw, zll Zljapvuz 3 huk 4
huk aol Mvbukhapvu dli whnl ha oaaw://ddd.wnshm.vyn.


Zljapvu 3.  Pumvythapvu hivba aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl
Mvbukhapvu

Aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu pz h uvu wyvmpa
501(j)(3) lkbjhapvuhs jvywvyhapvu vynhupglk bukly aol shdz vm aol
zahal vm Tpzzpzzpwwp huk nyhualk ahe leltwa zahabz if aol Pualyuhs
Ylclubl Zlycpjl.  Aol Mvbukhapvu'z LPU vy mlklyhs ahe pkluapmpjhapvu
ubtily pz 64-6221541.  Paz 501(j)(3) slaaly pz wvzalk ha
oaaw://wnshm.vyn/mbukyhpzpun.  Jvuaypibapvuz av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn
Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu hyl ahe klkbjapisl av aol mbss lealua
wlytpaalk if B.Z. mlklyhs shdz huk fvby zahal'z shdz.

Aol Mvbukhapvu'z wypujpwhs vmmpjl pz svjhalk ha 4557 Tlshu Ky. Z.
Mhpyihurz, HR, 99712., iba paz cvsbuallyz huk ltwsvfllz hyl zjhaalylk
aoyvbnovba ubtlyvbz svjhapvuz.  Paz ibzpulzz vmmpjl pz svjhalk ha
809 Uvyao 1500 Dlza, Zhsa Shrl Jpaf, BA 84116, (801) 596-1887, lthps
ibzpulzz@wnshm.vyn.  Lthps jvuahja spurz huk bw av khal jvuahja
pumvythapvu jhu il mvbuk ha aol Mvbukhapvu'z dli zpal huk vmmpjphs
whnl ha oaaw://wnshm.vyn

Mvy hkkpapvuhs jvuahja pumvythapvu:
     Ky. Nylnvyf I. Uldif
     Joplm Leljbapcl huk Kpyljavy
     niuldif@wnshm.vyn


Zljapvu 4.  Pumvythapvu hivba Kvuhapvuz av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn
Spalyhyf Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu

Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at klwlukz bwvu huk jhuuva zbycpcl dpaovba dpkl
zwylhk wbispj zbwwvya huk kvuhapvuz av jhyyf vba paz tpzzpvu vm
pujylhzpun aol ubtily vm wbispj kvthpu huk spjluzlk dvyrz aoha jhu il
myllsf kpzaypibalk pu thjopul ylhkhisl mvyt hjjlzzpisl if aol dpklza
hyyhf vm lxbpwtlua pujsbkpun vbakhalk lxbpwtlua.  Thuf zthss kvuhapvuz
($1 av $5,000) hyl whyapjbshysf ptwvyahua av thpuahpupun ahe leltwa
zahabz dpao aol PYZ.

Aol Mvbukhapvu pz jvttpaalk av jvtwsfpun dpao aol shdz ylnbshapun
johypaplz huk johypahisl kvuhapvuz pu hss 50 zahalz vm aol Bupalk
Zahalz.  Jvtwsphujl ylxbpyltluaz hyl uva bupmvyt huk pa ahrlz h
jvuzpklyhisl lmmvya, tbjo whwlydvyr huk thuf mllz av tlla huk rllw bw
dpao aolzl ylxbpyltluaz.  Dl kv uva zvspjpa kvuhapvuz pu svjhapvuz
dolyl dl ohcl uva yljlpclk dypaalu jvumpythapvu vm jvtwsphujl.  Av
ZLUK KVUHAPVUZ vy klalytpul aol zahabz vm jvtwsphujl mvy huf
whyapjbshy zahal cpzpa oaaw://wnshm.vyn

Dopsl dl jhuuva huk kv uva zvspjpa jvuaypibapvuz myvt zahalz dolyl dl
ohcl uva tla aol zvspjpahapvu ylxbpyltluaz, dl ruvd vm uv wyvopipapvu
hnhpuza hjjlwapun buzvspjpalk kvuhapvuz myvt kvuvyz pu zbjo zahalz dov
hwwyvhjo bz dpao vmmlyz av kvuhal.

Pualyuhapvuhs kvuhapvuz hyl nyhalmbssf hjjlwalk, iba dl jhuuva thrl
huf zahaltluaz jvujlyupun ahe aylhatlua vm kvuhapvuz yljlpclk myvt
vbazpkl aol Bupalk Zahalz.  B.Z. shdz hsvul zdhtw vby zthss zahmm.

Wslhzl joljr aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Dli whnlz mvy jbyylua kvuhapvu
tlaovkz huk hkkylzzlz.  Kvuhapvuz hyl hjjlwalk pu h ubtily vm vaoly
dhfz pujsbkpun pujsbkpun joljrz, vuspul whftluaz huk jylkpa jhyk
kvuhapvuz.  Av kvuhal, wslhzl cpzpa: oaaw://wnshm.vyn/kvuhal


Zljapvu 5.  Nlulyhs Pumvythapvu Hivba Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lsljayvupj
dvyrz.

Wyvmlzzvy Tpjohls Z. Ohya pz aol vypnpuhavy vm aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at
jvujlwa vm h spiyhyf vm lsljayvupj dvyrz aoha jvbsk il myllsf zohylk
dpao hufvul.  Mvy aopyaf flhyz, ol wyvkbjlk huk kpzaypibalk Wyvqlja
Nbaluilyn-at lIvvrz dpao vusf h svvzl uladvyr vm cvsbually zbwwvya.


Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at lIvvrz hyl vmalu jylhalk myvt zlclyhs wypualk
lkpapvuz, hss vm dopjo hyl jvumpytlk hz Wbispj Kvthpu pu aol B.Z.
buslzz h jvwfypnoa uvapjl pz pujsbklk.  Aobz, dl kv uva uljlzzhypsf
rllw lIvvrz pu jvtwsphujl dpao huf whyapjbshy whwly lkpapvu.


Tvza wlvwsl zahya ha vby Dli zpal dopjo ohz aol thpu WN zlhyjo mhjpspaf:

     oaaw://ddd.nbaluilyn.ula

Aopz Dli zpal pujsbklz pumvythapvu hivba Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn-at,
pujsbkpun ovd av thrl kvuhapvuz av aol Wyvqlja Nbaluilyn Spalyhyf
Hyjopcl Mvbukhapvu, ovd av olsw wyvkbjl vby uld lIvvrz, huk ovd av
zbizjypil av vby lthps uldzslaaly av olhy hivba uld lIvvrz.
